
You have a mind, and you should learn how to use it. There are two levels
of your mind – the conscious or rational level, and the subconscious or ir -
rational level. You think with your conscious mind, and whatever you ha -
bitually think sinks down into your subconscious mind, which creates ac -
cording to the nature of your thoughts. Your subconscious mind is the 
seat of your emotions and is the creative mind. If you think good, good 
will follow, if you think evil, evil will follow. This is the way your mind 
works.
The main point to remember is once the subconscious mind accepts an 
idea, it begins to execute it. It is an interesting and subtle truth that the 
law of the subconscious mind works for good and bad ideas alike. This 
law, when applied in a negative way, is the cause of failure, frustration 
and unhappiness. However, when your habitual thinking is harmonious 
and constructive, you experience perfect health, success and prosperity.
Peace of mind and a healthy body are inevitable when you begin to think 
and feel in the right way. Whatever you claim mentally and feel as true, 
your subconscious mind will accept and bring forth into your experience. 
The only thing necessary for you to do is to get your conscious mind to 
accept your idea, and the law of your own subconscious mind will bring 
forth the health, peace or position you desire. You give the command or 
decree, and your subconscious will faithfully reproduce the idea impressed
upon it. The law of your mind is this: You will get a reaction or response 
from your subconscious mind according to the nature of the thought or 
idea you hold in your conscious mind.
Psychologists and psychiatrists point out that when thoughts are con -
veyed to your subconscious mind, impressions are made in the brain cells.
As soon as your subconscious accepts any idea, it proceeds to put it into 
effect immediately. It works by association of ideas and uses every bit of 
knowledge that you have gathered in your lifetime to bring about its pur -
pose. It draws on the infinite power, energy and wisdom within you. It 
lines up all the laws of nature to get its way. Sometimes it seems to bring 
about an immediate solution to your difficulties, but at other times it may 
take days, weeks, or longer... Its ways are past finding out .
Conscious & Subconscious Terms Differentiated
You must remember that these are not two minds. They are merely two 
spheres of activity within one mind. Your conscious mind is the reasoning 
mind. It is that phase of mind which chooses. For example, you choose 
your books, your home and your partner in life. You make all your deci -
sions with your conscious mind. On the other hand, without any conscious
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
choice on your part, your heart is kept functioning automatically, and the 
process of digestion, circulation and breathing are carried on by your sub -
conscious mind through processes independent of your conscious control.
Your subconscious mind accepts what is impressed upon it or what you 
consciously believe. It does not reason things out like your conscious 
mind, and it does not argue with you controversially. Your subconscious 
mind is like the soil, which accepts any kind of seed, good or bad. Your 
thoughts are active and might be likened unto seeds. Negative, destruc -
tive thoughts continue to work negatively in your subconscious mind and 
in due time will come forth into outer experience, which corresponds with 
them.
Remember, your subconscious mind does not engage in proving whether 
your thoughts are good or bad, true or false, but it responds according to 
the nature of your thoughts or suggestions. For example, if you con -
sciously assume something as true, even though it may be false, your 
subconscious mind will accept it as true and proceed to bring about re -
sults, which must necessarily follow, because you consciously assumed it 
to be true.
Experiments By Psychologists
Innumerable experiments by psychologists and others on persons in the  
hypnotic state have shown that the subconscious mind is incapable of 
making selections and comparisons, which are necessary for a reasoning 
process. They have shown repeatedly that your subconscious mind will 
accept any suggestions, however false. Having once accepted any sugges -
tion, it responds according to the nature of the suggestion given.
To illustrate the amenability of your subconscious mind to suggestion, if a 
practiced hypnotist suggests to one of his subjects that he is Napoleon 
Bonaparte, or even a cat or a dog, he will act out the part with inimitable 
accuracy. His personality becomes changed for the time being. He be -
lieves himself to be whatever the operator tells him he is.
A skilled hypnotist may suggest to one of his students in the hypnotic 
state that his back itches, to another that his nose is bleeding, to another 
that he is a marble statue, to another that he is freezing and the temper -
ature is below zero. Each one will follow out the line of his particular sug -
gestion, totally oblivious to all his surroundings, which do not pertain to 
his idea.
These simple illustrations portray clearly the difference between your con -
scious reasoning mind and your subconscious mind, which is impersonal, 
non-selective and accepts as true whatever your conscious mind believes 
to be true. Hence, the importance of selecting thoughts, ideas and 
premises which bless, heal, inspire and fill your soul with joy.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
The Terms Objective & Subjective Mind Clarified
Your conscious mind is sometimes referred to as your objective mind be -
cause it deals with outward objects. The objective mind takes cognizance 
of the objective world. Its media of observation are your five physical 
senses. Your objective mind is your guide and director in your contact 
with your environment. You gain knowledge through your five senses. 
Your objective mind learns thought observation, experience and educa -
tion. As previously pointed out, the greatest function of the objective 
mind is that of reasoning.
Suppose you are one of the thousands of tourists who come to Los Ange -
les annually. You would come to the conclusion that it is a beautiful city 
based upon your observation of the parks, pretty gardens, majestic build -
ings and lovely homes. This is the working of your objective mind.  
Your subconscious mind is oftentimes referred to as your subjective mind.
Your subjective mind takes cognizance of its environment by means inde -
pendent of the five senses. Your subjective mind perceives by intuition. It 
is the seat of your emotion and the storehouse of memory. Your subjec -
tive mind performs its highest functions when your objective senses are in
abeyance. In a word, it is that intelligence, which makes itself manifest 
when the objective mind is suspended or in a sleepy, drowsy state.
Your subjective mind sees without the use of the natural organs of vision. 
It has the capacity of clairvoyance and clairaudience. Your subjective mind
can leave your body, travel to distant lands and bring back information of -
tentimes of the most exact and truthful character. Through your subjec -
tive mind, you can read the thoughts of others, read the contents of 
sealed envelopes and closed safes. Your subjective mind has the ability to 
apprehend the thoughts of others without the use of the ordinary objec -
tive means of communication. It is of the greatest importance that we un -
derstand the interaction of the objective and subj mind in order to learn 
the true art of prayer. 
The Subconscious Cannot Reason Like Your Conscious Mind
Your subconscious mind cannot argue controversially. Hence, if you give it
wrong suggestions, it will accept them as true and will proceed to bring 
them to pass as conditions, experiences and events. All things that have 
happened to you are based on thoughts impressed on your subconscious 
mind through belief. If you have conveyed erroneous thoughts to your 
subconscious mind, the sure method of overcoming them is by the repeti -
tion of constructive, harmonious thoughts frequently repeated, which your
subconscious mind accepts, thus forming new and healthy habits of 
thought and life, for your subconscious mind is the seat of habit.
The habitual thinking of your conscious mind establishes deep grooves in 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
your subconscious mind. This is very favorable for you if your habitual 
thoughts are harmonious, peaceful and constructive.
If you have indulged in fear, worry and other destructive forms of think -
ing, the remedy is to recognize the omnipotence of your subconscious 
mind and decree freedom, happiness and perfect health. Your subcon -
scious mind, being creative and one with your divine source, will proceed 
to create the freedom and happiness, which you have earnestly decreed.
The Tremendous Power Of Suggestion
You must realize by now that your conscious mind is the “watchman at 
the gate,” and its chief function is to protect your subconscious mind from
false impressions. You are now aware of one of the basic laws of mind: 
Your subconscious mind is amenable to suggestion. As you know, your 
subconscious mind does not make comparisons or contrasts, neither does 
it reason and think things out for itself. This latter function belongs to 
your conscious mind. It simply reacts to the impressions given to it by 
your conscious mind. It does not show a preference for one course of ac -
tion over another.
The following is a classic example of the tremendous power of suggestion.
Suppose you approach a timid looking passenger on board ship and say to
him something like this: “You look very ill. How pale you are! I feel certain
you are going to be seasick. Let me help you to your cabin.” The passen -
ger turns pale. Your suggestion of seasickness associates itself with his 
own fears and forebodings. He accepts your aid down to the berth, and 
there your negative suggestion, which was accepted by him, is realized. 
Different Reactions To The Same Suggestion
It is true that different people will react in different ways to the same sug -
gestion because of their subconscious conditioning or belief. For example, 
if you go to a sailor on the ship and say to him sympathetically, “My dear 
fellow, you're looking very ill. Aren't you feeling sick? You look to me as if 
you are going to be seasick.”
According to his temperament he either laughs at your “joke,” or express -
es mild irritation. Your suggestion fell on deaf ears in this instance be -
cause your suggestion of seasickness was associated in his mind with his 
own immunity from it. Therefore, it called up not fear or worry, but self-
confidence.
The dictionary says that a suggestion is the act or instance of putting 
something into one's mind, the mental process by which the thought or 
idea suggested is entertained, accepted, or put into effect. You must re -
member that a suggestion cannot impose something on the subconscious 
mind against the will of the conscious mind. In other words, your con -
scious mind has the power to reject the suggestion given. In the case of 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
the sailor, he had not fear of seasickness. He had convinced himself of his 
immunity and the negative suggestion had absolutely no power to evoke 
fear.
The suggestion of seasickness to the other passenger called forth his in -
dwelling fear of seasickness. Each of us has his own inner fears, beliefs 
and opinions. These inner assumptions rule and govern our lives. A sug -
gestion has no power in and of itself except it is accepted mentally by 
you. This causes your subconscious powers to flow in a limited and re -
stricted way according to the nature of the suggestion.
How He Lost His Arm
Every two or three years I give a series of lectures at the London Truth 
Forum in Caxton Hall. This is a forum I founded a number of years ago. 
Dr Evelyn Fleet, the director, told me about an article which appeared in 
the English newspapers dealing with the power of suggestion. This is the 
suggestion a man gave to his subconscious mind over a period of about 
two years. “I would give my right arm to see my daughter cured.” It ap -
peared that his daughter had a crippling form of arthritis, together with a 
so-called incurable form of skin disease. Medical treatment had failed to 
alleviate the condition, and the father had an intense longing for his 
daughter's healing, and expressed his desire in the words just quoted.
Dr Evelyn Fleet said that the newspaper article pointed out that one day 
the family was out riding when their car collided with another. The father's
right arm was torn off at the shoulder and immediately the daughter's 
arthritis and skin condition vanished.
You must make certain to give your subconscious only suggestions which 
heal, bless, elevate and inspire you in all ways. Remember that your sub -
conscious mind cannot take a joke. It takes you at your word.
How Autosuggestion Banishes Fear
Illustrations of autosuggestion : Autosuggestion means suggesting some -
thing definite and specific to oneself. Hebert Parkyn, in his excellent man -
ual of autosuggestion, records the following incident. It has its amusing 
side, so that one remembers it. “A New York visitor in Chicago looks at his
watch, which is set an hour ahead of Chicago time, and tells a Chicago 
friend that it is twelve o'clock. The Chicago friend, not considering the dif -
ference in time between Chicago and New York, tells the New Yorker that 
he is hungry and that he must go to lunch.”
Autosuggestion may be used to banish various fears and other negative 
conditions. A young singer was invited to give an audition. She had been 
looking forward to the interview, but on three previous occasions she had 
failed miserably due to fear of failure. This young lady had a very good 
voice, but she had been saying to herself, “When the time comes for me 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
to sing, maybe they won't like me. I will try, but I'm full of fear and anxi -
ety.”
Her subconscious mind accepted these negative autosuggestions as a re -
quest and proceeded to manifest them and bring them into her experi -
ence. The cause was an involuntary autosuggestion, i.e. silent fear 
thoughts emotionalized and subjectified. 
She overcame it by the following technique: Three times a day she isolat -
ed herself in a room. She sat down comfortably in an armchair, relaxed 
her body and closed her eyes. She stilled her mind and body as best she 
could. Physical inertia favors mental passivity and renders the mind more 
receptive to suggestion. She counteracted the fear suggestion by saying 
to herself, “I sing beautifully, I am poised, serene, confident and calm.”
She repeated this statement slowly, quietly and with feeling from five to 
ten times at each sitting. She had three such “sittings” every day and one
immediately prior to sleep. At the end of a week she was completely 
poised and confident. When the invitation to audition came, she gave a 
remarkable, wonderful audition.
How She Restored Her Memory
A woman, aged seventy-five, was in the habit of saying to herself, “I am 
losing my memory.” She reversed the procedure and practiced induced 
autosuggestion several times a day as follows: “My memory from today 
on is improving in every department. I shall always remember whatever I 
need to know at every moment of time and point of space. The impres -
sions received will be clearer and more definite. I shall retain them auto -
matically and with ease. Whatever I wish to recall will immediately 
present itself in the correct form in my mind. I am improving rapidly ev -
ery day, and very soon my memory will be better than it has ever been 
before.” At the end of three weeks, her memory was back to normal and 
she was delighted.
How He Overcame A Nasty Temper
Many men who complained of irritability and bad temper proved to be 
very susceptible to autosuggestion and obtained marvelous results by us -
ing the following statements three or four times a day – morning, noon 
and night prior to sleep for about a month. “Henceforth, I shall grow more
good humored. Joy, happiness and cheerfulness are now becoming my 
normal states of mind. Every day I am becoming more and more lovable 
and understanding. I am now becoming the center of cheer and good will 
to all those about me, infecting them with good humor. This happy, joyous
and cheerful mood is now becoming my normal, natural state of mind. I 
am grateful.”
The Constructive & Destructive Power of Suggestion
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
Some illustrations and comments on heterosuggestion: Heterosuggestion 
means suggestions from another person. In all ages the power of sugges -
tion has played a part in the life and though of man in every period of 
time and in each country of the earth. In many parts of the world it is the 
controlling power in religion. 
Suggestion may be used to discipline and control ourselves, but it can 
also be used to take control and command over others who do not know 
the laws of mind. In its constructive form it is wonderful and magnificent. 
In its negative aspects it is one of the most destructive of all the response
patterns of the mind, resulting in patterns of misery, failure, suffering, 
sickness and disaster. 
Have You Accepted Any of These?
From infancy on, the majority of us have been given many negative sug -
gestions. Not knowing how to thwart them, we unconsciously accepted 
them. Here are some of the negative suggestions: “You can't,” “You'll nev -
er amount to anything,” “You mustn't,” “You'll fail,” “You haven't got a 
chance,” “You're all wrong,” “It's no use,” “It's not what you know, but 
who you know,” “the world is going to the dogs,” “What's the use, nobody 
cares,” “It's no use trying so hard,” “You're too old now,” “Things are get -
ting worse and worse,” “Life is an endless grind,” “Love is for the birds,” 
“You just can't win,” “Pretty soon you'll be bankrupt,” “Watch out, you'll 
get the virus,” “You can't trust a soul,” etc. 
Unless, as an adult, you use use constructive autosuggestion, which is re -
conditioning therapy, the impressions made on you in the past can cause 
behavior patterns that cause failure in your personal and social life. Auto -
suggestion is a means releasing you from the mass of negative verbal 
conditioning that might otherwise distort your life pattern, making the de -
velopment of good habits difficult. 
You Can Counteract Negative Suggestions
Pick up the paper any day and you can read dozens of items that could 
sow the seeds of futility, fear, worry and impending doom. If accepted by 
you, these thoughts of fear could cause you to lose the will for life. Know -
ing that you can reject all these negative suggestions by giving your sub -
conscious mind constructive autosuggestions, you counteract all these de -
structive ideas. 
Check regularly on the negative autosuggestions that people make to 
you. You do not have to be influenced by destructive heterosuggestion. All
of us have suffered from it in our childhood and in our teens. If you look 
back, you can easily recall how parents, friends, relatives, teachers and 
associates contributed in a campaign of negative suggestions. Study the 
things said to you and you will discover much of it was in the form of pro -
paganda. The purpose of much of what was said was to control you or in -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
still fear into you. 
This heterosuggestion process goes on in every home, office, factory and 
club. You will find that many of these suggestions are for the purpose of 
making you think, feel and act as others want you to and in ways that are
to their advantage.  
How Suggestion Killed A Man
Here is an illustration of heterosuggestion: A relative of mine went to a 
crystal ball gazer in India who told him that he had a bad heart and pre -
dicted that he would die at the next new moon. He began to tell all mem -
bers of his family about this prediction, and he arranged his will. 
This powerful suggestion entered into his subconscious mind because he 
accepted it completely. My relative also told me that this crystal gazer was
believed to have some strange occult powers and she could do harm or 
good to a person. He died as predicted not knowing that he was the cause
of his own death. I supposed many of us have heard similar stupid, ridicu -
lous, superstitious stories.
Let us look at what happened in the light of our knowledge of the way the
subconscious mind works. Whatever the conscious, reasoning mind of 
man believes; the subconscious mind will accept and act upon. My rela -
tive was happy, healthy, vigorous and robust when he went to see the for -
tuneteller. She gave him a very negative suggestion, which he accepted. 
He became terrified and constantly dwelt upon the fact that he was going 
to die at the next new moon. He proceeded to tell everyone about it, and 
he prepared for the end. The activity took place in his own mind and his 
own thought was the cause. He brought about his own so-called death, or
rather destruction of the physical body, by his fear and expectation of the 
end.
The woman who predicted his death had no more power than the stones 
and sticks in the field. Her suggestion had no power to create or bring 
about the end she suggested. If he had known the laws of his mind, he 
would have completely rejected the negative suggestion and refused to 
give her words any attention, knowing in his heart that he was governed 
and controlled by his own thought and feeling. Like tin arrows aimed at a 
battleship, her prophecy could have been completely neutralized and dis -
sipated without hurting him.
The suggestions of others in themselves have absolutely no power what -
ever over you except the power that you give them through your own 
thoughts. You have to give your mental consent; you have to entertain 
the thought. Then, it becomes your thought, and you do the thinking. Re -
member, you have the capacity to choose. Choose life! Choose love! 
Choose health! Choose abundance!
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
The Power Of An Assumed Major Premise
Your mind works like a syllogism. This means that whatever major 
premise your conscious mind assumes to be true determines the conclu -
sion your subconscious mind comes to in regard to any particular question
or problem in your mind. If your premise is true, the conclusion must be 
true as in the following example:
Every virtue is laudable;
Kindness is a virtue;
Therefore, kindness is laudable.
Another example is as follows:
All formed things change and pass away;
The Pyramids of Egypt are formed things;
Therefore, some day the Pyramids will pass away.
The first statement is referred to as the major premise, and the right con -
clusion must necessarily follow the right premise.
A college professor, who attended some of my science of mind lectures in 
May, 1962, at Town Hall, New York, said to me, “Everything in my life is 
topsy-turvy, and I have lost health, wealth and friends. Everything I touch
turns out wrong.”
I explained to him that he should establish a major premise in his think -
ing, that the Infinite Intelligence of his subconscious mind was guiding, 
directing and prospering him spiritually, mentally and materially. Then, his
subconscious mind would automatically direct him wisely in his invest -
ments, decisions, and also heal his body and restore his mind to peace 
and tranquility.
This professor formulated an overall picture of the way he wanted his life 
to be, and this was his major premise: “Infinite Intelligence leads and 
guides me in all my ways. Perfect health is mine, and the Law of Harmony
operates in my mind and body. Beauty, love, peace and abundance are 
mine. The principle of right action and divine order govern my entire life. I
know my major premise is based on the eternal truths of life, and I know,
feel and believe that my subconscious mind responds according to the na -
ture of my conscious mind thinking.”
He wrote me as follows: “I repeated the above statements slowly, quietly 
and lovingly several times a day knowing that they were sinking deep 
down into my subconscious mind, and that results must follow. I am 
deeply grateful for the interview you gave me and I would like to add that
all departments of my life are changing for the better. It works!”
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
The Subconscious Does Not Argue Controversially
Your subconscious mind is all-wise and knows the answers to all ques -
tions. It does not argue with you or talk back to you. It does not say, “You
must not impress me with that.” For example, when you say, “I can't do 
this,” “I am too old now,” “I can't meet this obligation,” “I was born on the
wrong side of the tracks,” “I don't know the right politician,” you are im -
pregnating your subconscious with these negative thoughts and it re -
sponds accordingly. You are actually blocking your own good, thereby 
bringing lack, limitation and frustration into your life.
When you set up obstacles, impediments and delays in your conscious 
mind, you are denying the wisdom and intelligence resident in your sub -
conscious mind. You are actually saying in effect that your subconscious 
mind cannot solve your problem. This leads to mental and emotional con -
gestion, followed by sickness and neurotic tendencies. To realize your de -
sire and overcome your frustration, affirm boldly several times a day: 
“The Infinite Intelligence, which gave me this desire leads, guides and re -
veals to me the perfect plan for the unfolding of my desire. I know the 
deeper wisdom of my subconscious is now responding and what I feel and
claim within is expressed in the without. There is a balance, equilibrium 
and equanimity.” 
If you say, “There is no way out; I am lost; there is no way out of this 
dilemma; I am stymied and blocked,” you will get no answer or response 
from your subconscious mind. If you want the subconscious to work for 
you, give it the right request, and attain its cooperation. It is always 
working for you. It is controlling your heartbeat this minute and also your 
breathing. It heals a cut on your finger and its tendency is lifeward, forev -
er seeking to take care of you and preserve you. Your subconscious has a 
mind of its own, but it accepts your patterns of thought and imagery.
When you are seeking an answer to a problem, your subconscious will re -
spond, but it expects you to come to a decision and to a true judgment in 
your conscious mind. You must acknowledge the answer is in your sub -
conscious mind. However, if you say, “I don't think there is any way out; I
am all mixed up and confused; why don't I get an answer?” you are neu -
tralizing your prayer. Like the soldier marking time, you do not get any -
where.
Still the wheels of your mind, relax, let go, and quietly affirm: “My sub -
conscious knows the answer. It is responding to me now. I give thanks 
because I know the infinite intelligence of my subconscious knows all 
things and is revealing the perfect answer to me now. My real conviction 
is now setting free the majesty and glory of my subconscious mind. I re -
joice that it is so.”
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
Review Of Highlights
1. Think good, and good follows. Think evil, and evil follows. You are what
you think all day long.
2. Your subconscious mind does not argue with you. It accepts what your 
conscious mind decrees. If you say, “I can't afford it,” it may be true, but 
do not say it. Select a better thought, decree. “I'll buy it, I accept it in my
mind.”
3. You have the power to choose. Choose health and happiness. You can 
choose to be friendly or you can choose to be unfriendly. Choose to be co -
operative, joyous, friendly, lovable and the whole world will respond. This 
is the best way to develop a wonderful personality.
4. Your conscious mind is the “watchman at the gate.” Its chief function is
to protect your subconscious mind from false impressions. Choose to be -
lieve that something good can happen and is happening now. Your great -
est power is your capacity to choose. Choose happiness and abundance.
5. The suggestions and statements of others have no power to hurt you. 
The only power is the movement of your own thought. You can choose to 
reject the thoughts or statements of others and affirm the good. You have
the power to choose how you will react.
6. Watch what you say. You have to account for every idle word. Never 
say, “I will fail; I will lose my job; I can't pay the rent.” Your subconscious 
cannot take a joke. It brings all these things to pass.
7. Your mind is not evil. No force of nature is evil. It depends how you use
the powers of nature. Use your mind to bless, heal and inspire all people 
everywhere.
8. Never say, “I can't.” Overcome that fear by substituting the following: 
“I can do all things through the power of my subconscious mind.”
9. Begin to think from the standpoint of the eternal truths and principles 
of life and not from the standpoint of fear, ignorance and superstition. Do 
not let others do your thinking for you. Choose your own thoughts and 
make your own decisions.
10. You are the captain of your soul (subconscious mind) and the master 
of your fate. Remember, you have the capacity to choose. Choose life! 
Choose love! Choose health! Choose happiness!
11. Whatever your conscious mind assumes and believes to be true, your 
subconscious mind will accept and bring to pass. Believe in good fortune, 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
divine guidance, right action and all the blessings of life.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
