
Infinite Riches are all around you if you will open your mental eyes and 
behold the treasure house of infinity within you. There is a gold mine 
within you from which you can extract everything you need to live life glo -
riously, joyously and abundantly. Many are sound asleep because they do 
not know about this gold mine of Infinite Intelligence and boundless love 
within themselves. Whatever you want, you can draw forth. A magnetized
piece of steel will lift about twelve times its own weight, and if you de -
magnetize this same piece of steel, it will not even lift a feather. Similarly,
there are two types of men. There is the magnetized man who is full of 
confidence and faith. He knows that he is born to win and to succeed. 
Then, there is the type of man who is demagnetized. He is full of fears 
and doubts. Opportunities come, and he says, “I might fail; I might lose 
money; people will laugh at me.” This type of man will not get very far in 
life because, if he is afraid to go forward, he will simply stay where he is. 
Become a magnetized man and discover the master secret of the ages.
The Master Secret Of The Ages
What, in your opinion, is the master secret of the ages? The secret of 
atomic energy? Thermonuclear energy? The neutron bomb? Interplane -
tary travel? No, not any of these. Then, what is this master secret? Where
can one find it, and how can it be contacted and brought into action? The 
answer is extraordinarily simple. This secret is the marvelous, mira -
cle-working power found in your own subconscious mind, the last place 
that most people would seek it.
The Marvelous Power Of Your Subconscious Mind
You can bring into your life more power, more wealth, more health, more 
happiness and more joy by learning to contact and release the hidden 
power of your subconscious mind.
You need not acquire this power; you already possess it. But, you want to
learn how to use it; you want to understand it so that you can apply it in 
all departments of your life.
As you follow the simple techniques and processes set forth in this book, 
you can gain the necessary knowledge and understanding. You can be in -
spired by a new light, and you can generate a new force enabling you to 
realize your hopes and make all your dreams come true. Decide now to 
make your life grander, greater, richer and nobler than ever before.
Within your subconscious depths lies infinite wisdom, infinite power and 
infinite supply of all that is necessary, which is waiting for development 
and expression. Begin now to recognize these potentialities of your deep -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
er mind and they will take form in the world without.
The Infinite Intelligence within your subconscious mind can reveal to you 
everything you need to know at every moment of time and point of space 
provided you are open minded and receptive. You can receive new 
thoughts and ideas enabling you to bring forth new inventions, make new 
discoveries or write books and plays. Moreover, the Infinite Intelligence in 
your subconscious can impart to you wonderful kinds of knowledge of an 
original nature. It can reveal to you and open the way for perfect expres -
sion and true place in your life.
Through the wisdom of your subconscious mind you can attract the ideal 
companion, as well as the right business associate or partner. It can find 
the right buyer for your home and provide you with all the money you 
need and the financial freedom to be, to do, and to go as your heart de -
sires.
It is your right to discover this inner world of thought, feeling and power, 
of light, love and beauty. Though invisible, its forces are mighty. Within 
your subconscious mind you will find the solution for every problem and 
the cause for every effect. You can draw out the hidden powers; you come
into actual possession of the power and wisdom necessary to move for -
ward in abundance, security, joy and dominion.
I have seen the power of the subconscious lift people up out of crippled 
states, making them whole, vital and strong once more, free to go out 
into the world to experience happiness, health and joyous expression. 
There is a miraculous healing power in your subconscious that can heal 
the troubled mind and the broken heart. It can open the prison door of 
the mind and liberate you. It can free you from all kinds of material and 
physical bondage.
Necessity Of A Working Basis
Substantial progress in any field of endeavor is impossible in the absence 
of a working basis, which is universal in its application. You can become 
skilled in the operation of your subconscious mind. You can practice its 
powers with a certainty of results in exact proportion to your knowledge 
of its principles and to your application of them for definite, specific pur -
poses and goals you wish to achieve.
Being a former chemist, I would like to point out that if you combine hy -
drogen and oxygen in the proportions of two atoms of the former to one 
of the latter, water will be the result. You are very familiar with the fact 
that one atom of oxygen and one atom of carbon will produce carbon 
monoxide, a poisonous gas. But, if you add another atom of oxygen, you 
will get carbon dioxide, a harmless gas, and so on throughout the vast 
realm of chemical compounds.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
You must not think that the principles of chemistry, physics and mathe -
matics differ from the principles of your subconscious mind. Let us consid -
er a generally accepted principle: “Water seeks its own level.” This is a 
universal principle, which is applicable to water everywhere.
Consider another principle: “Matter expands when heated.” This is true 
everywhere, at any time, and under all circumstances. You can heat a 
piece of steel and it will expand regardless whether the steel is found in 
China, England or India. It is a universal truth that matter expands when 
healed. It is also a universal truth that whatever you impress on your 
subconscious mind is expressed on the screen of space as condition, ex -
perience and event.
Your prayer is answered because your subconscious mind is principle, and
by principle I mean the way a thing works. For example, the principle of 
electricity is that it works from a higher to a lower potential. You do not 
change the principle of electricity when you use it, but by cooperating 
with nature, you can bring forth marvelous inventions and discoveries 
which bless humanity in countless ways.
Your subconscious mind is principle and works according to the law of be -
lief. You must know what belief is, why it works and how it works. Your 
Bible says in a simple, clear and beautiful way: Whosoever shall say unto 
this mountain, be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall 
not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those things which he saith 
shall come to pass; he shall have whatsoever he saith. Mark 11:23.
The law of your mind is the law of belief. This means to believe in the way
your mind works, to believe in belief itself. The belief of your mind is the 
thought of your mind – that is simple – just that and nothing else.
All your experiences, events, conditions and acts are the reactions of your
subconscious mind to your thoughts. Remember, it is not the thing be -
lieved in, but the belief in your own mind, which brings about the result. 
Cease believing in the false beliefs, opinions, superstitions and fears of 
mankind. Begin to believe in the eternal verities and truths of life, which 
never change. Then, you will move onward, upward and Godward.
Whoever reads this book and applies the principles of the subconscious 
mind herein set forth, will be able to pray scientifically and effectively for 
himself and for others. Your prayer is answered according to the universal
law of action and reaction. Thought is incipient action. The reaction is the 
response from your subconscious mind, which corresponds with the na -
ture of your thought. Busy your mind with the concepts of harmony, 
health, peace and good will and wonders will happen in your life.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
The Duality Of Mind
You have only one mind, but your mind possesses two distinctive charac -
teristics. The line of demarcation between the two is well known to all 
thinking men and women today. The two functions of your mind are es -
sentially unlike. Each is endowed with separate and distinct attributes and
powers. The nomenclature generally used to distinguish the two functions 
of your mind is as follows: The objective and subjective mind, the con -
scious and subconscious mind, the waking and sleeping mind, the surface 
self and the deep self, the voluntary mind and the involuntary mind, the 
male and the female and many other terms. You will find the terms “con -
scious” and “subconscious” used to represent the dual nature of your 
mind throughout this book.
The Conscious & Subconscious Minds
An excellent way to get acquainted with the two functions of your mind is 
to look upon your own mind as a garden. You are a gardener, and you are
planting seeds (thoughts) in your subconscious mind all day long, based 
on your habitual thinking. As you sow in your subconscious mind, so shall 
you reap in your body and environment.
Begin now to sow thoughts of peace, happiness, right action, good will 
and prosperity. Think quietly and with interest on these qualities and ac -
cept them fully in your conscious reasoning mind. Continue to plant these 
wonderful seeds (thoughts) in the garden of your mind and you will reap 
a glorious harvest. Your subconscious mind may be likened to soil, which 
will grow all kinds of seeds, good or bad. Do men gather grapes or thorns,
figs or thistles? Every thought is, therefore, a cause, and every condition 
is an effect. For this reason, it is essential that you take charge of your 
thoughts so as to bring forth only desirable conditions.
When your mind thinks correctly, when you understand the truth, when 
the thoughts deposited in your subconscious mind are constructive. Har -
monious and peaceful the magic working power of your subconscious will 
respond and bring about harmonious conditions, agreeable surroundings 
and the best of everything. When you begin to control your thought pro -
cesses, you can apply the powers of your subconscious to any problem or 
difficulty. In other words, you will actually be consciously cooperating with
the infinite power and omnipotent law, which governs all things.
Look around you wherever you live and you will notice that the vast ma -
jority of mankind lives in the world without and the more enlightened men
are intensely interested in the world within. Remember, it is the world 
within, namely your thoughts, feelings and imagery that makes your 
world without. It is, therefore, the only creative power and everything 
that you find in your world of expression has been created by you in the 
inner world of your mind, consciously or unconsciously.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
A knowledge of the interaction of your conscious and subconscious minds 
will enable you to transform your whole life. In order to change external 
conditions, you must change the cause. Most men try to change condi -
tions and circumstances by working with conditions and circumstances. To
remove discord, confusion, lack and limitation, you must remove the 
cause and the cause is the way you are using your conscious mind. In 
other words, the way you are thinking and picturing in your mind.
You are living in a fathomless sea of infinite riches. Your subconscious is 
every sensitive to your thoughts. Your thoughts form the mold or matrix 
through which the Infinite Intelligence, wisdom, vital forces and energies 
of your subconscious flow. The practical application of the laws of your 
mind as illustrated in each chapter in this book will cause you to experi -
ence abundance for poverty, wisdom for superstition and ignorance, peace
for pain, joy for sadness, light for darkness, harmony for discord, faith 
and confidence for fear, success for failure and freedom from the law of 
averages. Certainly, there can be no more wonderful blessing than these 
from a mental, emotional and material standpoint.
Most of the great scientists, artists, poets, singers, writers and inventors 
have a deep understanding of the workings of the conscious and subcon -
scious minds.
One time Caruso, the great operatic tenor, was struck with stage fright. 
He said his throat was paralyzed due to spasms caused by intense fear, 
which constricted the muscles in his throat. 
Perspiration poured copiously down his face. He was ashamed because in 
a few minutes he had to go out on the stage, yet he was shaking with 
fear and trepidation. He said, “They will laugh at me. I can't sing.” Then 
he shouted in the presence of those behind the stage, “The Little Me 
wants to strangle the Big Me within.”
He said to the Little Me, “Get out of here, the Big Me wants to sing 
through me.”
By the Big Me, he meant the limitless power and wisdom of his subcon -
scious mind. He began to shout, “Get out, get out, the Big Me is going to 
sing!”
His subconscious mind responded, releasing the vital forces within him. 
When the call came, he walked out on the stage and sang gloriously and 
majestically, enthralling the audience.
It is obvious to you now that Caruso must have understood the two levels
of mind – the conscious or rational, and the subconscious or irrational lev -
el. Your subconscious mind is reactive and responds to the nature of your 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
thoughts. When your conscious mind (the Little Me) is full of fear, worry 
and anxiety, the negative emotions engendered in your subconscious 
mind (the Big Me) are released and flood the conscious mind with a sense
of panic, foreboding and despair. When this happens, you can, like Caru -
so, speak affirmatively and with a deep sense of authority to the irrational
emotions generated in your deeper mind as follows: “Be still, be quiet, I 
am in control, you must obey me, you are subject to my command, you 
cannot intrude where you do not belong.” 
It is fascinating and intensely interesting to observe how you can speak 
authoritatively and with conviction to the irrational movement of your 
deeper self, bringing silence, harmony and peace to your mind. The sub -
conscious is subject to the conscious mind, and that is why it is called 
subconscious or subjective. 
Outstanding Differences & Modes Of Operation
You will perceive the main differences by the following illustration: The 
conscious mind is like the navigator or captain at the bridge of a ship. He 
directs the ship and signals orders to men in the engine room, who in turn
control all the boilers, instruments, gauges etc. The men in the engine 
room do not know where they are going; they follow orders. They would 
go on the rocks if the man in the bridge issued faulty or wrong instruc -
tions based on his findings with the compass, sextant or other instru -
ments. The men in the engine room obey him because he is in charge and
issues orders, which are automatically obeyed. Members of the crew do 
not talk back to the captain, they simply carry out orders.
The captain is the master of his ship and his decrees are carried out. Like -
wise, your conscious mind is the captain and the master of your ship, 
which represents your body, environment and all your affairs. Your sub -
conscious mind takes the orders you give it based upon what your con -
scious mind believes and accepts as true.
When you repeatedly say to people, “I can't afford it,” then your subcon -
scious mind takes you at your word and sees to it that you will not be in a
position to purchase what you want. As long as you persist in saying, “I 
can't afford that car, that trip to Europe, that home, that fur coat or er -
mine warp,” you can rest assured that your subconscious mind will follow 
your orders and you will go through life experiencing the lack of all these 
things.
Last Christmas Eve a beautiful young university student looked at an at -
tractive and rather expensive traveling bag in a store window. She was 
going home to Buffalo, New York, for the holidays. She was about to say, 
“I can't afford that bag,” when she recalled something she had heard at 
one of my lectures, which was, “Never finish a negative statement, re -
verse it immediately, and wonders will happen in your life.”
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
She said, “That bag is mine. It is for sale. I accept it mentally and my 
subconscious sees to it that I received it.”
At eight o'clock Christmas Eve her fiance presented her with a bag exactly
the same as the one she had looked at and mentally identified herself 
with at ten o'clock the same morning. She had filled her mind with the 
thought of expectancy and released the whole thing to her deeper mind 
which has the “know-how” of accomplishment.
This young girl, a student at the University of Southern California, said to 
me, “I didn't have the money to buy that bag, but now I know where to 
find money and all the things I need, and that is in the treasure house of 
eternity within me.”
Another simply illustration is this: When you say, “I do not like mush -
rooms,” and the occasion subsequently comes that you are served mush -
rooms in sauces or salads, you will get indigestion because your subcon -
scious mind says to you, “The boss (your conscious mind) does not like 
mushrooms.” This is an amusing example of the outstanding differences 
and modes of operation of your conscious and subconscious minds.
A woman may say, “I wake up at three o'clock, if I drink coffee at night.” 
Whenever she drinks coffee at night, her subconscious mind nudges her, 
as if to say, “The boss wants you to stay awake tonight.”
Your subconscious mind works twenty-four hours a day and makes provi -
sions for your benefit, pouring all the fruit of your habitual thinking into 
your lap.
How Her Subconscious Responded
A woman wrote me a few months ago as follows: “I am seventy-five years
old, a widow with a grown family. I was living alone and on a pension. I 
heard your lectures on the powers of the subconscious mind wherein you 
said that ideas could be conveyed to the subconscious mind by repetition, 
faith and expectancy.
“I began to repeat frequently with feeling, 'I am wanted. I am happily 
married to a kind, loving and spiritual minded man. I am secure!'
“I kept on doing this many times a day for about two weeks, and one day 
at the corner drugstore, I was introduced to a retired pharmacist. I found 
him to be kind, understanding and very religious. He was a perfect an -
swer to my prayer. Within a week he proposed to me and now we are on 
our honeymoon in Europe. I know that the intelligence within my subcon -
scious mind brought both of us together in divine order.”
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
This woman discovered that the treasure house was within her. Her prayer
was felt as true in her heart and her affirmation sank down by osmosis 
into her subconscious mind, which is the creative medium. The moment 
she succeeded in bringing about a subjective embodiment, her subcon -
scious mind brought about the answer through the law of attraction. Her 
deeper mind, full of wisdom and intelligence, brought both of them to -
gether in divine order.
Be sure that you think on whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things 
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, 
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if 
there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things. 
Phil. 4:8.
Brief Summary Of Ideas Worth Remembering
1. The treasure house is within you. Look within for the answer to your 
heart's desire.
2. The great secret possessed by the great men of all ages was their abili -
ty to contact and release the powers of their subconscious mind. You can 
do the same.
3. Your subconscious has the answer to all problems. If you suggest to 
your subconscious prior to sleep, “I want to get up at 6 a.m.,” it will awak -
en you at that exact time.
4. Your subconscious mind is the builder of your body and can heal you. 
Lull yourself to sleep every night with the idea of perfect health, and your 
subconscious, being your faithful servant, will obey you.
5. Every thought is a cause and every condition is an effect. 
6. If you want to write a book, write a wonderful play, give a better talk to
your audience, then convey the idea lovingly and feelingly to your sub -
conscious mind, and it will respond accordingly.
7. You are like a captain navigating a ship. He must give the right orders, 
and likewise, you must give the right orders (thoughts and images) to 
your subconscious mind, which controls and governs all your experiences.
8. Never use the terms, “I can't afford it” or “I can't do this.” Your subcon -
scious mind takes you at your word and sees to it that you do not have 
the money or the ability to do what you want to do. Affirm, “I can do all 
things through the power of my subconscious mind.”
9. The law of life is the law of belief. A belief is a thought in your mind. Do
not believe in things to harm or hurt you. Believe in the power of your 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
subconscious to heal, inspire, strengthen and prosper you. According to 
your belief is it done unto you.
10. Change your thoughts and you change your destiny.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
