
You spend about eight out of every twenty-four hours, or one third of your
entire life, in sleep. This is an inexorable law of life. This also applies to 
the animal and vegetable kingdoms. Sleep is a divine law and many an -
swers to our problems come to us when we are sound asleep upon the 
bed.
Many people have advocated the theory that you get tired during the day,
that you go to sleep to rest the body, and that a reparative process takes 
place while you sleep. Nothing rests in sleep. Your heart, lungs and all 
your vital organs functions while you are asleep. If you eat prior to sleep, 
the food is digested an assimilated; also, your skin secretes perspiration, 
and your nails and hair continue to grow.
Your subconscious mind never rests or sleeps. It is always active, control -
ling all your vital forces. The healing process takes place more rapidly 
while you are asleep as there is no interference from your conscious 
mind. Remarkable answers are given to you while you are asleep.
Why We Sleep
Dr John Bigelow, a famous research authority on sleep (Dr John Bigelow, 
The Mystery of Sleep, New York and London: Harper Brothers, 1903), 
demonstrated that at night while asleep you receive impressions showing 
that the nerves of the eyes, ears, nose and taste buds are active during 
sleep and also that the nerves of your brain are quite active. He says that 
the main reason we sleep is because “the nobler part of the soul is united 
by abstraction to our higher nature and becomes a participant in the wis -
dom and foreknowledge of the gods.”
Dr Bigelow states also, “The results of my studies have not only strength -
ened my convictions that the supposed exemption from customary tolls 
and activities was not the final purpose of sleep, but have also made 
clearer to my mind the conviction that no part of a man's life deserves to 
be considered more indispensable to its symmetrical and perfect spiritual 
development than while he is separated from the phenomenal world in 
sleep.”
Prayer, A Form Of Sleep
Your conscious mind gets involved with vexations, strife and contentions 
of the day and it is very necessary to withdraw periodically from sense ev -
idence and the objective world, and commune silently with the inner wis -
dom of your subconscious mind. By claiming guidance, strength and 
greater intelligence in all phases of your life, you will be enabled to over -
come all difficulties and solve your daily problems.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
This regular withdrawal from sense evidence and the noise and confusion 
of everyday living is also a form of sleep, i.e. you become asleep to the 
world of the senses and alive to the wisdom and power of your subcon -
scious mind.
Startling Effects Of Sleep Deprivation
Lack of sleep can cause you to become irritable, moody and depressed. 
Dr George Stevenson of the National Association for Mental Health says, 
“I  believe it can safely be said that all human beings a minimum of six 
hours sleep to be healthy. Most people need more. Those who think they 
can get along on less are fooling themselves.”
Medial research scholars, investigating sleep processes and deprivation of 
sleep, point out that severe insomnia has preceded psychotic breakdown 
in some instances. Remember, you are spiritually recharged during sleep, 
and adequate sleep is essential to produce joy and vitality in life.
You Need More Sleep
Robert O'Brien, in an article, “Maybe you Need More Sleep,” in an issue of 
The Reader's Digest , reports the following experiments on sleep:
“For the last three years experiments have been in progress at Walter 
Reed Army Institute of Research in Washington, Dc. Subjects – more than
one hundred military and civilian volunteers – have been kept awake for 
as long as four days. Thousands of tests have measured the effects on 
their behavior and personality. Results of these tests have given scientists
astonishingly new insights into the mysteries of sleep.
“They now know that the tired brain apparently craves sleep so hungrily 
that it will sacrifice anything to get it. After only a few  hours of sleep 
loss, fleeting stolen naps called lapses, or micro sleep, occurred at the 
rate of three or four an hour. As in real sleep, eyelids dropped and heart -
beat slowed. Each lapse lasted just a fraction of a second. Sometimes the 
lapses were periods of blankness; sometimes they were filled with im -
ages, wisps of dreams. As hours of sleep loss mounted, the lapses took 
place more often and lasted longer, perhaps two or three seconds. Even if 
the subjects had been piloting an airliner in a thunderstorm, they still 
couldn't have resisted micro sleeps for those few priceless seconds. And it
can happen to you, as many who have fallen asleep at the wheel of a car 
can testify.  
“Another startling effect of sleep deprivation was its attack on human 
memory and perception. Many sleep deprived subjects were unable to re -
tain information long enough to relate it to the task they were supposed 
to perform. They were totally befuddled in situations requiring them to 
hold several factors in mind and act on them, as a pilot must when he 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
skilfully integrates wind direction, air speed, altitude and glide path to 
make a safe landing.”
Sleep Brings Counsel
A young lade in Los Angeles who listens to my morning radio talks told 
me that she had been offered a lucrative position in New York City at 
twice her present salary. She was wondering whether to accept or not and
prayed prior to sleep as follows: “The creative intelligence of my subcon -
scious mind knows what is best for me. Its tendency is always lifeward, 
and it reveals to me the right decision which blesses me and all con -
cerned. I give thanks for the answer which I know will come to me.”
She repeated this simple prayer over and over again as a lullaby prior to 
sleep and in the morning she had a persistent feeling that she should not 
accept the offer. She rejected the offer and subsequent events verified 
that her inward sense of knowing, because the company went bankrupt a 
few months following their offer of employment to her.
The conscious ind may be correct on the facts objectively known, but the 
intuitive faculty of her subconscious mind saw the failure of the concern in
question and prompted her accordingly.
Saved From Certain Disaster
I will illustrate how the wisdom of your subconscious mind can instruct 
you and protect you relative to your request for right action as you go to 
sleep.
Many years ago, before the Second World War, I was offered a very lucra -
tive assignment in the Orient, and I prayer for guidance and right decision
as follows: “Infinite Intelligence within me knows all things, and the right 
decision is revealed to me in divine order. I will recognize the answer 
when it comes.”
I repeated this simple prayer over and over again as a lullaby prior to 
sleep and in a dream came the vivid realization of things to come three 
years hence. An old friend appeared in the dream and said, “Read these 
headlines – do not go!” The headlines of the newspaper which appeared in
the dream related to war and the attack on Pearl Harbor.
Occasionally, the writer dreams literally. The aforementioned dream was 
undoubtedly a dramatization of the subconscious mind which projected a 
person whom I trusted and respected. To some a warning may come in 
the form of a mother who appears in a dream. She tells the person not to 
go here or there, and the reason for the warning. Your subconscious mind
is all-wise. It knows all tings. Oftentimes it will speak to you only in a 
voice that your conscious mind will immediately accept as true. Some -
times your subconscious mind will warn you in a voice which sounds like 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
that of your mother or some loved one which may cause you to stop on 
the street, and you find, if you had gone another foot, a falling object 
from a window might have struck you on the head.
My subconscious mind is one with the universal subconscious and it knew 
the Japanese were planning a war, and it also knew when the war would 
start.
Dr Rhine, director of the Department of Psychology at Duke University, 
has gathered together a vast amount of evidence showing that a great 
number of people all over the world see events before they happen, and 
in many instances are, therefore, able to avoid the tragic event which was
foreseen vividly in a dream.
The dream I had, showed clearly the headlines in the New York Times  
about three years prior to the tragedy of Pearl Harbor. In consequence of 
this dream, I immediately canceled the trip as I felt a subconscious com -
pulsion to do so. Three years later the Second World War proved the truth
of the inner voice of intuition.
Your Future Is In Your Subconscious Mind
Remember that the future, the result of your habitual thinking, is already 
in your mind except when you change it through prayer. The future of a 
country, likewise, is in the collective subconscious of the people of that 
nation. There is nothing strange in the dream I had wherein I saw the 
headlines of the New York newspapers long before the war began. The 
war had already taken place in mind, and all the plans of attack were al -
ready engraved on that great recording instrument, the subconscious 
mind or collective unconscious of the universal mind. Tomorrow's events 
are in your subconscious mind, so are next week's and next month's and 
they may be seen by a highly psychic or clairvoyant person.
No disaster or tragedy can happen to you if you decide to pray. Nothing is
predetermined or foreordained. Your mental attitude, i.e. the way you 
think, feel and believe determines your destiny. You can, through scientific
prayer, which is explained in a previous chapter, mold, fashion and create 
your own future. Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap .
A Catnap Nets Him $15,000
One of my students mailed me a newspaper clipping three or four years 
ago about a man called Ray Hammerstrom, a roller at the steel works in 
Pittsburgh, operated by Jones and Laughlin Steel Corporation. He received
$15,000 for his dream.
According to the article , the engineers could not fix a faulty switch in a 
newly installed bar mill which controlled the delivery of straight bars to 
the cooling beds. The engineers worked on the switch about eleven or 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
twelve times to no avail.
Hammerstrom thought a lot about the problem and tried to figure out a 
new design which might work. Nothing worked. One afternoon he lay 
down for a nap and prior to sleep he began to think about the answer to 
the switch problem. He had a dream in which the perfect design for the 
switch was portrayed. When he awoke, he sketched his new design ac -
cording to the outline of his dream.
This visionary catnap won Hammerstrom a check for $15,000, the largest 
award the firm ever gave an employee for a new idea.
How A Famous Professor Solved His Problem In Sleep
Dr H V Helprecht, Professor of Assyrian at the University of Pennsylvania, 
wrote as follows: “One Saturday evening I had been wearying myself in 
the vain attempt to decipher two small fragments of agate which were 
supposed to belong to the finger rings of some Babylonians.
“About midnight, weary and exhausted, I went to bed and dreamed the 
following remarkable dream: A tall thin priest of Nippur, about forty years 
of age, led me to the treasure chamber of the temple...a small, low-
ceilinged room without windows, with scraps of agate and lapis-lazuli 
scattered on the floor. Here he addressed me as follows: The two frag -
ments, which you have published separately on pages 22 and 26 belong 
together, and are not finger rings. The first two rings served as earrings 
for the statue of god; the two fragments you have are the portions of 
them. If you will put them together you will have confirmation of my 
words.”
I awoke at once. I examined the fragments and to my astonishment 
found the dream verified. The problem was then at last solved.”
This demonstrates clearly the creative manifestation of his subconscious 
mind which knew the answer to all his problems.
How The Subconscious Worked For A Famous Write While He Slept
Robert Louis Stevenson in one of his books, Across the Plains, devotes a 
whole chapter to dreams. He was a vivid dreamer and had the persistent 
habit of giving specific instructions to his subconscious every night prior 
to sleep. He would request his subconscious to evolve stories for him 
while he slept. For example, if Stevenson's funds were at a low ebb, his 
command to his subconscious would be something like this: “Give me a 
good thrilling novel which will be marketable and profitable.” His subcon -
scious responded magnificently.
Stevenson says, “These little brownies (the intelligences and powers of his
subconscious) can tell me a story piece by piece, like a serial, and keep 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
me, its supposed creator, all the while in total ignorance of where they 
aim.” And he added: “That part of my work which is done when I am up 
and about (which he is consciously aware and awake) is by no means 
necessarily mine, since all goes to show that the brownies have a hand in 
it even then.”
Sleep In Peace & Wake In Joy
To those who suffer from insomnia, you will find the following prayer very 
effective. Repeat it slowly, quietly and lovingly prior to sleep: “My toes are
relaxed, my ankles are relaxed, my abdominal muscles are relaxed, my 
heart and lungs are relaxed, my hands and arms are relaxed, my neck is 
relaxed, my brain is relaxed, my face is relaxed, my eyes are relaxed, my 
whole mind and body are relaxed. I fully and freely forgive everyone, and 
I sincerely wish for them harmony, health, peace and all the blessings of 
life. I am at peace; I am poised, serene and calm. I rest in security and in
peace. A great stillness steals over me, and a great calm quiets my whole 
being as I realize the divine presence within me. I know that the realiza -
tion of life and love heals me. I wrap myself in the mantel of love and fall 
asleep filled with good will for all. Throughout the night peace remains 
with me and in the morning I shall be filled with life and love. A circle of 
love is drawn around me. I will fear no evil, for Thou art with me, I sleep 
in peace, I wake in joy, and in Him I live, move and have my being .”
Summary Of Your Aids To The Wonders Of Sleep
1. If you are worried that you will not wake up on time, suggest to your 
subconscious mind prior to sleep the exact time you wish to arise, and it 
will awaken you. It needs no clock. Do the same thing with all problems. 
There is nothing too hard for your subconscious.
2. Your subconscious never sleeps. It is always on the job. It controls all 
your vital functions. Forgive yourself and everyone else before you go to 
sleep and healing will take place much more rapidly.
3. Guidance is given you while you are asleep, sometimes in a dream. The
healing currents are also released and in the morning you feel refreshed 
and rejuvenated.
4. When troubled by the vexations and strife of the day, still the wheels of
your mind and think about the wisdom and intelligence lodged in your 
subconscious mind which is ready to respond to you. This will give you 
peace, strength and confidence. 
5. Sleep is essential for peace of mind and health of body. Lack of sleep 
can cause irritation, depression and mental disorders. You need eight 
hours sleep.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
6. Medical research scholars point out that insomnia precedes  psychotic 
disorders.
7. You are spiritually recharged during sleep. Adequate sleep is essential 
for joy and vitality in life.
8. Your tired brain craves sleep so hungrily that it will sacrifice anything to
get it. Many who have fallen asleep at the wheel of an automobile can 
testify to this.
9. many sleep deprived people have poor memories and lack proper coor -
dination. They become befuddle, confused and disorientated.
10. Sleep brings counsel. Prior to sleep, claim that the Infinite Intelligence
of your subconscious mind is guiding and directing you. Then, watch for 
the lead which comes, perhaps on awakening.
11. Trust your subconscious completely. Know that its tendency is always 
lifeward. Occasionally, your subconscious answers you in a very vivid 
dream and a vision in the night. You can be forewarned in a dream in the 
same way as the author of this book was warned.
12. Your future is in your mind now, based on your habitual thinking and 
beliefs. Claim that Infinite Intelligence leads and guides you; and that all 
good is yours, and your future will be wonderful. Believe it and accept it. 
Expect the best and invariably the best will come to you.
13. If you are writing a novel, play or book or are working on an inven -
tion, speak to your subconscious mind at night and claim boldly that its 
wisdom, intelligence and power are guiding, directing and revealing to 
you the ideal play, novel, book or revealing the perfect solution whatever 
it may be. Wonders will happen as you pray this way.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
