
It is your right to be rich. You are here to lead the abundant life and be 
happy, radiant and free. You should, therefore, have all the money you 
need to lead a full, happy and prosperous life.
You are here to grow, expand and unfold spiritually, mentally and materi -
ally. You have the inalienable right to fully develop and express yourself 
along all lines. You should surround yourself with beauty and luxury.
Why be satisfied with just enough to go around when you can enjoy the 
riches of your subconscious mind? In this chapter you can learn to make 
friends with money, and you should always have a surplus. Your desire to 
be rich is a desire for a fuller, happier, more wonderful life. It is a cosmic 
urge. It is not only good, but very good.
Money Is A Symbol
Money is a symbol of exchange. It means to you not only freedom from 
want, but beauty, luxury, abundance and refinement. It is merely a sym -
bol of the economic health of the nation. When your blood is circulating 
freely in your body, you are healthy. When money is circulating freely in 
your life, you are economically healthy. When people begin to hoard mon -
ey, to put it away in tin boxes and become charge with fear, there is eco -
nomic illness. Money has taken many forms as a medium of exchange 
down through the centuries, such as salt, beads and trinkets of various 
kinds. In early times a man's wealth was determined by the number of 
sheep and oxen he had. Now we use currency, and other negotiable in -
struments, as it is much more convenient to write a check then carry 
some sheep around with you to pay bills.
How To Walk The Royal Road To Riches
Knowledge of the powers of your subconscious mind is the means to the 
royal road to riches of all kinds; spiritual, mental or financial. The student 
of the laws of mind believes and knows definitely that regardless of eco -
nomic situations, stock market fluctuation, depression, strikes, war or 
other conditions and circumstances, he will always be amply supplied, re -
gardless of what form money takes. The reason for this is that he has 
conveyed the idea of wealth to his subconscious mind, and it keeps him 
supplied wherever he may be. He has convinced himself in his mind that 
money is forever flowing freely in his life and that there is always a won -
derful surplus. Should there be a financial collapse of government tomor -
row and all the man's present holdings become valueless, as the German 
marks did after the First World War, he would still attract wealth and be 
cared for, regardless of the form the new currency took.
Why You Do Not Have More Money
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
As you read this chapter, you are probably saying, “I am worthy of a high -
er salary than I am receiving.” I believe most people are inadequately 
compensated. One of the causes many people do not have more money is
that they are silently or openly condemning it. They refer to money as 
“filthy lucre' or “the love of money is the root of all evil.” Another reason 
they do not prosper is that they have a sneaky subconscious feeling there
is some virtue in poverty. This subconscious pattern may be due to early 
childhood training, superstition or it could be based on a false interpreta -
tion of scriptures.
Money & A Balanced Life
One time a man said to me, “I am broke. I do not like money. It is the 
root of all evil.” These statements represent a confused, neurotic mind. 
Love of money to the exclusion of everything else will cause you to be -
come lopsided and unbalanced. You are here to use your power or author -
ity wisely. Some men crave power, others crave money. If you set your 
heart on money exclusively and say, “Money is all I want; I am going to 
give all my attention to amassing money; nothing else matters,” you can 
get money and attain a fortune, but you have forgotten that you are here 
to lead a balanced life. You must also satisfy the hunger for peace of 
mind, harmony, love, joy an perfect health.
By making money your sole aim, you simply made a wrong choice. You 
thought that was all you wanted, but you found after all your efforts that 
it was not only the money you needed. You also desired true expression 
of your hidden talents, true place in life, beauty and the joy of contribut -
ing to the welfare and success of others. By learning the laws of your sub -
conscious mind, you could have a million dollars or many millions, if you 
wanted them, and still have peace of mind, harmony, perfect health and 
perfect expression.
Poverty Is A Mental Disease
There is no virtue in poverty; it is a disease like any other mental disease.
If you were physically ill, you would think there was something wrong 
with you. You would seek help and do something about the condition at 
once. Likewise, if you do not have money constantly circulating in your 
life, there is something radically wrong with you.
The urge of life principle in you is toward growth, expansion and the life 
more abundant. You are not here to live in a hovel, dress in rags and go 
hungry. You should be happy, prosperous and successful.
Why You Must Never Criticize Money
Cleanse your mind of all weird and superstitious beliefs about money. Do 
not ever regards money as evil or filthy. If you do, you cause it to take 
wings and fly away from you. Remember that you lose what you con -
demn. You cannot attract what you criticize. 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
Getting The Right Attitude Toward Money
Here is a simple technique you may use to multiply money in your experi -
ence. Use the following statements several times a day, “I like money, I 
love it, I use it wisely, constructively and judiciously. Money is constantly 
circulating in my life. I release it with joy and it returns to me multiplied 
in a wonderful way.  It is good and very good. Money flows to me in 
avalanches of abundance. I use it for good only and I am grateful for my 
good and for the riches of my mind.”
How The Scientific Thinker Looks At Money
Suppose, for example, you found gold, silver, lead, copper or iron in the 
ground. Would you pronounce these things evil? All evil comes from man's
darkened understanding, from his ignorance, from his false interpretation 
of life and from his misuse of his subconscious mind. Uranium, lead or 
some other metal could have been used as a medium of exchange. We 
use paper bills, checks, nickel and silver; surely these things are not evil. 
Physicists and chemists know today that the only difference between one 
metal and another is the number and rate of motion of electrons revolving
around a central nucleus. They can now change one metal into another 
through a bombardment of the atoms in the powerful cyclotron. Gold, un -
der under conditions, becomes mercury. I believe that our modern scien -
tists in the near future will be able to make gold, silver and other metals 
synthetically in the chemical laboratory. The cost may be prohibitive now, 
but it can be done. I cannot imagine any intelligent person seeing any -
thing evil in electrons, neutrons, protons and isotopes.
The piece of paper in your pocket is composed of atoms and molecules 
with their electrons and protons arranged differently. Their number and 
rate of motion are different. That is the only way the paper differs from 
the silver in your pocket.
How To Attract The Money You Need
Many years ago I met a young boy in Australia who wanted to become a 
physician and surgeon, but he had no money. I explained to him how a 
seed deposited in the soil attracts to itself everything necessary for its un -
folding, and that all he had to do was to take a lesson from the seed and 
deposit the required idea in his subconscious mind. For expenses, this 
young, brilliant boy used to clean out doctors' offices, wash windows and 
do odd repair jobs. He told me that every night, as he went to sleep, he 
used to picture in his mind's eye a medical diploma on a wall with his 
name on it in big, bold letters. He used to clean and shine the framed 
diplomas in the medical building where he worked. It was not hard for 
him to engrave the image of a diploma in his mind and develop it there. 
Definite results followed as he persisted with his mental picture every 
night for about four months.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
The sequel of this story was very interesting. One of the doctors took a 
great liking to this young boy and after training him in the art of sterilizing
instruments, giving hypodermic injections and other miscellaneous first 
aid work, he employed him as a technical assistant in his office. The doc -
tor later sent him to medical school at his own expense. Today, this young
man is a prominent medical doctor in Montreal, Canada. He discovered 
the law of attraction by using his subconscious mind the right way. He op -
erated an age old law which says, “Having seen the end, you have willed 
the means to the realization of the end.” The end in this case was to be -
come a medical doctor. 
This young man was able to imagine, see and feel the reality of being a 
doctor. He lived with that idea, sustained it, nourished it and loved it until 
through his imagination it penetrated the layers of his subconscious mind 
and became a conviction, thereby attracting to him everything necessary 
for the fulfillment of his dream.
Why Some Men Do Not Get A Raise In Pay
If you are working in a large organization and you are silently thinking of 
and resenting the fact you are underpaid, that you are not appreciated 
and that you deserve more money and great recognition, you are subcon -
sciously severing your ties with that organization. You are setting a law in 
motion and the superintendent or manager will say to you, “We have to 
let you go.” Actually, you dismissed yourself. The manager was simply the
instrument through which your own negative mental state was confirmed.
It was an example of the law of action and reaction. The action was your 
thought and the reaction as the response of your subconscious mind.
Obstacles & Impediments On The Pathway To Riches
I am sure you have heard men say, “That fellow has a racket.” “He is a 
racketeer.” “He is getting money dishonestly.” “He is a faker.” “I knew him 
when he had nothing.” “He is a crook, a thief and a swindler.”
If you analyze the man who talks like that, you discover he is usually in 
want or suffering from some financial or physical illness. Perhaps his for -
mer college friends went up the ladder of success and excelled him. Now 
he is bitter and envious of their progress. In many instances this is the 
cause of his downfall. Thinking negatively of these classmates and con -
demning their wealth causes the wealth and prosperity he is praying for 
to vanish and flee away. He is condemning the thing he is praying for.
He is praying two ways. On the one hand he is saying, “Wealth is flowing 
to me now,” and in the next breath, silently or audibly, he is saying, “I re -
sent that fellow's wealth.” Always make it a special point to rejoice in the 
wealth of the other person.
Protect Your Investments
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
If you are seeking wisdom regarding investments, or if you are worried 
about your stocks or bonds, quietly claims, “Infinite Intelligence governs 
and watches over all my financial transactions, and whatsoever I do shall 
prosper.” Do this frequently and you will find that your investments will be
wise; moreover, you will be protected from loss, as you will be prompted 
to sell your securities or holdings before any loss accrues to you.
You Cannot Get Something For Nothing
In large stores the management employs store detectives to prevent peo -
ple from stealing. They catch a number of people every day trying to get 
something for nothing. All such people are living in the mental atmos -
phere of lack and limitation and are stealing from themselves peace, har -
mony, faith, honesty, integrity, good will and confidence. Furthermore, 
they are attracting to themselves all manner of loss, such as loss of char -
acter, prestige, social status and peace of mind. These people lack faith in
the source of supply and the understanding of how their minds work. If 
they would mentally call on the powers of their subconscious mind and 
claim that they are guided to their true expression, the would find work 
and constant supply. Then by honesty, integrity and perseverance they 
would become a credit to themselves and to society at large.
Your Constant Supply Of Money
Recognizing the powers of your subconscious mind and the creative power
of your thought or mental image is the way to opulence, freedom and 
constant supply. Accept the abundant life in your own mind. Your mental 
acceptance and expectancy of wealth has its own mathematics and me -
chanics of expression. As you enter in to the mood of opulence, all things 
necessary for the abundant life will come to pass.
Let this be your daily affirmation; write it in your heart, “I am one with 
the infinite riches of my subconscious mind. It is my right to be rich, hap -
py and successful. Money flows to me freely, copiously and endlessly. I 
am forever conscious of my true worth. I give of my talents freely and I 
am wonderfully blessed financially. It is wonderful!”
Step Up This Way To Riches
1. Be bold enough to claim that it is your right to be rich and your deeper 
mind will honor your claim.
2. You don't want just enough to go around. You want all the money you 
need to do all the things you want to do and when you want to do them. 
Get acquainted with the riches of your subconscious mind.
3. When money is circulating freely in your life, you are economically 
healthy. Look at money like the tide you will always have plenty of it. The 
ebb and flow of the tide is constant. When the tide is out, you are abso -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
lutely sure that it will return.
4. Knowing the laws of your subconscious mind, you will always be sup -
plied regardless of what form money takes.
5. One reason many people simply make ends meet and never have 
enough money is that they condemn money. What you condemn takes 
wings and flies away.
6. Do not make a god of money. It is only a symbol. Remember that the 
real riches are in your mind. You are here to lead a balanced life – this in -
cludes acquiring all the money you need.
7. Don't make money your sole aim. Claim wealth, happiness, peace, true
expression and love and personally radiate love and good will to all. Then 
your subconscious mind will give you compound interest in all these fields 
of expression.
8. There is no virtue in poverty. It is a disease of the mind and you should
heal yourself of this mental conflict or malady at once.
9. You are not here to live in a hovel, to dress in rags or to go hungry. You
are here to lead the life more abundant.
10. Never use the terms “filthy lucre” or “I despise money.” You lose what 
you criticize. There is nothing good or bad, but thinking of it in either light
makes it so.
11. Repeat frequently, “I like money. I use it wisely, constructively and ju -
diciously. I release it with joy and it returns a thousand fold.
12. Money is not evil anymore so than copper, lead, tin or iron which you 
find in the ground. All evil is due to ignorance or misuse of the mind's 
powers.
13. To picture the end result in your mind causes your subconscious to re -
spond and fulfill your mental picture.
14. Stop trying to get something for nothing. There is no such thing as a 
free lunch. You must give to receive. You must give mental attention to 
your goals, ideals and enterprises and your deeper mind will back you up.
The key to wealth is application of the laws of the subconscious mind by 
impregnating it with the idea of wealth.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
