
The solution lies within the problem. The answer is in every question. If 
you are presented with a difficult situation and you cannot see your way 
clear, the best procedure is to assume that Infinite Intelligence within 
your subconscious mind knows all and sees all, has the answer, and is re -
vealing it to you now. Your new mental attitude that the creative intelli -
gence is bringing about a happy solution will enable you to find the an -
swer. Rest assured that such an attitude of mind will bring order, peace 
and meaning to all your undertakings.
How To Break Or Build A Habit
You are a creature of habit. Habit is the function of your subconscious 
mind. You learned to swim, ride a bicycle, dance and drive a car by con -
sciously doing these things over and over again until they established 
tracks in your subconscious mind. Then, the automatic habit action of 
your subconscious mind took over. This is sometimes called second nature
which is a reaction of your subconscious mind to your thinking and acting.
You are free to choose a good habit or a bad habit. If you repeat a nega -
tive thought or act over a period of time, you will be under the compul -
sion of a habit. The law off your subconscious is compulsion.
How He Broke A Bad Habit
Mr Jones said to me, “An uncontrollable urge to drink seizes upon me, and
I remain drunk for two weeks at a time. I can't give up this terrible habit.”
Time and time again these experiences had occurred to this unfortunate 
man. He had grown into the habit of drinking to excess. Although he had 
started drinking of his own initiative, he also began to realize that he 
could change the habit and establish a new one. He said that while 
through his will power he was able to suppress his desires temporarily, his
continued efforts to suppress the many urges only made matters worse. 
His repeated failures convinced him that he was hopeless and powerless 
to control his urge or obsession. This idea of being powerless operated as 
a powerful suggestion to his subconscious mind and aggravated his weak -
ness, making his life a succession of failures.
I taught him to harmonize the functions of the conscious and subcon -
scious mind. When these two cooperate, the idea or desire implanted in 
the sub mind is realized. His reasoning mind agreed that if the old habit 
path or track had carried him into trouble, he could consciously form a 
new path to freedom, sobriety and peace of mind. He knew that his de -
structive habit was automatic, but since it was acquired through his con -
scious choice, he realized that if he had been conditioned negatively, he 
also could be conditioned positively. As a result, he ceased thinking of the 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
fact that he was powerless to overcome the habit. Moreover, he under -
stood clearly that there was no obstacle to his healing other than his own 
thought. Therefore, there was no occasion for great mental effort or men -
tal coercion.
The Power Of His Mental Picture
This man acquired a practice of relaxing his body and getting into a re -
laxed drowsy, meditative state. Then he filled his mind with the picture of 
the desired end, knowing his subconscious mind could bring it about the 
easiest way. He imagined his daughter congratulating him on his freedom,
and saying to him, “Daddy, it's wonderful to have you home!' he had lost 
his family through drink. He was not allowed to visit them, and his wife 
would not speak to him.
Regularly, systematically, he used to sit down and meditate in the way 
outlined. When his attention wandered, he made it a habit to immediately
recall the mental picture of his daughter with her smile and the scene of 
his home enlivened by her cheerful voice. All this brought about a recon -
ditioning of his mind. It was a gradual process. He kept it up. He perse -
vered knowing that sooner or later he would establish a new habit pattern
in his subconscious mind.
I told him that he could liken his conscious mind to a camera, that his 
subconscious mind was the sensitive plate on which he registered and im -
pressed the picture. This made a profound impression on him, and his 
whole aim was to firmly impress the picture on his mind and develop it 
there. Films are developed in the dark; likewise, mental pictures are de -
veloped in the darkroom of the subconscious mind.
Focused Attention
Realizing that his conscious mind was simply a camera, he used no effort. 
There was no mental struggle. He quietly adjusted his thoughts and fo -
cused his attention on the scene before him until he gradually became 
identified with the picture. He became absorbed in the mental atmos -
phere, repeating  the mental movie frequently. There was no room for 
doubt that a healing would follow. When there was any temptation to 
drink, he would switch his imagination from any reveries of drinking bouts
to the feeling of being at home with his family. He was successful because
he confidently expected to experience the picture he was developing in his
mind. Today he is president of a multimillion dollar concern and is radiant -
ly happy.
He Said A Jinx Was Following Him
Mr Block said that he had been making an annual income of $20,000, but 
for the past three months all doors seemed to jam tightly. He brought 
clients up to the point where they were about to sign on the dotted line, 
and then at the eleventh hour the door closed. He added that perhaps a 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
jinx was following him.
In discussing the matter with Mr Block, I discovered that three months 
previously he had become very irritated, annoyed and resentful toward a 
dentist who, after he had promised to sign a contract, had withdrawn at 
the last moment. He began to live in the unconscious fear that other 
clients would do the same, thereby setting up a history of frustration, 
hostility and obstacles. He gradually built up in his mind a belief in ob -
struction and last minute cancellations until a vicious circle had been es -
tablished. What I fear most has come upon me. Mr Block realized that the
trouble was in his own mind and that it was essential to change his men -
tal attitude.
His run of so-called misfortune was broken in the following way: “I realize
I am one with the Infinite Intelligence of my subconscious mind which 
knows no obstacle, difficulty or delay. I live in the joyous expectancy of 
the best. My deeper mind responds to my thoughts. I know that the work 
of the infinite power of my subconscious cannot be hindered. Infinite In -
telligence always finishes successfully whatever it begins. Creative wis -
dom works through me bringing all my plans and purposes to completion.
Whatever I start, I bring to a successful conclusion. My aim in life is to 
give wonderful service, and all those whom I contact are blessed by what 
I have to offer. All my work comes to full fruition in divine order.
He repeated this prayer every morning before going to call on his cus -
tomers, and he also prayed each night prior to sleep. In a short time he 
had established a new habit pattern in his subconscious mind, and he was
back in his old accustomed stride as a successful salesman.
How Much Do You Want What You Want?
A young man asked Socrates how he could get wisdom. Socrates replied, 
“Come with me.” He took the lad to a river, pushed the boy's head under 
the water, held it there until the boy was gasping for air, then relaxed and 
released his head. When the boy regained his composure, he asked him, 
“What did you desire most when you were under water?”
“I wanted air,” said the boy.
Socrates said to him, “When you want wisdom as much as you wanted air
when you were immersed in the water, you will receive it.”
Likewise, when you really have an intense desire to overcome any block 
in your life, and you come to a clear-cut decision that there is a way out, 
and that is the course you wish to follow, then victory and triumph are as -
sured.
If you really want peace of mind and inner calm, you will get it, regardless
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
of how unjustly you have been treated, or how unfair the boss has been 
or what a mean scoundrel someone has proved to be. All this makes no 
difference to you when you awaken to your mental and spiritual powers. 
You know what you want, and you will definitely refuse to let the thieves 
(thoughts) of hatred, anger, hostility and ill will rob you of peace, harmo -
ny, health and happiness. You cease to become upset by people, condi -
tions, news and events by identifying your thoughts immediately with 
your aim in life. Your aim is peace, health, inspiration, harmony and abun -
dance. Feel a river of peace of flowing through you now. Your thought is 
the immaterial and invisible power, and you choose to let it bless, inspire 
and give you peace.
Why He Could Not Be Healed
This is a case history of a married man with four children who was sup -
porting and secretly living with another woman during his business trips. 
He was ill, nervous, irritable and cantankerous and he could not sleep 
without drugs. The doctor's medicine failed to bring down his high blood 
pressure of over two hundred. He had pains in numerous organs of his 
body which doctors could not diagnose or relieve. To make matters worse,
he was drinking heavily.
The cause of all this was a deep unconscious sense of guilt. He had violat -
ed the marriage vows, and this troubled him. The religious creed he was 
brought up on was deeply lodged in his subconscious mind and he drank 
excessively to heal the wound of guilt. Some invalids take morphine and 
codeine for severe pains, he was talking alcohol for the pain or wound in 
his mind. It was the old story of adding fuel to the fire.
The Explanation & The Cure
He listened to the explanation of how his mind worked. He faced his prob -
lem, looked at it, and gave up his dual role. He knew that his drinking was
an unconscious attempt to escape. The hidden cause lodged in his sub -
conscious mind had to be eradicated, then the healing would follow.
He began to impress his subconscious mind three or four times a day by 
using the following prayer: “My mind is full of peace, poise, balance and 
equilibrium. The infinite lies stretched in smiling repose within me. I am 
not afraid of anything in the past, the present or the future. The Infinite 
Intelligence of my subconscious mind leads, guides and directs me in all 
ways. I now meet every situation with faith, poise, calmness and confi -
dence. I am now completely free from the habit. My mind is full of inner 
peace, freedom and joy. I forgive myself, then I am forgiven. Peace, so -
briety and confidence reign supreme in my mind.”
He repeated this prayer frequently as outlined, being fully aware of what 
he was doing and why he was doing it. Knowing what he was doing gave 
him the necessary faith and confidence. I explained to him that as he 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
spoke these statements out loud, slowly, lovingly and meaningfully, they 
would gradually sink down into his subconscious mind. Like seeds, they 
would grow after their kind. These truths, on which he concentrated, went
in through his eyes, he ears heard the sound and the healing vibrations of
these words reached his subconscious mind and obliterated all the nega -
tive mental patterns which caused all the trouble. Light dispels darkness. 
The constructive thought destroys the negative thought. He became a 
transformed man within a month.
Refusing To Admit It
If you are an alcoholic or drug addict, admit it. Do not dodge the issue. 
Many people remain alcoholics because they refuse to admit it.
Your disease is an instability, an inner fear. You are refusing to face life, 
and so you try to escape your responsibilities through the bottle. As an al -
coholic you have no free will, although you think have, and you may even 
boast about your will power. If you are a habitual drunkard and say brave -
ly “I will not touch it anymore,” you have no power to make this assertion 
come true, because you do not know where to locate the power.
You are living in a psychological prison of your own making, and you are 
bound by your beliefs, opinions, training and environmental influences. 
Like most people, you are a creature of habit. You are conditioned to react
they way you do.
Building In The Idea Of Freedom
You can build the idea of freedom and peace of mind into your mentality 
so that it reaches your subconscious depths. The latter, being all powerful,
will free you from all desire for alcohol. Then, you will have the new un -
derstanding of how your mind works, and you can truly back up your 
statement and prove the truth to yourself.
Fifty-One Percent Healed
If you have a keen desire to free yourself from any destructive habit, you 
are fifty-one percent healed already. When you have a greater desire to 
give up the bad habit than to continue it, you will not experience too 
much difficulty in gaining complete freedom.
Whatever thought you anchor the mind upon, the latter magnifies. If you 
engage the mind on the concept of freedom (freedom from the habit) and
peace of mind, and if you keep it focused on this new direction of atten -
tion, you generate feelings and emotions which gradually emotionalize the
concept of freedom and peace. Whatever idea you emotionalize is accept -
ed by your subconscious and brought to pass.
The Law Of Substitution
Realize that something good can come out of your suffering. You have not
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
suffered in vain. However, it is foolish to continue to suffer.
If you continue as an alcoholic, it will bring about mental and physical de -
terioration and decay. Realize that the power in your subconscious is 
backing you up. Even though you may be seized with melancholia, you 
should begin to imagine the joy of freedom that is in store for you. This is 
the law of substitution. Your imagination took you to the bottle; let it take
you now to freedom and peace of mind. You will suffer a little bit, but it is 
for a constructive purpose. You will bear it like a mother in the pangs of 
childbirth, and you will, likewise, bring forth a child of the mind. Your sub -
conscious will give birth to sobriety.
Cause of Alcoholism
The real cause of alcoholism is negative and destructive thinking; for as a 
man thinketh, so is he. The alcoholic has a deep sense of inferiority, inad -
equacy, defeat and frustration, usually accompanied by a deep inner hos -
tility. He has countless alibis as to his reason for drinking, but the sole 
reason is in his thought life.
Three Magic Steps
The First Step
Get still; quiet the wheels of the mind. Enter into a sleepy, drowsy state. 
In this relaxed, peaceful, receptive state, you are preparing for the sec -
ond step.
The Second Step
Take a brief phrase which can readily be graven on the memory, and re -
peat it over and over as a lullaby. Use the phrase, “Sobriety and peace of 
mind are mine now, and I give thanks.” To prevent the mind from wander -
ing, repeat it aloud or sketch its pronunciation with the lips and tongue as
you say it mentally. This helps its entry into the subconscious mind. Do 
this for five minutes or more. You will find a deep emotional response.
The Third Step
Just before going to sleep, practice what Johann von Goethe, German au -
thor, used to do. Imagine a friend or loved one in front of you. Your eyes 
are closed, you are relaxed and at peace. The loved one or friend is sub -
jectively present, and is saying to you, “Congratulations!” You see the 
smile; you hear the voice. You mentally touch the hand; it is all real and 
vivid. The word congratulations  implies complete freedom. Hear it over 
and over again until you get the subconscious reaction which satisfies.
Keep On Keeping On
When fear knocks at the door of your mind, or when worry, anxiety and 
doubt cross your mind, behold your vision, your goal. Think of the infinite 
power within your subconscious mind, which you can generate by your 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
thinking and imagining, and this will give you confidence, power and 
courage. Keep on, persevere, until the day breaks and the shadows flee 
away.
Review Your Thought Power
1. The solution lies within the problem. The answer is in every question. 
Infinite Intelligence responds to you as you call upon it with faith and con -
fidence.
2. Habit is the function of your subconscious mind. There is no greater ev -
idence of the marvelous power of your subconscious than the force and 
sway habit holds in your life. You are a creature of habit.
3. You form habit patterns in your subconscious mind by repeating a 
thought and act over and over again until it establishes tracks in the sub -
conscious mind and becomes automatic, such as swimming, dancing, typ -
ing, walking, driving your car etc.
4. You have freedom to choose. You can choose a good habit or a bad 
habit. Prayer is a good habit.
5. Whatever mental picture, backed by faith, you behold in your conscious
mind, your subconscious mind will bring to pass.
6. The only obstacle to your success and achievement is your own 
thought or mental image.
7. When your attention wanders, bring it back to the contemplation of 
your good or goal. Make a habit of this. This is called disciplining the 
mind.
8. Your conscious mind is the camera, and your subconscious mind is the 
sensitive plate on which you register or impress the picture.
9. The only jinx that follows anyone is a fear thought repeated over and 
over in the mind. Break the jinx by knowing that whatever you start you 
will bring to a conclusion in divine order. Picture the happy ending and 
sustain it with confidence.
10. To form a new habit, you must be convinced that it is desirable. When
your desire to give up the bad habit is greater than your desire to contin -
ue, you are fifty-one percent healed already.
11. The statements of others cannot hurt you except through your own 
thoughts and mental participation. Identify yourself with your aim which 
is peace, harmony and joy. You are the only thinker in your universe.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
12. Excessive drinking is an unconscious desire to escape. The cause of 
alcoholism is negative and destructive thinking. The cure is to think of 
freedom, sobriety and perfection and to feel the thrill of accomplishment.
13. Many people remain alcoholics because they refuse to admit it.
14. The law of your subconscious mind, which held you in bondage and 
inhibited your freedom of action, will give you freedom and happiness. It 
depends on how you use it.
15. Your imagination took you to the bottle; let it take you to freedom by 
imagining you are free.
16. The real cause of alcoholism is negative and destructive thinking. As a
man thinketh in his heart  (subconscious mind) so is he.
17. When fear knocks at the door of your mind, let faith in God and all 
things good open the door.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
