
An engineer has a technique and a process for building a bridge or an en -
gine. Like the engineer, your mind also has a technique for governing, 
controlling and directing your life. You must realize that methods and 
techniques are primary.
In building the Golden Gate Bridge, the chief engineer understood mathe -
matical principles, stresses and strains. Secondly, he had a picture of the 
ideal bridge across the bay. The third step was his application of tried and 
proven methods by which the principles were implemented until the 
bridge took form and we drive on it. There also are techniques and meth -
ods by which your prayers are answered. If your prayer is answered, 
there is a way in which it is answered and this is a scientific way. Nothing 
happens by chance. This is a world of law and order. In this chapter you 
will find practical techniques for the unfolding and nurture of your spiritual
life. Your prayers must not remain up in the air like a balloon. They must 
go somewhere and accomplish something in your life.
When we come to analyze prayer we discover there are many different 
approaches and methods. We will not consider in this book the formal, rit -
ual prayers used in religious services. These have an important place in 
group worship. We are immediately concerned with the methods of per -
sonal prayer as it is applied in your daily life and as it is used to help oth -
ers. 
Prayer is the formulation of an idea concerning something we wish to ac -
complish. Prayer is the soul's sincere desire. Your desire is your prayer. It 
comes out of your deepest needs and it reveals the things you want in 
life. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they 
shall be filled. That is really prayer, life's hunger and thirst for peace, har -
mony, health, joy and all the other blessings of life.
The Passing-Over Technique For Impregnating The Subconscious
This consists essentially in inducing the subconscious mind to take over 
your request as handed it by the conscious mind. This passing-over is 
best accomplished in the reverie-like state. Know that in your deeper 
mind is infinite intelligence and Infinite Power. Just calmly think over what
you want; see it coming into fuller fruition from this moment forward. Be 
like the little girl who had a very bad cough and a sore throat. She de -
clared firmly and repeatedly: “It is passing away now. It is passing away 
now.” It passed away in about an hour. Use this technique with complete 
simplicity and naiveté.
Your Subconscious Will Accept Your Blueprint
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
If you were building a new home for yourself and your family, you know 
that you would be intensely interested in regard to the blueprint for your 
home; you would see to it that the builders conformed to the blueprint. 
You would watch the material and select only the best wood, steel, in fact,
the best of everything. What about your mental home and your mental 
blueprint for happiness and abundance? All your experiences and every -
thing that enters into your life depend upon the nature of the mental 
building blocks which you use in the construction of your mental home.
If your blueprint is full of mental patterns of fear, worry, anxiety or lack 
and if you are despondent, doubtful and cynical, then the texture of the 
mental material you are waving into your mind will come forth as more 
toil, care, tension, anxiety and limitation of all kinds.
The most fundamental and the most far reaching activity in life is that 
which you build into your mentality every waking hour. Your word is silent 
and invisible; nevertheless, it is real.
You are building your mental home all the time, and your thought and 
mental imagery represent your blueprint. Hour by hour, moment by mo -
ment, you can build radiant health, success and happiness by the 
thoughts you think, the ideas which you harbor, the beliefs you accept 
and the scenes that you rehearse in the hidden studio of your mind. This 
stately mansion, upon the construction of which you are perpetually en -
gaged, is your personality, your identity in this plane, your whole life story
on this earth.
Get a new blueprint; build silently by realizing peace, harmony, joy and 
good will in the present moment. By dwelling upon these things, and 
claiming them, your subconscious mind will accept your blueprint and 
bring all these things to pass. By their fruits ye shall know them .
The Science & Art Of True Prayer
The term “science” means knowledge, which is coordinated, arranged and
systematized. Let us think of the science and art of true prayer as it deals
with the fundamental principles of life and the techniques and processes 
by which they can be demonstrated in your life, as well as in the life of 
every human being when he applies them faithfully. The art is your tech -
nique or process, and the science behind it is the definite response of cre -
ative mind to your mental picture or thought. Ask, and it shall be given 
you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. 
Matthew 7:7.
Here you are told you shall receive that for which you ask. It shall be 
opened to you when you knock, and you shall find that for which you are 
searching. This teaching implies the definiteness of mental and spiritual 
laws. There is always a direct response from the Infinite Intelligence of 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
your subconscious mind to your conscious thinking. If you ask for bread, 
you will not receive a stone. You must ask believing, if you are to receive. 
Your mind moves from the thought to the thing. Unless there is first an 
image in the mind, it cannot move, for there would be nothing for it to 
move toward. Your prayer, which is your mental act, must be accepted as 
an image in your mind before the power from your subconscious will play 
upon it and make it productive. You must reach a point of acceptance in 
your mind, an unqualified and undisputed state of agreement.
This contemplation should be accompanied by a feeling of joy and restful -
ness in foreseeing the certain accomplishment of your desire. The sound 
basis for the art and science of true prayer is your knowledge and com -
plete confidence that the movement of your conscious mind will gain a 
definite response from your subconscious mind, which is one with bound -
less wisdom and infinite power. By following this procedure, your prayers 
will be answered.
The Visualization Technique
The easiest and most obvious way to formulate an idea is to visualize it, 
to see it in your mind's eye as vividly as if it were alive. You can see with 
the naked eye only what already exists in the external world; in a similar 
way, that which you can visualize in your mind's eye already exists in the 
invisible realms of your mind. Any picture, which you have in your mind, 
is the substance of things hoped for and the evidence of things not seen . 
What you form in your imagination is as real as any part of your body. 
The idea and the thought are real and will one day appear in your objec -
tive world if you are faithful to your mental image.
This process of thinking forms impressions in your mind; these impres -
sions in turn become manifested as facts and experiences in your life. The
builder visualizes the type of building he wants; he sees it as he desires it 
to be completed. His imagery and thought processes become a plastic 
mold from which the building will emerge – a beautiful or an ugly one, a 
skyscraper or a very low one. His mental imagery is projected and is 
drawn on paper. Eventually, the contractor and his workers gather the es -
sential materials and the building progresses until it stands finished, con -
forming perfectly to the mental patterns of the architect.
I use the visualization technique prior to speaking from the platform. I 
quiet the wheels of my mind in order that I may present to the subcon -
scious mind my images of thought. Then, I picture the entire auditorium 
and the seats filled with men and women; each one of them illumined and
inspired by the infinite healing presence. I see them as radiant, happy 
and free. 
Having first built up the idea in my imagination, I quietly sustain it there 
as a mental picture while I imagine I hear men and women saying, “I am 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
healed,” “I feel wonderful,” “I've had an instantaneous healing,” “I'm 
transformed.” I keep this up for about ten minutes or more, knowing and 
feeling that each person's mind and body are saturated with love, whole -
ness, beauty and perfection. My awareness grows to the point where in 
my mind I can actually hear the voices of the multitude proclaiming their 
health and happiness; then I release the whole picture and go onto the 
platform. Almost every Sunday some people stop and say that their 
prayers were answered.
Mental Movie Method
The Chinese say, “A picture is worth a thousand words.” William James, 
the father of American psychology, stressed the fact that the subconscious
mind will bring to pass any picture held in the mind and backed by faith. 
Act as though I am, and I will be .
A number of years ago I was in the Middle West lecturing in several 
states, and I desired to have a permanent location in the general area 
from which I could serve those who desired help. I traveled far, but the 
desire did not leave my mind. One evening, while in a hotel in Spokane, 
Washington, I relaxed completely on a couch, immobilized my attention, 
and in a quiet, passive manner imagined that I was talking to a large au -
dience, saying in effect, “I am glad to be here; I have prayed for the ideal
opportunity.” I saw in my mind's eye the imaginary audience and I felt the
reality of it all. I played the role of the actor, dramatized this mental 
movie, and felt satisfied that this picture was being conveyed to my sub -
conscious mind, which would bring it to pass in its own way. The next 
morning, on awakening, I felt a great sense of peace and satisfaction and 
in a few days time I received a telegram asking me to take over an orga -
nization in the Midwest, which I did, and I enjoyed it immensely for sever -
al years.
The method outlined here appeals to many who have described it as “the 
mental movie method.” I have received numerous letters from people who
listen to my radio talks and weekly public lectures, telling me of the won -
derful results they get using this technique in the sale of their property. I 
suggest to those who have homes or property for sale that they satisfy 
themselves in their own mind that their price is right. Then, I claim that 
the Infinite Intelligence is attracting to them the buyer who really wants 
to have the property and who will love it and prosper in it. After having 
done this I suggest that they quiet their mind, relax, let go and get into a 
drowsy, sleepy state, which reduces all mental effort to a minimum. Then,
they are to picture the check in their hands, rejoice in the check, give 
thanks for the check and go off to sleep feeling the naturalness of the 
whole mental movie created in their own mind. They must act as though 
it were an objective reality and the subconscious mind will take it as an 
impression and through the deeper currents of the mind, the buyer and 
the seller are brought together. A mental picture held in the mind, backed
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
by faith, will come to pass.
The Baudoin Technique
Charles Baudoin was a professor at the Rousseau Institute in France. He 
was a brilliant psychotherapist and a research director of the New Nancy 
School of Healing, who in 1910 taught that the best way to impress the 
subconscious mind was to enter into a drowsy, sleepy state, or a state 
akin to sleep in which all effort was reduced to a minimum. Then in a qui -
et, passive, receptive way, by reflection, he would convey the idea to the 
subconscious. The following is his formula: “A very simple way of securing
this (impregnation of the subconscious mind) is to condense the idea, 
which is to be the object of suggestion, to sum it up in a brief phase, 
which can be readily graven on the memory and to repeat it over and 
over again as a lullaby.”
Some years ago, a young lady in Los Angeles was engaged in a prolonged
bitter family lawsuit over a will. Her husband had bequeathed his entire 
estate to her, and his sons and daughters by a previous marriage were 
bitterly fighting to break the will. The Baudoin technique was outlined to 
her, and this is what she did. She relaxed her body in an armchair, en -
tered into the sleepy state and, as suggested, condensed the idea of her 
need into a phrase consisting of six words easily graven on the memory. 
“It is finished in divine order.” The significance to her of these words 
meant that Infinite Intelligence operating through the laws of her subcon -
scious mind would bring about a harmonious adjustment through the 
principle of harmony. She continued this procedure every night for about 
ten nights. After she got into a sleepy state, she would affirm slowly, qui -
etly and feelingly the statement: “It is finished in divine order,” over and 
over again, feeling a sense of inner peace and an all-pervading tranquili -
ty; then she went off into her deep normal sleep. On the morning of the 
eleventh day, following the use of the above technique, she awakened 
with a sense of well-being, a conviction that it was finished. Her attorney 
called her the same day saying that the opposing attorney and his clients 
were willing to settle. A harmonious agreement was reached and litigation
was discontinued.
The Sleeping Technique
By entering into a sleepy, drowsy state, effort is reduced to a minimum. 
The conscious mind is submerged to a great extent when in a sleepy 
state. The reason for this is that the highest degree of outcropping of the 
subconscious occurs prior to sleep and just after we awaken. In this state 
the negative thoughts, which tend to neutralize your desire and so pre -
vent acceptance by your subconscious mind, are no longer present.
Suppose you want to get rid of a destructive habit. Assume a comfortable 
posture, relax your body, and be still. Get into a sleepy state, and in that 
sleepy state, say quietly, over and over again as a lullaby, “I am com -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
pletely free from this habit; harmony and peace of mind reign supreme.” 
repeat the above slowly, quietly and lovingly for five or ten minutes, night
and morning. Each time you repeat the words the emotional value be -
comes greater. When the urge comes to repeat the negative habit, repeat 
the above formula out loud to yourself. By this means you induce the sub -
conscious to accept the idea and a healing follows.
The Thank You Technique 
In the Bible, Paul recommends that we make known our requests with 
praise and thanksgiving. Some extraordinary results follow this simple 
method of prayer. The thankful heart is always close to the creative forces
of the universe, causing countless blessings to flow toward it by the law of
reciprocal relationship, based on a cosmic law of action and reaction.
For instance, a father promises his son a car for graduation; the boy has 
not yet received the car, but he is very thankful and happy, and is as joy -
ous as though he had actually received the car. He knows his father will 
fulfill his promise and he is full of gratitude and joy even though he has 
not yet received the car, objectively speaking. He has, however, received 
it with joy and thankfulness in his mind.
I shall illustrate how Mr Broke applied this technique with excellent re -
sults. He said, “Bills are piling up, I am out of work, I have three children 
and no money. What shall I do?” Regularly every night and morning, for a
period of about three weeks, he repeated the words, “Thank you, Father, 
for my wealth.” in a relaxed, peaceful manner until the feeling or mood of 
thankfulness dominated his mind. He imagined he was addressing the in -
finite power and intelligence within him knowing, of course, that he could 
not see the creative intelligence or infinite mind. He was seeing with the 
inner eye of spiritual perception, realizing that his thought-image of 
wealth was the first cause, relative to the money, position and food he 
needed. His thought-feeling was the substance of wealth untrammeled by 
antecedent conditions of any kind. By repeating, “Thank you, Father,” over
and over again, his mind and heart were lifted up to the point of accep -
tance, and when fear, thoughts of lack, poverty and distress came into his
mind, he would say, “Thank you, Father,” as often as necessary. He knew 
that as he kept up the thankful attitude he would recondition his mind to 
the idea of wealth, which is what happened.
The sequel to his prayer is very interesting. After praying in the above-
mentioned manner, he met a former employer of his on the street whom 
he ha not seen for twenty years. The man offered him a very lucrative po -
sition and advanced him $500 on a temporary loan. Today, Mr Broke is 
vice-president of the company for which he works. His recent remark to 
me was, “I shall never forget the wonders of 'Thank you, Father' It has 
worked wonders for me.”
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
The Affirmative Method
The effectiveness of an affirmation is determined largely by your under -
standing of the truth and the meaning back of the words, “In praying use 
not vain repetition.” Therefore, the power of your affirmation lies in the 
intelligent application of definite and specific positives. For example, a boy
adds three and three and puts down seven on the blackboard. The teach -
er affirms with mathematical certainty that three and three are six; there -
fore, the boy changes his figures accordingly. The teacher's statement did
not make three and three equal six because the latter was already a 
mathematical truth. The mathematical truth caused the boy to rearrange 
the figures on the blackboard. It is abnormal to be sick; it is normal to be 
healthy. Health is the truth of your being. When you affirm health, harmo -
ny and peace for yourself or another, and when you realize these are uni -
versal principles of your own being, you will rearrange the negative pat -
terns of your subconscious mind based on your faith and understanding of
that which you affirm.
The result of the affirmative process of prayer depends on your conform -
ing to the principles of life, regardless of appearances. Consider for a mo -
ment that there is a principle of mathematics and none of error; there is a
principle of truth but none of dishonesty. There is a principle of intelli -
gence but none of ignorance; there is a principle of harmony and none of 
discord. There is a principle of health but none of disease, and there is a 
principle of abundance but none of poverty.
The affirmative method was chose by the author for use on his sister who 
was to be operated on for the removal of gallstones in a hospital in Eng -
land. The condition described was based on the diagnosis of hospital tests
and the usual X ray procedures. She asked me to pray for her. We were 
separated geographically about 6,500 miles, but there is no time or space
in the mind principle. Infinite mind or intelligence is present in its entirety 
at every point simultaneously. I withdrew all thought from the contempla -
tion of symptoms and from the corporeal personality altogether. I af -
firmed as follows: “This prayer is for my sister Catherine. She is relaxed 
and at peace, poised, balanced, serene and calm. The healing intelligence 
of her subconscious mind, which created her body, is now transforming 
every cell, nerve, tissue, muscle and bone of her being according to the 
perfect pattern of all organs lodged in her subconscious mind. Silently, 
quietly, all distorted thought patters in her subconscious mind are re -
moved and dissolved, and the vitality, wholeness and beauty of the life 
principle are made manifest in every atom of her being. She is now open 
and receptive to the healing currents which are flowing through her like a 
river, restoring her to perfect health, harmony and peace. All distortions 
and ugly images are now washed away by the infinite ocean of love and 
peace flowing through her, and it is so.” 
I affirmed the above several times a day and at the end of two weeks my 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
sister had an examination, which showed a remarkable healing and the X 
ray proved negative. 
To affirm is to state that it is so, and as you maintain this attitude of mind
as true, regardless of all evidence to the contrary, you will receive an an -
swer to your prayer. Your thought can only affirm, for even if you deny 
something, you are actually affirming the presence of what you deny. Re -
peating an affirmation, knowing what you are saying and why you are 
saying it, leads the mind to that state of consciousness where it accepts 
that which you state as true. Keep on affirming the truths of life until you 
get the subconscious reaction, which satisfies.
The Argumentative Method
This method is just what the word implies. It stems from the procedure of
Dr Phineas Parkhurst Quimby of Maine. Dr Quimby, a pioneer in mental 
and spiritual healing, lived and practiced in Belfast, Maine, about one hun -
dred years ago. A book called The Quimby Manuscripts , published in 1921
by Thomas Y Crowell company, New York City, and edited by Horatio 
Dresser, is available in your library. This book gives newspaper accounts 
of this man's remarkable results in prayer treatment of the sick. Quimby 
duplicated many of the healing miracles recorded in the Bible. In brief, the
argumentative method employed according to Quimby consists of spiritual
reasoning where you convince the patient and yourself that sickness is 
due to his false belief,, groundless fears and negative patterns lodged in 
his subconscious mind. You reason it out clearly in your mind and con -
vince your patient that the disease or ailment is due only to a distorted, 
twisted pattern of thought, which has taken form in the body. This wrong 
belief in some external power and external causes has now externalized 
itself as sickness, and can be changed by changing the thought patterns.
You explain to the sick person that the basis of all healing is a change of 
belief. You also point out that the subconscious mind created the body 
and all its organs; therefore, it knows how to heal it, can heal it and is do -
ing so now as you speak. You argue in the courtroom of your mind that 
the disease is a shadow of the mind based on disease-soaked, morbid 
thought imagery. You continue to build up all the evident you can muster 
on behalf of the healing power within, which created all the organs in the 
first place, and which has a perfect pattern of every cell, nerve and tissue 
within it. Then, you render a verdict in the courthouse of your mind in fa -
vor of yourself and your patient. You liberate the sick one by faith and 
spiritual understanding. Your mental and spiritual evidence is overwhelm -
ing; there being but one mind, what you feel as true will be resurrected in
the experience of the patient. This procedure is essentially the argumen -
tative method used by Dr Quimby of Maine form 1849 to 1869.
The Absolute Method Is Like Modern Sound Wave Therapy
Many people throughout the world practice this form of prayer treatment 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
with wonderful results. The person using the absolute method mentions 
the name of the patient, such as John Jones, then quietly and silently 
thinks of God and His qualities and attributes, such as, God is all bliss, 
boundless love, Infinite Intelligence, all-powerful, boundless wisdom, ab -
solute harmony, indescribable beauty and perfection. As he quietly thinks 
along these lines he is lifted up in consciousness into a new spiritual wave
length, at which times he feels the infinite ocean of Bod's love is now dis -
solving everything unlike itself in the mind and body of John Jones for 
whom he is praying. He feels all the power and love of God are now fo -
cused on John Jones, and whatever is bothering or vexing him is now 
completely neutralized in the presence of the infinite ocean of life and 
love.
The absolute method of prayer might be likened to the sound wave or 
sonic therapy recently shown by a distinguished physician in Los Angeles. 
He has an ultra sound wave machine, which oscillates at a tremendous 
speed and sends sound waves to any area of the body to which it is di -
rected. These sound waves can be controlled, and he told me of achieving
remarkable results in dissolving arthritic, calcareous deposits as well as 
the healing and removal of other disturbing conditions.
To the degree that we rise in consciousness by contemplating qualities 
and attributes of God , do we generate spiritual electronic waves of har -
mony, health and peace. Many remarkable healings follow this technique 
of prayer.
A Cripple Walks
Dr Phineas Parkhurst Quimby, of whom we spoke previously in this chap -
ter, used the absolute method in the latter years of his healing career. He 
was really the father of psychosomatic medicine and the first psychoana -
lyst. He had the capacity to diagnose clairvoyantly the cause of the pa -
tient's troubles, pains and aches.
The following is a condensed account of the healing of a cripple as record -
ed in Quimby's Manuscript's:
Quimby was called on to visit a woman who was lame, aged and bedrid -
den. He states that her ailment was due to the fact that she was impris -
oned by a creed so small and contracted that she could not stand upright 
and move about. She was living in the tomb of fear and ignorance; fur -
thermore, she was taking the Bible literally and it frightened her. “In this 
tomb,” Quimby said, “was the presence and power of God trying to burst 
the bands, break through the bonds and rise from the dead.” When she 
would ask others for an explanation of some passage of the Bible, the an -
swer would be a stone; then she would hunger for the bread of life. Dr 
Quimby diagnosed her case as a mind cloudy and stagnated, due to exci -
tation and fear, caused by the inability to see clearly the meaning of the 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
passage of the Bible, which she had been reading. This showed itself in 
the body by her heavy and sluggish feeling, which would terminate as 
paralysis.
At this point Quimby asked her what was meant in the bible verses: Yet a
little while am I with you, and then I go unto Him that sent me. Ye shall 
seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither ye cannot come. 
John 7:33-34. She replied that it mean Jesus went to heaven. Quimby 
what it really meant by telling her that being with her a little while  meant 
his explanation of her symptoms, feelings and their causes; i.e. he had 
compassion and sympathy for her momentarily, but he could not remain 
in that mental state. The next step was to go to Him that sent us  which, 
as Quimby pointed out, was the creative power of God in all of us.
Quimby immediately traveled in his mind and contemplated the divine 
ideal; i.e. the vitality, intelligence, harmony and power of God functioning 
in the sick person. This is hwy he said to the woman, “Therefore, where I 
go you cannot come, for you are in your narrow, restricted belief, and I 
am in health.” This prayer and explanation produced an instantaneous 
sensation, and a change came over her mind. She walked without her 
crutches! Quimby said it was one of the most singular of all his healings! 
She was, as it were, dead to error, and to bring her to life or truth was to 
raise her form the dead. Quimby quoted the resurrection of Christ and ap -
plied it to her own Christ or health; this produced a powerful effect on her.
He also explained to her that the truth, which she accepted was the angel 
or idea, which rolled away the stone of fear, ignorance and superstition, 
thereby releasing the healing power of God, which made her whole.
The Decree Method
Power goes into our word according to the feeling and faith behind it. 
When we realize the power that moves the world is moving on our behalf 
and is backing up our word, our confidence and assurance grow. You do 
not try and add power to power; therefore, there must be no mental 
striving, coercion, force or mental wrestling.
A young girl used the decree method on a young man who was constantly
phoning her, pressing her for dates and meeting her at her place of busi -
ness; she found it very difficult to get rid of him. She decreed as follows: 
“I release (man's name) unto god. He is in the true place at all times. Ia 
am free and he is free. I now decree that my words go forth into infinite 
mind and it brings it to pass. It is so.” She said he vanished and she has 
never seen him since, adding, “It was as though the ground swallowed 
him up.” 
Thou shall decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee: and the 
light shall shine upon thy ways. Job 22:28 .
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
Serve Yourself With Scientific Truth
1. Be a mental engineer and use tried and proven techniques in building a
grander and greater life.
2. Your desire is your prayer. Picture the fulfillment of your desire now and
feel its reality and you will experience the joy of the answered prayer.
3. Desire to accomplish things the easy way with the sure aid of mental 
science.
4. You can build radiant health, success and happiness by the thoughts 
you think in the hidden studio of your mind.
5. Experiment scientifically until you personally prove that there is always 
a direct response from the Infinite Intelligence of your subconscious mind 
to your conscious thinking.
6. Feel the joy and restfulness in foreseeing the certain accomplishment 
of your desire. Any mental picture which you have in your mind is the 
substance of things hoped for and the evidence of things not seen.
7. A mental picture is worth a thousand words. Your subconscious will 
bring to pass any picture held in the mind backed by faith.
8. Avoid all effort or mental coercion in prayer. Get into a sleepy, drowsy 
state and lull yourself to sleep feeling and knowing that your prayer is an -
swered.
9. Remember that the thankful hear is always close to the riches of the 
universe.
10. To affirm is to state that it is so, and as you maintain this attitude of 
mind as true, regardless of all evidence to the contrary, you will receive 
an answer to your prayer.
11. Generate electronic waves of harmony, health and peace by thinking 
of the love and the glory of God.
12. What you decree and feel as true will come to pass. Decree harmony, 
health, peace and abundance.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
