
Relations
In studying this book, you learn that your subconscious mind is a record -
ing machine which faithfully reproduces whatever you impress upon it. 
This is one of the reasons for the application of the Golden Rule in human 
relations.
Matthew 7:12 says, All things whatsoever ye would that men should do 
unto you, do ye even so to them . This quotation has outer and inner 
meanings. You are interested in its inner meaning from the standpoint of 
your subconscious mind which is: As you would the men should think 
about you, think you about them in like manner. As you would that men 
should feel about you, feel you also about them in like manner. As you 
would want men to act toward you, act you toward them in like manner.
For example, you may be polite and courteous to someone in your office, 
but when his back is turned, you are very critical and resentful toward 
him in your mind. Such negative thoughts are highly destructive to you. It
is like taking poison. You are actually taking mental poisons which rob you
of vitality, enthusiasm, strength, guidance and good will. These negative 
thoughts and emotions sink down into your subconscious, and cause all 
kinds of difficulties and maladies in your life.
The Master Key To Happy Relationships With Others
Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with that judgment ye judge, ye 
shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to 
you again. Matthew 7:1-2 .
A study of these verses and the application of the inner truths therein 
contained represent the real key to harmonious relations. To judge is to 
think, to arrive at a mental verdict or conclusion in your mind. The 
thought you have about the other person is your thought, because you 
are thinking it. Your thoughts are creative, therefore, you actually create 
in our own experience what you think and feel about the other person. It 
is also true that the suggestion you give to another, you give to yourself 
because your mind is the creative medium.
This is why it is said, For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be 
judged. When you know this law and the way your subconscious mind 
works, you are careful to think, feel and act right toward the other. These 
verses teach you about the emancipation of man and reveal to you the 
solution to your individual problems.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
And With What Measure Ye Mete, It Shall Be Measured To You Again
The good you do for others comes back to you in like measure; and the 
evil you do returns to you by the law of your own mind. If a man cheats 
and deceives another, he is actually cheating and deceiving himself, his 
sense of guilt and mood of loss inevitably will attract loss to him in some 
way, at some time. His subconscious records his mental act and reacts ac -
cording to the mental intention or motivation.
Your subconscious mind is impersonal and unchanging, neither consider -
ing persons nor respecting religious affiliations or institutions of any kind. 
It is neither compassionate not vindictive. The way you think, feel and act
toward others returns at least upon yourself.
The Daily Headlines Made Him Sick
Begin now to observe yourself. Observe your reactions to people, condi -
tions, and circumstances. How do you respond to the events and news of 
the day? It makes not difference if all the other people were wrong and 
you alone were right. If the news disturbs you, it is your evil because your
negative emotions robbed you of peace and harmony.
A woman wrote me about her husband, saying that he goes into a rage 
when he reads what certain newspaper columnists write in the newspaper.
She added that his constant reaction of anger and suppressed rage on his
part brought on bleeding ulcers and his physician recommended an emo -
tional reconditioning.
I invited this man to see me and I explained to him the way his mind 
functions indicating how emotionally immature it was to get angry when 
others write articles with which he disapproves or disagrees.
He began to realize that he should give the newspaperman freedom to 
express himself even though the latter disagreed with him politically, reli -
giously or in any other way. In the same manner, the newspaperman 
would give him freedom to write a letter to the newspaper disagreeing 
with is published statements. He learned that he could disagree without 
being disagreeable. He awakened to the simple truth that it is never what 
a person says or does that affects him, it is his reaction to what is said or 
done that matters.
This explanation was the cure for this man, and he realized that with a lit -
tle practice he could master his morning tantrums. His wife told me, sub -
sequently, that he laughed at himself and also at what the columnists say.
They no longer have power to disturb, annoy or irritate him. His ulcers 
have disappeared due to his emotional poise and serenity.
I Hate Women, But I Like Men
A private secretary was very bitter toward some of the girls in her office 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
because they were gossiping about her, and as he said, spreading vicious 
lies about her. She admitted that she did no like women. She said, “I hate
women, but I like men.” I discovered also that she spoke to the girls who 
were under her in the office in a very haughty, imperious and irritable 
tone of voice. She pointed out that they took delight in making things dif -
ficult for her. There was a certain pomposity in her way of speaking, and I
could see where her tone of voice would affect some people unpleasantly.
If all the people in the office of factory annoy you, isn't it a possibility that
the vibration, annoyance and turmoil may be due to some subconscious 
pattern or mental projection from you? We know that a dog will react fe -
rociously if you hate or fear dogs. Animals pick up your subconscious vi -
brations and react accordingly. Many undisciplined human beings are just 
as sensitive as dogs, cats and other animals.
I suggested a process of prayer to this private secretary who hated wom -
en, explaining to her that when she began to identify herself with spiritual
virtues and commenced to affirm the truths of life, her voice, mannerisms
and hatred of women would completely disappear. She was surprised to 
know that the emotion of hatred shows up in a person's speech, actions, 
in his writings and in all phases of his life. She ceased reacting in the typi -
cal, resentful and angry way. She established a pattern of prayer, which 
she practiced regularly, systematically and conscientiously in the office.
The prayer was as follows: “I think, speak and act lovingly, quietly and 
peacefully. I now radiate love, peace, tolerance and kindness to all the 
girls who criticized me and gossiped about me. I anchor my thoughts on 
peace, harmony and good will to all. Whenever I am about to react nega -
tively, is ay firmly to myself, 'I am going to think, speak and act from the 
standpoint of the principle of harmony, health and peace within myself.' 
Creative intelligence leads, rules and guides me in all my ways.”
The practice of this prayer transformed her life and she found that all crit -
icism and annoyance ceased. The girls became co-workers and friends 
along life's journey. She discovered that there is no one to change but 
myself.
His Inner Speech Held Back His Promotion
One day a salesman came to see me and described his difficulties in 
working with the sales manager of his organization. He had been with the 
company ten years and had received no promotion or recognition of any 
kind. He showed me his sales figures, which were greater proportionately 
than the other men in the territory. He said that he sales manager did not
like him, that he was unjustly treated and that at conferences the manag -
er was rude to him and at times ridiculed his suggestions.
I explained that undoubtedly the cause was to a great degree within him -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
self, and that his concept and belief about his superior bore witness to the
reaction of this man. The measure we mete, shall be measured to us 
again. His mental measure or concept of the sales manager was that he 
was mean and cantankerous. He was filled with bitterness and hostility to -
ward the executive. On his way to work he conducted a vigorous conver -
sation with himself filled with criticism, mental arguments, recriminations 
and denunciations of his sales manager.
What he gave out mentally, he was inevitably bound to get back. This 
salesman realized that his inner speech was highly destructive because of 
the intensity and force of his silent thoughts and emotions and personally 
conducted mental condemnation and vilification of the sales manager en -
tered into his own subconscious mind. This brought about the negative re -
sponse from his boss as well as creating many other personal, physical 
and emotional disorders.
He began to pray frequently as follows: “I am the only thinker in my uni -
verse. I am responsible for what I think about my boss. My sales manager
is not responsible for the way I think about him. I refuse to give power to 
any person, place or thing to annoy me or disturb me. I wish health, suc -
cess, peace of mind and happiness for my boss. I sincerely wish him well, 
and I know he is divinely guided in all his ways.”
He repeated this prayer out loud slowly, quietly and feelingly, knowing 
that his mind is like a garden, and that whatever he plants in the garden 
will come forth like seeds after their kind.
I also taught him to practice mental imagery prior to sleep in this way: He
imagined that his sales manager was congratulating him on his fine work, 
on his zeal and enthusiasm, and on his wonderful response from cus -
tomers. He felt the reality of all this, felt his handshake, heard the tone of
his voice and saw him smile. He made a real mental movie, dramatizing it
to the best of his ability. Night after night he conducted this mental move,
knowing that his subconscious mind was the receptive plate on which his 
conscious imagery would be impressed.
Gradually by a process of what may be termed mental and spiritual osmo -
sis, the impression was made on his subconscious mind, and the expres -
sion automatically came forth. The sales manager subsequently called 
him up to San Francisco, congratulated him, and gave him a new assign -
ment as Division Sales Manager over one hundred men with a big in -
crease in salary. He changed his concept and estimate of his boss, and 
the latter responded accordingly.
Becoming Emotionally Mature
What the other person says or does cannot really annoy or irritate you ex -
cept you permit him to disturb you. The only way he can annoy you is 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
through your own thought. For example, if you get angry, you have to go 
through four stages in your mind. You begin to think about what he said. 
You decide to get angry and generate an emotion of rage. Then, you de -
cide to act. Perhaps, you talk back and react in kind. You see that the 
thought, emotion, reaction and action all take place in your mind.
When you become emotionally mature, you do not respond negatively to 
the criticism and resentment of others. To do so would mean that you had
descended to that state of low mental vibration and become one with the 
negative atmosphere of the other. Identify yourself with your aim in life, 
and do not permit any person, place, or thing to deflect you from your in -
ner sense of peace, tranquility and radiant health.
The Meaning Of Love In Harmonious Human Relations
Sigmund Freud, the Austrian founder of psychoanalysis, said that unless 
the personality has love, it sickens and dies. Love includes understanding,
good will and respect for the divinity in the other person. The more love 
and good will you emanate and exude, the more comes back to you.
If you puncture the other fellow's ego and would his estimate of himself, 
you cannot gain his good will. Recognize that every man wants to be 
loved and appreciated, and made to feel important in the world. Realize 
that the other man is conscious of his true worth, and that, like yourself, 
he feels the dignity of being an expression of the One Life-Principle ani -
mating all men. As you do this consciously and knowingly, you build the 
other person up, and he returns your love and good will.
He Hated Audiences
An actor told me that the audience booed and hissed him on his first ap -
pearance on the stage. He added that the play was badly written and that
undoubtedly he did not play a good role. He admitted openly to me that 
for months afterward he hated audiences. He called them dopes, dum -
mies, stupid, ignorant, gullible, etc. He quit the stage in disgust and went 
to work in a drugstore for a year.
One day a friend invited him to hear a lecture in Town Hall, New York City,
on “How to Get Along With Ourselves.” This lecture changed his life. He 
went back to the stage and began to pray sincerely for the audience and 
himself. He poured out love and good will every night before appearing on
the stage. He made it a habit to claim that the peace of God filled the 
hearts of all present, and that all present were lifted up and inspired. Dur -
ing each performance he sent out love vibrations to the audience. Today, 
he is a great actor, and he loves and respects people. His good will and 
esteem are transmitted to others and are felt by them.
Handling Difficult People
There are difficult people in the world who are twisted and distorted men -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
tally. They are malconditioned. Many are mental delinquents, argumenta -
tive, uncooperative, cantankerous, cynical and sour on life. They are sick 
psychologically. Many people have deformed and distorted minds, proba -
bly warped during childhood. Many have congenital deformities. You 
would not condemn a person who had tuberculosis, nor should you con -
demn a person who is mentally ill. No one, for example, hates or resents 
a hunchback; there are many mental hunchbacks. You should have com -
passion and understanding. To understand all is to forgive all .
Misery Loves Company
The hateful, frustrated, distorted and twisted personality is out of tune 
with the infinite. He resents those who are peaceful, happy and joyous. 
Usually he criticizes, condemns and vilifies those who have been very 
good and kind to him. His attitude is this: Why should they be so happy 
when he is so miserable? He wants to drag them down to his own level. 
Misery loves company. When you understand this you remain unmoved, 
calm and dispassionate.
The Practice Of Empathy In Human Relations
A girl visited me recently stating that she hated another girl in her office. 
She gave her reason that the other girl was prettier, happier and wealthier
than she, and, in addition, was engaged to the boss of the company 
where they worked. One day after the marriage had taken place, the crip -
pled daughter (by a former marriage) of the woman whom she hated 
came into the office. The child put her arms around her mother and said, 
“Mommy, mommy, I love my new daddy! Look what he gave me!” She 
showed her mother a wonderful new toy. 
She said to me, “My heart went out to that little girl, and I knew how hap -
py she must feel. I got a vision of how happy this woman was. All of a 
sudden I felt love for her, and I went into the office wished her all the 
happiness in the world, and I meant it.”
In psychological circles today, this is called empathy which simply means 
the imaginative projection of your mental attitude into that of another. 
She projected her mental mood or the feeling of her heart into that of the
other woman, and began to think and look out through the other woman's
brain. She was actually thinking and feeling as the other woman, and also
as the child, because she likewise had projected herself into the mind of 
the child. She was looking out from that vantage point on the child's 
mother.
If tempted to injure of think ill of another, project yourself mentally into 
the mind of Moses and think from the standpoint of the Ten Command -
ments. If you are prone to be envious, jealous or angry, project yourself 
into the mind of Jesus and think from that standpoint, and you will feel 
the truth of the words Love ye one another .
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
Appeasement Never Wins
Do not permit people to take advantage of you and gain the point by tem -
per tantrums, crying jags or so-called heart attacks. These people are dic -
tators who try to enslave you and make you do their bidding. Be firm but 
kind, and refuse to yield. Appeasement never wins. Refuse to contribute 
to their delinquency, selfishness and possessiveness. Remember, do that 
which is right. You are here to fulfill your ideal and remain true to the 
eternal verities and spiritual values of life which are eternal.
Give no one in all the world the power to deflect you from your goal, your 
aim in life which is to express your hidden talents to the world, to serve 
humanity, and to reveal more and more of God's wisdom, truth and beau -
ty to all people in the world. Remain true to your ideal. Know definitely 
and absolutely that whatever contributes to your peace, happiness and 
fulfillment must of necessity bless all men who walk the earth. The har -
mony of the part is the harmony of the whole, for the whole is in the part,
and the part is in the whole. All you owe the other, as Paul says, is love, 
and love is the fulfilling of the law of health, happiness and peace of mind.
Profitable Pointers in Human Relations
1. Your subconscious mind is a recording machine which reproduces your 
habitual thinking. Think good of the other, and you are actually thinking 
good about yourself.
2. A hateful or resentful thought is a mental poison. Do not think ill of an -
other for to do so is to think ill of yourself. You are the only thinker in your
universe, and your thoughts are creative.
3. Your mind is a creative medium; therefore, what you think and feel 
about the other, you are bringing to pass in your own experience. This is 
the psychological meaning of the Golden Rule. As you that man should 
think about you, think you about them in the same manner.
4. To cheat, rob, or defraud another brings lack, loss and limitation to 
yourself. Your subconscious mind records your inner motivations, 
thoughts and feelings. These being of a negative nature, loss, limitation 
and trouble come to you in countless ways. Actually, what yo do to the 
other, you are doing to yourself.
5. The good you do, the kindness proffered, the love and good will you 
send forth, will all come back to you multiplied in many ways.
6. You are the only thinker in your world. You are responsible for the way 
you think about the other. Remember, the other person is not responsible 
for the way you think about him. Your thoughts are reproduced. What are 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
you thinking about the other fellow?
7. Become emotionally mature and permit other people to differ from you.
They have a perfect right to disagree with you, and you have the same 
freedom to disagree with them. You can disagree without being disagree -
able.
8. Animals pick up your fear vibrations and snap at you. If you love ani -
mals, they will never attack you. Many undisciplined human beings are 
just as sensitive as dogs, cats and other animals.
9. Your inner speech, representing your silent thoughts and feelings, is 
experienced in the reactions of others toward you.
10. Wish for the other what you wish for yourself. This is the key to har -
monious human relations.
11. Change your concept and estimate of your employer. Feel and know 
he is practicing the Golden rule and the Law of Love, and he will respond 
accordingly.
12. The other person cannot annoy you or irritate you except you permit 
him. Your thought is creative; you can bless him. If someone calls you a 
skunk, you have the freedom to say to the other, “God's peace fills your 
soul.”
13. Love is the answer to getting along with others. Love is understand -
ing, good will and respecting the divinity of the other.
14. You would not hate a hunchback or cripple. You would have compas -
sion. Have compassion and understanding for mental hunchbacks who 
have been conditioned negatively. To understand all is to forgive all.
15. Rejoice in the success, promotion and good fortune of the other. In 
doing so, you attract good fortune to yourself.
16. Never yield to emotional scenes and tantrums of others. Appeasement
never wins. Do not be a doormat. Adhere to that which is right. Stick to 
your ideal, knowing that the mental outlook which gives you peace, hap -
piness and joy is right, good and true. What blesses you, blesses all. All 
you owe any person in the world is love, and love is wishing for everyone 
what you wish for yourself – health, happiness and all the blessings of 
life.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
