
Many scientists realize the true importance of the sub mind. Edison, Mar -
coni, Kettering, Poincare, Einstein and many others have used the sub -
conscious mind. It has given them the insight and the “know-how” for all 
their great achievements in modern science and industry. Research has 
shown that the ability to bring into action the subconscious power has de -
termined the success of all the great scientific and research workers.
An instance of how a famous chemist, Fredrich von Stradonitz, used his 
subconscious mind to solve his problem is as follows: He had been work -
ing laboriously for a long time trying to rearrange the six carbon and the 
six hydrogen atoms on the benzine formula, and he was constantly per -
plexed and unable to solve the matter. Tired and exhausted, he turned 
the request over completely to his subconscious mind. Shortly afterward, 
as he was about to board a London bus, his subconscious presented his 
conscious mind with a sudden flash of a snake biting its own tail and turn -
ing around like a pinwheel. This answer, from his subconscious mind, gave
him the long sought answer of the circular rearrangement of the atoms 
that is known as the benzine ring.
How A Distinguished Scientist Brought Forth His Inventions
Nikola Tesla was a brilliant electrical scientist who brought forth the most 
amazing innovations. When an idea for a new invention came into his 
mind, he would build it up in his imagination, knowing that his subcon -
scious mind would reconstruct and reveal to his conscious mind all the 
parts needed for its manufacture in concrete form. Through quietly con -
templating every possible improvement, he spent no time in correcting 
defects and was able to give the technicians the perfect product of his 
mind. 
He said, “Invariably, my device works as I imagined it should. In twenty 
years there has not been a single exception.”
How A Famous Naturalist Solved His Problem
Professor Agassiz, a distinguished American naturalist, discovered the in -
defatigable activities of his subconscious mind while he slept. The follow -
ing has been reported by his widow in her biography of her famous hus -
band.
“He had been for two weeks striving to decipher the somewhat obscure 
impression of a fossil fish on the stone slab in which it was preserved. 
Weary and perplexed, he put his work aside at last, and tried to dismiss it
from his mind. Shortly after, he waked one night persuaded that while 
asleep he had seen his fish with all the missing features perfectly re -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
stored. But when he tried to hold and make fast the image it escaped 
him. Nevertheless, he went early to the Jardin des Plantes, thinking that 
on looking anew at the impression he should see something which would 
put him on the track of his vision. In vain the blurred record was as black 
as ever. The next night he saw the fish again, but with no more satisfacto -
ry result when he awoke it disappeared from his memory as before. Hop -
ing that the same experience might be repeated, on the third night he 
placed a pencil and paper beside the bed before going to sleep.
“Accordingly, toward morning the fish reappeared in his dream, confused -
ly at first, but at last with such distinctness that he had no longer any 
doubt as to its zoological characters. Still half dreaming, in perfect dark -
ness, he traced these characters on the sheet of paper at the bedside. In 
the morning he was surprised to see in his nocturnal sketch features 
which he thought it impossible the fossil itself should reveal. He hastened 
to the Jardin des Plantes, and, with his drawing as a guide, succeeded in 
chiseling away the surface of the stone under which portions of the fish 
proved to be hidden. When wholly exposed it corresponded with his 
dream and his drawing, and he succeeded in classifying it with ease.”
An Outstanding Physician Solved The Problem Of Diabetes
Some years ago I received clipping from a magazine describing the origin 
of the discovery of insulin. This is the essence of the article as I recall it.
About forty years ago or more, Dr Frederick Banting, a brilliant Canadian 
physician and surgeon, was concentrating his attention on the ravages of 
diabetes. At that time medical science offered not effective method of ar -
resting the disease. Dr Banting spent considerable time experimenting 
and studying the international literature on the subject. One night he was 
exhausted and fell asleep. While asleep, his subconscious mind instructed 
him to extract eh residue from the degenerated pancreatic duct of dogs. 
This was the origin of insulin which has helped millions of people.
You will note that Dr Banting had been consciously dwelling on the prob -
lem for some time seeking a solution, a way out, and his subconscious re -
sponded accordingly.
It does not follow that you will always get an answer overnight. The an -
swer may not come for some time. Do not be discouraged. Keep on turn -
ing the problem over every night to the subconscious mind prior to sleep, 
as if you had never done it before.
One of the reasons for the delay may be that you look upon it as a major 
problem. You may believe it will take a long time to solve it.
Your subconscious mind is timeless and spaceless. Go to sleep believing 
you have the answer no. do not postulate the answer in the future. Have 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
an abiding faith in the outcome. Become convinced now as you read this 
book that there is an answer and a perfect solution for you.
How A Famous Scientist & Physicist Escaped From A Russian Con -
centration Camp
Dr Lothax von Blenk-Schmidt, a member of the Rocket Society and an 
outstanding research electronic engineer, gives the following condensed 
summary of how he used his subconscious mind to free himself from cer -
tain death at the hands of brutal guards in a Russian prison camp coal 
mine. He states as follows:
“I was a prisoner of war in a coal mine in Russia, and I saw men dying all 
around me in that prison compound. We were watched over by brutal 
guards, arrogant officers and sharp, fast thinking commissars. After a 
short medical checkup, a quota of coal was assigned to each person. My 
quota was three hundred pounds per day. In case any man did not fill his 
quota, his small food ration was cut down, and in a short time he was 
resting in the cemetery.
“I started concentrating on my escape. I knew that my subconscious mind
would somehow find a way. My home in Germany was destroyed, my fam -
ily wiped out, all my friends and former associates were either killed in 
the war or were in concentration camps.
“I said to my subconscious mind, I want to go to Los Angeles, and you will
find the way.” I had seen pictures of Los Angeles and I remembered some
of the boulevards very well as well as some of the buildings.
“Every day and night I would imagine I was walking down Wilshire Boule -
vard with an American girl whom I met in Berlin prior to the war (she is 
now my wife). In my imagination we would visit the stores, ride buses 
and eat in restaurants. Every night I made it a special point to drive my 
imaginary American automobile up and down the boulevards of Los Ange -
les. I made all this vivid and real. These pictures in my mind were as real 
and as natural to me as one of the trees outside the prison camp.
“Every morning the chief guard would count the prisoners as they were 
lined up. He would call out 'one, two, three,' etc., and when seventeen 
was called out which was my number in sequence, I stepped aside. In the
meantime, the guard was called away for a minute or so, and on his re -
turn he started by mistake on the next man as number seventeen. When 
the crew returned in the evening, the number of men was the same, and 
I was not missed, and the discovery would take a long time.
“I walked out of the camp undetected and kept walking for twenty-four 
hours, resting in a deserted town the next day. I was able to live by fish -
ing and killing some wild life. I found coal trains going to Poland and trav -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
eled on them by night, until finally I reached Poland. With the help of 
friends, I made my way to Lucerne, Switzerland.
“One evening at the Palace Hotel, Lucerne, I had a talk with a man and 
his wife from the United States of America. This man asked me if I would 
care to be a guest at his home in Santa Monica, California. I accepted, 
and when I arrived in Los Angeles, I found that their chauffeur drove me 
along Wilshire Boulevard and many other boulevards which I had imag -
ined so vividly in the long months in the Russian coal mines. I recognized 
the buildings which I had seen in my mind so often. It actually seemed as
if I had been in Los Angeles before. I had reached my goal.
“I will never cease to marvel at the wonders of the subconscious mind. 
Truly, it has ways we know not of.”
How Archaeologists & Paleontologists Reconstruct Ancient Scenes
These scientists know that their subconscious mind has a memory of ev -
erything that has ever transpired. As they study the ancient ruins and fos -
sils, through their imaginative perception, their subconscious mind aids 
them in reconstructing the ancient scenes. The dead past becomes alive 
and audible once more. Looking at these ancient temples and studying 
the pottery, statuary, tools and household utensils of these ancient times, 
the scientist tells us of an age when there was no language. Communica -
tion was done by grunts, groans and signs.
The keen concentration and disciplined imagination of the scientist awak -
ens the latent powers of his subconscious mind enabling him to clothe the
ancient temples with roofs, and surround them with gardens, pools and 
fountains. The fossil remains are clothes with eyes, sinews and muscles 
and they again walk and talk. The past becomes the living present and we
find that in mind there is no time or space. Through disciplined, controlled
and directed imagination, you can be a companion of the most scientific 
and inspired thinkers of all time.
How To Receive Guidance From Your Subconscious
When you have what you term “a difficult decision” to make, or when you 
fail to see the solution to your problem, begin at once to think construc -
tively about it. If you are fearful and worried, you are not really thinking. 
True thinking is free from fear.
Here is a simple technique you can use to receive guidance on any sub -
ject: Quiet the mind and still the body. Tell the body to relax; it has to 
obey you. It has no volition, initiative or self conscious intelligence. Your 
body is an emotional disk which records your beliefs and impressions. Mo -
bilize your attention; focus your thought on the solution to your problem. 
Try to solve it with your conscious mind. Think how happy you would be 
about the perfect solution. Sense the feeling you would have if the perfect
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
answer were yours now. Let your mind play with this mood in a relaxed 
way; then drop off to sleep. When you awaken, and you do not have the 
answer, get busy about something else. Probably, when you are preoccu -
pied with something else, the answer will come into your mind like toast 
pops out of a toaster.
In receiving guidance from the subconscious mind, the simple way is the 
best. This is an illustration: I once lost a valuable ring which was an heir -
loom. I looked everywhere for it and could not locate it. At night I talked 
to the subconscious in the same manner that I would talk to anyone. I 
said to it prior to dropping off to sleep, “You know all things; you know 
where that ring is, and you now reveal to me where it is.”
In the morning I awoke suddenly with the words ringing in my ear, “Ask 
Robert!”
I thought it very strange that I should ask Robert, a young boy about nine
years of age; however, I followed the inner voice of intuition.
Robert said, “Oh yes, I picked it up in the yard while I was playing with 
the boys. I placed it on the desk in my room. I did not think it worth any -
thing so I did not say anything about it.”
The subconscious mind will always answer you if you trust it.
His Subconscious Revealed The Location Of His Father's Will
A young man who attends my lectures had this experience. His father 
died and apparently left no will. However, this man's sister told him that 
their father had confided to her that a will had been executed which was 
fair to all. Every attempt to locate the will failed.
Prior to sleep he talked to his deeper mind as follows: “I now turn this re -
quest over to the subconscious mind. It knows just where that will is and 
reveals it to me.” Then he condensed his request down to one word, “An -
swer,” repeating it over and over again as a lullaby. He lulled himself to 
sleep with the word, “Answer.”
The next morning this young man had an overpowering hunch to go to a 
certain bank in Los Angeles where he found a safe deposit vault regis -
tered in the name of his father, the contents of which solved all his prob -
lems.
Your thought, as you go to sleep, arouses the powerful latency which is 
within you. For example, let us suppose you are wondering whether to sell
your home, buy a certain stock, sever partnership, move to New York or 
stay in Los Angeles, dissolve the present contract or take a new one. Do 
this: Sit quietly in your armchair or at the desk in your office. Remember 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
that there is a universal law of action and reaction. The action is your 
thought. The reaction is the response from your subconscious mind. The 
subconscious mind is reactive and reflexive; this is its nature. It re -
bounds, rewards and repays. It is the law of correspondence. It responds 
by corresponding. As you contemplate right action, you will automatically 
experience a reaction or response in yourself which represents the guid -
ance or answer of your subconscious mind.
In seeking guidance, you simply think quietly about right action which 
means that you are using the Infinite Intelligence resident in the sub mind
to the point where it begins to use you. From there on, your course of ac -
tion is directed and controlled by the subjective wisdom within you which 
is all-wise and omnipotent. Your decision will be right. There will only be 
right action because you are under a subjective compulsion to do the right
thing. I use the word compulsion because the law of the subconscious is 
compulsion.
The Secret Of Guidance
The secret of guidance or right action is to mentally devote yourself to the
right answer, until you find its response in you. The response is a feeling, 
an inner awareness, an overpowering hunch whereby you know that you 
know. You have used the power to the point where it begins to use you. 
You cannot possibly fail or make one false step while operating under the 
subjective wisdom within you. You will find that all your ways are pleas -
antness and all your paths are peace.
Highlights To Recall
1. Remember that the subconscious mind has determined the success and
wonderful achievements of all great scientific workers.
2. By giving your conscious attention and devotion to the solution of a 
perplexing problem, your subconscious mind gathers all the necessary in -
formation and presents it full blow to the conscious mind.
3. If you are wondering about the answer to a problem, try to solve it ob -
jectively. Get all the information you can from research and also from oth -
ers. If no answer comes, turn it over to your subconscious mind prior to 
sleep, and the answer always comes. It never fails.
4. You do not always get the answer overnight. Keep on turning your re -
quest over to your subconscious until the day breaks and the shadows 
flee away.
5. You delay the answer by thinking it will take a long time or that it is a 
major problem. Your subconscious has no problem, it knows only the an -
swer.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
6. Believe that you have the answer now. Feel the joy of the answer and 
the way you would feel if you had the perfect answer. Your subconscious 
will respond to your feeling.
7. Any mental picture, backed by faith and perseverance, will come to 
pass through the miracle-working power of your subconscious. Trust it, 
believe in its power and wonders will happen as you pray.
8. Your subconscious is the storehouse of memory and within your sub -
conscious are recorded your experiences since childhood.
9. Scientists meditating on ancient scrolls, temples, fossils, etc., are able 
to reconstruct scenes of the past and make them alive today. Their sub -
conscious mind comes to their aid.
10. Turn over your request for a solution to your subconscious prior to 
sleep. Trust it and believe in it and the answer will come. It knows all and 
sees all, but you must not doubt or question its powers.
11. The action is your thought, and the reaction is the response of your 
subconscious mind. If your thoughts are wise, your actions and decisions 
will be wise.
12. Guidance comes as a feeling, an inner awareness, an overpowering 
hunch whereby you know that you know. It is an inner sense of touch. 
Follow it.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
