
One of our students told me that he was invited to speak at a banquet. He
said he was panic stricken at the thought of speaking before a thousand 
people. He overcame his fear this way. For several night she sat down in 
an armchair for about five minutes and said to himself slowly quietly and 
positively, “I am going to master this fear. I am overcoming it now. I 
speak with poise and confidence. I am relaxed and at ease.” He operated 
a definite law of mind and overcame his fear.
The subconscious mind is amenable to suggestion and is controlled by 
suggestion. When you still your mind and relax, the thoughts of your con -
scious mind sink down into the subconscious through a process similar to 
osmosis, whereby fluids separated by a porous membrane intermingle. As
these positive seeds, or thoughts, sink into the subconscious are, they 
grow after their kind and you become poised, serene and calm.
Man's Greatest Enemy
Is is said that fear is man's greatest enemy. Fear is behind failure, sick -
ness and poor human relations. Millions of people are afraid of the past, 
the future, old age, insanity and death. Fear is a thought in you mind and 
you are afraid of your own thoughts.
A little boy can be paralyzed with fear when he is told there is a boogie 
man under his bed who is going to take him away. When his father turns 
on the light and shows him there is no boogie man, he is freed from fear. 
The fear in the mind of the boy was as real as if there really was a boogie 
man there. He was healed of a false thought in his mind. The thing he 
feared did not exist. Likewise, most of your fears have no reality. They are
merely a conglomeration of sinister shadows, and shadows have no reali -
ty.
Do The Thing You Fear
Ralph Waldo Emerson, philosopher and poet, said, “Do the thing you are 
afraid to do, and the death of fear is certain.” There was a time when the 
writer of this chapter was filled with unutterable fear when standing be -
fore an audience. The way I overcame it was to stand before the audi -
ence, do the thing I was afraid to do, and the death of fear was certain. 
When you affirm positively that you are going to master your fears, and 
you come to a definite decision in your conscious mind, you release the 
power of the subconscious which flows in response to the nature of your 
thought.
Banishing Stage Fright
A young lady was invited to an audition. She had been looking forward to 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
the interview. However, on three previous occasions, she had failed miser -
ably due to stage fright. She possessed a very good voice, but she was 
certain that when the time came for her to sing, she would be seized with 
state fright. The subconscious mind takes your fears as a request, pro -
ceeds to manifest them and then brings them into your experience. On 
three previous auditions she sang wrong notes, and she finally broke 
down and cried. The cause, as previously outlined, was an involuntary au -
tosuggestion, i.e. a silent fear thought emotionalized and subjectified.
She overcame it by the following technique: Three times a day she isolat -
ed herself in a room. She sat down comfortably in an armchair, relaxed 
her body and closed her eyes. She stilled her mind and body to the best 
of her ability. Physical inertia favors passivity and renders the mind more 
receptive to suggestion. She counteracted the fear suggestion by saying 
to herself, “I sing beautifully, I am poised, serene, confident and calm.”
She repeated this statement slowly, quietly and with feeling from five to 
ten times at each sitting. She had three such “sittings” every day and one
immediately prior to sleep. At the end of a week she was completely 
poised and confident, and gave an outstanding audition. Carry out the 
above procedure, and the death of fear is certain.
Fear Of Failure
Occasionally young men from the local university come to see me, as well
as school teachers, who often seem to suffer from suggestive amnesia at 
examinations. The complaint is always the same: “I know the answers af -
ter the examination is over, but I can't remember the answers during the 
examination.”
The idea which realizes itself, is the one to which we invariably give con -
centrated attention. I find that each one is obsessed with the idea of fail -
ure. Fear is behind the temporary amnesia, and it is the cause of the 
whole experience. 
One young medical student was the most brilliant person in his class, yet 
he found himself failing to answer simple questions at the time of written 
or oral examinations. I explained to him that the reason was he had been 
worrying and was fearful for several days previous to the examination. 
These negative thoughts became charged with fear.
Thoughts enveloped in the powerful emotion of fear are realized in the 
subconscious mind. In other words, this young man was requesting his 
subconscious mind to see to it that he failed, and that is exactly what it 
did. On the day of the examination he found himself stricken with what is 
called, in psychological circles, suggestive amnesia.
How to Overcome Fear
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
He learned that his subconscious mind was the storehouse of memory, 
and that it had a perfect record of all he had heard and read during his 
medical training. Moreover, he learned the the subconscious mind was re -
sponsive and reciprocal. The way to be en rapport with it was to be re -
laxed, peaceful and confident.
Every night and morning he began to imagine his mother congratulating 
him on his wonderful record. He would hold an imaginary letter from her 
in his hand. As he began to contemplate the happy result, he called forth 
a corresponding or reciprocal response or reaction in himself. The all-wise 
and omnipotent power of the subconscious took over, dictated, and direct -
ed his conscious mind accordingly. He imagined the end, thereby willing 
the means to the realization of the end. Following this procedure, he had 
no trouble passing subsequent examinations. In other words, the subjec -
tive wisdom took over, compelling him to give an excellent account of 
himself.
Fear Of Water, Mountains, Closed Places Etc.
There are many people who are afraid to go into an elevator, climb moun -
tains, or even swim in the water. It may well be that the individual had 
unpleasant experiences in the water in his youth, such as having been 
thrown forcibly into the water without being able to swim. He might have 
been forcibly detained in an elevator which failed to function properly, 
causing resultant fear of closed places.
I had an experience when I as about ten years of age. I accidentally fell 
into a pool and went down three times. I can still remember the dark wa -
ter engulfing my heard, and my gasping for air until another boy pulled 
me out at the last moment. This experience sank into my subconscious 
mind and for years I feared the water.
An elderly psychologist said to me, “Go down to the swimming pool, look 
at the water, and say out loud in strong tones, 'I am going to master you, 
I can dominate you.' Then go into the water, take lessons and overcome 
it.” This I did, and I mastered the water. Do not permit water to master 
you. Remember you are the master of the water.
When I assumed a new attitude of mind, the omnipotent power of the 
subconscious responded, giving me strength, faith and confidence and en -
abling me to overcome my fear.
Master Technique For Overcoming Any Particular Fear
The following is a process and technique for overcoming fear which I 
teach from the platform. It works like a charm. Try it!
Suppose you are afraid of the water, a mountain, an interview, an audi -
tion, or you fear closed places. If you are afraid of swimming, begin now 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
to sit still for five or ten minutes three or four times a day, and imagine 
you are swimming. Actually, you are swimming in your mind. It is a sub -
jective experience. Mentally you have projected yourself into the water. 
You feel the chill of the water and the moment of your arms and legs. It is
all real, vivid and a joyous activity of the mind. It is not idle daydreaming,
for you know that what you are experiencing in your imagination will be 
developed in your subconscious mind. Then you will be compelled to ex -
press the image and likeness of the picture you impressed on your deeper
mind. This is the law of the subconscious. 
You could apply the same technique if you are afraid of mountains or high
places. Imagine you are climbing the mountain, feel the reality of it all, 
enjoy the scenery, knowing that as you continue to do this mentally, you 
will do it physically with ease and comfort.
He Blessed The Elevator
I knew an executive of a large corporation who was terrified to ride in an 
elevator. He would walk up five flights of stairs to his office every morn -
ing. He said that he began to bless the elevator every night and several 
times a day. He finally overcame his fear. This was how he blessed the el -
evator: “The elevator in our building is a wonderful idea. It came out of 
the universal mind. It is a boon and a blessing to all our employees. It 
gives wonderful service. It operates in divine order. I ride in it in peace 
and joy. I remain silent now while the currents of life, love and under -
standing flow through the patterns of my thought. In my imagination I am
now in the elevator, and I step out into my office. The elevator is full of 
our employees. I talk to them and they are friendly, joyous and free. It is 
a wonderful experience of freedom, faith and confidence. I give thanks.”
He continued this prayer for about ten days, and on the eleventh day, he 
walked into the elevator with other members of the organization and felt 
completely free.
Normal & Abnormal Fear
Man is born with two fears, the fear of falling and the fear of noise. These 
are a sort of alarm system given you by nature as a means of self preser -
vation. Normal fear is good. You hear an automobile coming down the 
road, and you step aside to survive. The momentary fear of being run 
over is overcome by your action. All other fears were given to you by par -
ents, relatives, teachers and all those who influenced your early years.
Abnormal Fear
Abnormal fear takes place when man lets his imagination run riot. I knew 
a woman who was invited to go on a trip around the world by plane. She 
began to cut out of the newspapers all reports of airplane catastrophes. 
She pictured herself going down in the ocean, being drowned etc. This is 
abnormal fear. Had she persisted in this, she would undoubtedly have at -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
tracted what she feared most.
Another example of abnormal fear is that of a businessman in New York, 
who was very prosperous and successful. He had his own private mental 
motion picture of which he was the director. He would run this mental 
movie of failure, bankruptcy, empty shelves and no bank balance until he 
sank into a deep depression. He refused to stop this morbid imagery and 
kept reminding his wife that “this can't last,” “there will be a recession,” “I
feel sure we will go bankrupt.” etc.
His wife told me that he finally did go into bankruptcy, and all the things 
he imagined and feared came to pass. The things he feared did not exist, 
but he brought them to pass by constantly fearing, believing and experi -
encing financial disaster. Job said, the thing I feared has come upon me .
There are people who are afraid that something terrible will happen to 
their children, and that some dreadful catastrophe will befall them. When 
they read about an epidemic or rare disease, they live in fear that they 
will catch it and some imagine they have the disease already. All of this is 
abnormal fear.
The Answer To Abnormal Fear
Move mentally to the opposite. To stay at the extreme of fear is stagna -
tion plus mental and physical deterioration. When fear arises, there im -
mediately comes with it a desire for something opposite to the thing 
feared. Place your attention on the thing immediately desired. Get ab -
sorbed and engrossed in your desire, knowing that the subjective always 
overturns the objective. This attitude will give you confidence and lift your
spirits. The infinite power of your subconscious mind is moving on your 
behalf and it cannot fail. Therefore, peace and assurance is yours.
Examine Your Fears
The president of a large organization told me that when he was a sales -
man he used to walk around the block five or six times before he called 
on a customer. The sales manager came along one day and said to him, 
“Don't be afraid of the boogie man behind the door. There is no boogie 
man. It is a false belief.” 
The manager told him that whenever he looked at his own fears he stared
them in the face and stood up to them, looking them straight in the eye. 
Then they faded and shrank into insignificance.
He Landed In The Jungle
A chaplain told me of his experiences in the Second World War. He had to 
parachute from a damaged plane and land in the jungle. He said he was 
frightened, but he knew there were two kinds of fear, normal and abnor -
mal which we have previously pointed out.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
He decided to do something about the fear immediately, and he began to 
talk to himself saying, “John, you can't surrender to your fear. Your fear is
a desire for safety and security and a way out.” 
He began to claim, “Infinite Intelligence which guides the planets in their 
courses is now leading and guiding me out of the jungle.”
He kept saying this out loud to himself for ten minutes or more. “Then,” 
he added, “something began to stir inside me. A mood of confidence be -
gan to seize me, and I began to walk. After a few days, I miraculously 
came out of the jungle and was picked up by a rescue plane.” His changed
mental attitude saved him. His confidence and trust in the subjective wis -
dom and power within him was the solution to his problem.
He said, “Had I begun to bemoan my fate and indulge my fears, I would 
have succumbed to the monster fear and probably would have died of 
fear and starvation.”
He Dismissed Himself
The general manager of an organization told me that for three years he 
feared he would lose his position. He was always imagining failure. The 
thing he feared did not exist, save as a morbid anxious thought in his own
mind. His vivid imagination dramatized the loss of his job until he became
nervous and neurotic. Finally, he was asked to resign.
Actually, he dismissed himself. His constant negative imagery and fear 
suggestions to his subconscious mind caused the latter to respond and re -
act accordingly. It caused him to make mistakes and foolish decisions 
which resulted in his failure as a general manager. His dismissal would 
never have happened, if he had immediately moved to the opposite in his 
mind.
They Plotted Against Him
During a recent world lecture tour, I had a two hour conversation with a 
prominent government official. He had a deep sense of inner peace and 
serenity. He said that all the abuse he receives politically from newspa -
pers and the opposition party never disturb him. His practice is to sit still 
for fifteen minutes in the morning and realize that in the center of himself
is a deep still ocean of peace. Meditating in this way, he generates 
tremendous power which overcomes all manner of difficulties and fears.
Some time previously, a colleague called him at midnight and told him a 
group of people were plotting against him. This is what he said to his col -
league, “I am going to sleep now in perfect peace. You can discuss it with 
me at 10.00 a.m. Tomorrow.”
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
He said to me, “I know that no negative thought can ever manifest except
if emotionalize the thought and accept it mentally. I refuse to entertain 
their suggestion of fear. Therefore, no harm can come to me.”
Notice how calm he was, how cool, how peaceful! He did not start getting 
excited, tearing his hair, or wringing his hands. At his center he found the 
still water, an inner peace and there was a great calm.
Deliver Yourself From All Your Fears
Use this perfect formula for casting out fear. I sought the Lord, and He 
heard me, and delivered me from all my fears. Psalm 34:4 . The Lord is 
ancient word meaning law – the power of your subconscious mind.
Learn the wonders of your subconscious, and how it works and functions. 
Master the techniques given to you in this chapter. Put them into practice 
now, today! Your subconscious will respond, and you will be free of all 
fears. I sought the Lord, and He heard me, and delivered me from all my 
fears.
Step This Way To Freedom From Fear
1. Do the thing you are afraid to do, and the death of fear is certain. Say 
to yourself and mean it, “I am going to master this fear,” and you will.
2. Fear is a negative thought in your mind. Supplant it with a constructive
thought. Fear has killed millions. Confidence is greater than fear. Nothing 
is more powerful than faith in God and the good.
3. Fear is man's greatest enemy. It is behind failure, sickness and bad hu -
man relations. Love casts out fear. Love is an emotional attachment to the
good things in life. Fall in love with honesty, integrity, justice, good will 
and success. Live in the joyous expectancy of the best, and invariably the 
best will come to you.
4. Counteract the fear suggestions with the opposite, such as “I sing 
beautifully; I am poised, serene and calm.” It will pay fabulous dividends.
5. Fear is behind amnesia at oral and written examination time. You can 
overcome this by affirming frequently, “I have a perfect memory for ev -
erything I need to know,” or you can imagine a friend congratulating you 
on your brilliant success on the examination. Persevere and you will win.
6. If you are afraid of the water, in your imagination swim freely and joy -
ously. Project yourself into the water mentally. Feel the chill and thrill of 
swimming across the pool. Make it vivid. As you do this subjectively, you 
will be compelled to go into the water and conquer it. This is the law of 
your mind.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
7. If you are afraid of closed places, such as elevators, lecture halls etc., 
mentally ride in an elevator blessing all its parts and functions. You will be
amazed how quickly the fear will be dissipated.
8. You were born with only two fears, the fear of falling and the fear of 
noise. All your other fears were acquired. Get rid of them.
9. Normal fear is good. Abnormal fear is very bad and destructive. To con -
stantly indulge in fear thoughts results in abnormal fear, obsessions and 
complexes. To fear something persistently causes a sense of panic and 
terror.
10. You can overcome abnormal fear when you know the power of your 
subconscious mind can change conditions and bring to pass the cherished 
desires of your heart. Give your immediate attention and devotion to your
desire which is the opposite of your fear. This is the love that casts out 
fear.
11. If you are afraid of failure, give your attention to success. If you are 
afraid of sickness, dwell on your perfect health. If you are afraid of an ac -
cident, dwell on the guidance and protection from God. If you are afraid 
of death, dwell on eternal life. God is life, and that is your life now.
12. The great law of substitution is the answer to fear. Whatever you fear 
has its solution in the form of your desire. If you are sick, you desire 
health. If you are in the prison of fear, you desire freedom. Expect the 
good. Mentally concentrate on the good, and know that your subconscious
mind answers you always. It never fails.
13. The things you fear do not really exist except as thoughts in your 
mind. Thoughts are creative. This is why Job said, The thing I feared has 
come upon me. Think good and good follows.
14. Look at your fears; hold them up to the light of reason. Learn to laugh
at your fears. That is the best medicine.
15. Nothing can disturb you but your own thought. The suggestions, 
statements, or threats of other persons have no power. The power is with -
in you, and when your thoughts are focused on that which is good, then 
God's power is with your thoughts of good. There is only one creative 
power, and it moves as harmony. There are no divisions or quarrels in it. 
Its source is love. This is why God's power is with your thoughts of good.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
