
4	
Life	Is	Waiting	for	You
People	often	say	that	the	only	constant	in	life	is	change,	but	I	think	there’s
another	way	to	look	at	life—a	better	way.	Life	never	changes;	it’s	perfect	and
finished.	Life	is	like	the	big	silver	screen	that	movies	are	shown	on,	never
changing	even	while	the	pictures	on	it	do.	It’s	just	that	here,	in	time	and	space,
we	are	the	projectors	shining	our	thoughts	onto	the	screen	of	life;	it’s	we	who
change	constantly,	not	life.	Life	itself	is	very	predictable	when	you	stop	looking
at	the	effects	of	your	creations	and	start	looking	at	the	underlying	steadfast
principles	involved.
Let	me	elaborate	a	little	more	on	the	constructs	of	this	time	and	space	theater
we’re	all	performing	in.	Doesn’t	it	make	sense	that	there	must	be	certain
inviolate	principles?	If	all	of	a	sudden	cows	could	fly,	oceans	could	disappear,
cities	be	moved,	or	material	things	occasionally	flickered	in	and	out	of	existence,
there’d	be	nothing	to	depend	on.	How	could	you	have	a	reality	in	which	the
rules,	or	the	props,	constantly	fluxed	without	your	involvement?	Living	in	time
and	space	would	be	impossible	without	certain	inviolate	principles.	This	is
especially	true	when	you	believe	that	one	of	the	fundamental	reasons	we’re	here
is	to	learn	of	our	absolute	power	to	shape	the	lives	we	lead.
If	you	understand	then	that	“life”	is	constant,	you	must	also	believe	in	the
need	for	certain	absolute,	unchanging	principles	that	make	this	possible	(what	I
previously	referred	to	as	the	Truths	of	
Being),	and	that	there	also	must	not	be
any
	forces	outside	of	ourselves	that	could	manipulate	the	results	of	our	own
thoughts,	beliefs,	and	intents.	If	there	were	such	outside	forces	(“non-us”	forces)
that	influenced	the	direction	of	our	lives	or	the	things	we	manifest—be	they
angels,	gods,	or	lucky	stars—then,	again,	it	couldn’t	be	said	that	we’ve	been
given	dominion	over	all	things.	Instead,	it	would	be	said	that	we’ve	been	given
dominion	over	
most
	things;	or	only	on	certain	occasions;	or	based	on	some	other
criteria,	circumstances,	or	judgments	that	are	not	our	own.	Without	unchanging
principles,	it	also	couldn’t	be	said	“Believe	and	all	things	are	possible.”	Instead,
caveats	would	have	to	be	added,	such	as,	hypothetically,	“as	long	as	it’s	Friday,
Saturn	is	rising,	or	Gabrielle	is	nearby.”
If	we	make	our	own	reality,	then	we	make	our	own	reality,	and	it’s	not	a	part-
--- Page 74 ---
time	thing	based	on	any	conditions	or	variables	
whatsoever
.	Only	with	perfect,
flawless	consistency	can	life,	like	a	mirror,	accurately	show	us	what	we’re
“putting	out”	there.	And	the	implications	are	staggering,	because	this	means	that
once	we	understand	these	simple	principles	and	build	our	lives	upon	the	rock	of
their	truth,	the	manifestation	of	our	dreams	is	utterly	inescapable.
This	is	what	I	mean	when	I	say	“Life	is	waiting	for	you.”	Your	life,	for	the
reasons	just	given,	is	a	
blank	canvas
	with	far	more	room	for	creativity	and
expression	than	we’ve	ever	suspected.	We	tend	to	think	in	generalities	when	it
comes	to	defining	life,	but	there	really	is	no	such	thing	as	life	“in	general.”	You
have	your	life,	I	have	my	life,	and	there	are	billions	of	other	adventurers	with
their	own	lives,	but	there	is	no	life	“in	general.”	Our	lives	are	far	more	personal,
precious,	and	unique	than	we’ve	been	taught,	and	this	is	because	they	are	far
more	
a	product	of	how	and	what	we	think
	than	they	are	of	evolution	or	destiny.
It’s	as	if	we	all	think	we’re	sitting	in	the	same	movie	theater—the	theater	of
life—and	we	think	we’re	all	watching	the	same	show,	just	with	different
perspectives,	but	actually	it’s	far	more	accurate	to	think	that	we	all	sit	alone	in
our	own	movie	theaters.	Apart	from	life’s	unchanging	principles,	we	all	live	by
different	rules	and	truths	based	
upon	different	beliefs.	(I	hope	you’re	following
me,	because	with	this	perspective	you’ll	realize	that	whatever	aspects	you’ve
ascribed	to	life	“in	general”	really	apply	only	to	
your
	life.	Your	life	is	just	an
externalized	reflection	of	all	you	think,	believe,	and	anticipate.)
There	is	no	“life”	without	you—only	an	inert	potential	that	needs	you	to	give
it	meaning,	shape,	and	purpose.	Life	is	waiting	for	you	to	
live
	it—
your	way
.
“Live”	is	a	verb;	it	means	to	take	action,	and	that’s	the	point.	Life	is	waiting	for
you	to	
take	action
,	to	exercise	your	free	will,	to	choose	your	path	by	using	its
principles	to	invoke	the	magic	behind	creation	in	order	to	live	the	life	you’ve
always	dreamed	you	could	live.	
This	is	why	you’re	here!
Life’s	Ultimate	Dance
By	deliberately	taking	action,	by	physically	moving	with	and	toward	your
dreams,	you	set	the	entire	Universe	into	motion.	
Action	is	the	key
.	It	is	the
demonstration	of	expectation,	sending	shock	waves	into	the	unseen	of	your
intent.	Through	it,	you	provide	the	spark	and	the	Universe	lights	the	fire.	It’s	as
if	we	sit	at	the	control	panels	of	our	life	(like	a	captain	might	stand	at	the	helm	of
some	vastly	complex	sailing	vessel	of	the	future)	and	simply	give	directions
while	countless	crew	members,	machines,	and	computers	fly	into	action	at	our
behest.	The	only	difference	is	that	our	own	personal	lives	and	the	commands	we
--- Page 75 ---
issue	are	infinitely	more	intricate	and	complicated	than	this	vessel,	and	instead
of	a	fallible	crew,	machines,	and	computers,	
we	have	at	our	disposal	an
infallible,	loving	Universe—an	extension	of	yourself—armed	with	inviolate
principles
.
Do	you	find	this	hard	to	believe?	Here	are	some	undeniable	examples	of	your
own	relationship	with	the	Universe	in	action,*	in	life’s	ultimate	dance,	during
which	you	effortlessly	draw	upon	it	to	
finish	what	you’ve	started	and	what
you’ve	commanded	it	to	do:	You	start	sentences	that	you	don’t	even	know	how
you’ll	finish,	but	you	always	do	finish	them	and	they	make	perfect	sense.	
Where
do	these	sentences	come	from?
	You	perform	profoundly	complex	muscle
movements	every	time	you	do	the	simplest	of	physical	activities,	yet	you	haven’t
a	clue	how	you	do	what	you	do—
and	who	does
?	You	open	any	book—this	book
even—and	you	see	on	each	page	black	squiggles	representing	information	that
does	not	exist	on	those	pages,	
but	it	exists	somewhere
.
*I	remember	reading	two	or	three	of	these	examples	in	a	Seth	Book	by	Jane	Roberts	more	than	twenty	years
ago.	They	are	so	stunningly	obvious	and	so	clearly	make	their	point	that	I	wanted	to	share	them	here.
Intent,	or	thought	without	action,	is	
not
	enough.
In	each	of	these	examples,	you	set	into	motion,	by	your	intent	and	
subsequent
actions
,	the	magic	of	the	Universe.	Intent,	or	thought	without	action,	is	
not
enough.	But	as	you	open	your	mouth	to	speak,	as	you	put	forth	your	leg	to	walk,
as	you	pry	open	the	pages	of	any	book	to	read,	these	
physical	gestures
overwhelmingly	imply	that	you	
believe
	your	intent	will	be	matched	with	results.
All	this	adds	to	the	energy	of	your	initial	thought	sufficiently	enough	that	a
tipping	point	is	reached;	critical	mass	is	achieved,	allowing	the	Universe	to	grab
the	baton	and	take	over,	
all	for	the	seemingly	feeble	actions	we	initiate
.	You
don’t	even	have	to	know	
how
	to	complete	the	processes	started,	yet	starting	the
process	clearly	demonstrates	a	belief	that	it	will	somehow	be	completed.	The
original	intent	(vision,	desire,	dream),	bolstered	by	the	expectation	and
empowered	because	of	the	action	that	follows,	is	sufficient	to	cause	the
necessary	articulation,	muscle	movements,	and	idea	formulations	invoked	by
life’s	magic	via	the	
thoughts	become	things
	principle	for	there	to	be	the
corresponding	manifestation.
Do	you	want	to	argue	that	it’s	your	subconscious	mind	that	finishes	your
sentences	and	makes	your	heart	beat?	Even	if	you	believed	this,	what	or	where	is
your	subconscious	mind,	anyway?	It	most	certainly	is	not	
physically
	located	in
your	brain.	It	springs	from	your	spiritual	self,	which,	again,	brings	us	back	to
thought	being	the	
spark	that	triggers	principles	in	the	unseen,	igniting	a
--- Page 76 ---
seemingly	magical	process	for	every	manifestation	we	witness.	And	what	stirs
up	this	magic	the	most	is	us	dancing	the	ultimate	dance,	
physically	moving	with
our	dreams
	by	demonstrating	an	unquestionable	belief	in	the	processes	we	have
unwittingly	started.
The	actions	we	take	or	don’t	take	reveal	the	thoughts	of	ours	that	are
believed-in	the	most	or	the	least.	And	understanding	this,	we	immediately	begin
to	see	how	important	taking	action	is	to	the	fruition	of	our	dreams	upon	the
blank	canvas	of	our	lives.	
This	is	not	so	much	because	of	what	we	may
accomplish	for	the	meager	steps	taken,	but	by	simply	taking	these	steps,	we
demonstrate	where	our	true	beliefs	lie	and	where	our	thinking	is,	thereby
engaging	the	magic	of	life	to	finish	what	we	have	begun
.
Let’s	look	closer.
Action:	Our	Beliefs	in	Motion
Setting	Divine	Intelligence,	or	the	Universe,	into	motion	begins	with	the
thoughts	you	choose	to	think,	and	those,	of	course,	most	often	stem	from	your
beliefs.	However,	we’re	physical	creatures,	and	getting	anything	done	requires
movement	and	action;	otherwise	we’d	remain	in	bed	dreaming	or	at	our
computers	surfing.	So	let’s	look	at	this	movement	of	our	actions	and	deeds	to	see
what	they	mean	and	find	out	what	they	can	do	for	us.
Graceful	or	fluid	action,	whether	in	dancing,	athletics,	or	as	one	simply	moves
through	life,	has	sometimes	been	described	as	poetry	in	motion,	but	really,	our
actions	are	our	
beliefs	in	motion
,	linking	the	present	we	know	to	the	future	we
expect	in	time	and	space.	They	are	the	physical	extensions	of	our	beliefs,	often
appearing	as	reactions	to	the	world	around	us.	For	example,	if	you	believe	that
you’re	about	to	be	devoured	by	a	charging	lion,	
you	run!
	Or	if	you	believe	your
fellow	adventurers	are	kind	and	wonderful,	you	greet	them	with	open	arms.	And
if	you	believe	that	you	create	your	own	reality,	you	accept	responsibility	for	all
that	has	ever	
happened	in	your	life,	while	behaving	responsibly	each	and	every
day	with	this	belief	in	mind.	Generally,	we	
automatically
	act	in	line	with	our
beliefs.
Sometimes	when	people	hear	me	explain	the	
thoughts	become	things
principle,	they	want	to	correct	me	by	adding	that	you	must	also	have	the
conviction	of	your	dreams	to	follow	up	and	
act
.	But	to	me	that	goes	without
saying,	because	you	cannot	help	but	
act
	with	your	true	beliefs	about	life;	it’s
virtually	impossible.	Let	me	ask	you	this:	If	you	knew	with	certainty,	with	all
your	heart	and	soul,	that	all	you	had	to	do	to	write	an	internationally	bestselling
--- Page 77 ---
novel	was	to	put	pen	to	paper	and	the	entire	work	would	gush	from	you	in
perfect	form,	would	you	do	it?	You	bet	you	would!	You	couldn’t	help	yourself.
But	if	you	didn’t	believe	it,	if	you	thought	it	was	very	difficult,	if	you	thought
your	chances	of	being	discovered	were	slim	to	none,	would	you	then	put	pen	to
paper?	No,	unless	you	really	forced	yourself	to.
Thoughts	
do
	become	things,	but	because	not	everything	you	think	can
instantly	spring	into	time	and	space,	only	those	thoughts	that	are	aligned	with
your	beliefs	and	are	felt	intensely,	to	the	degree	that	they	automatically	throw
you	into	action,	can	appear.	
Thoughts	become	things
;	this	needs	no	modification,
though	if	anything	should	be	added	to	those	three	magic	words	it	would	be	to
work	on	your	beliefs,	which	are	generally	the	root	cause	of	all	we	do	and	don’t
do.
Our	actions	are	our	
beliefs	in	motion
,	linking	the	present	we	know	to	the
future	we	expect	in	time	and	space.
Of	course,	this	is	the	
action
	section	of	this	book,	so	it	may	seem	that	with	all
this	talk	about	beliefs	I’ve	strayed	off	course.	Yet	in	a	moment,	once	I’ve	said	all
that	I	have	to	say	about	how	our	actions	mirror	our	beliefs,	I’ll	talk	about	how
we	can	do	some	“reverse	engineering,”	using	our	actions	to	change	our	beliefs.
Actions	Speak	(About	Your	Beliefs)	Louder	Than
Words
We	can	learn	about	our	beliefs	from	observing	and	understanding	our	normal,
everyday	behavior.	Once	you	understand	the	motivation	behind	the	things	you
catch	yourself	doing	(or	not	doing),	you	can	then	automatically	see	straight
through	to	the	beliefs	that	have	possessed	you.	This	is	all	the	more	important
when	you	realize	that	not	only	do	your	actions	and	inactions	extend	from	your
beliefs,	
but	they	also	support	and	reinforce	those	very	beliefs
;	thus,	a	cycle	of
manifestation	is	born.	If	the	beliefs	serve	you,	it’s	great,	but	it’s	a	big	problem
when	they	don’t.
To	give	you	some	examples,	realize	that	even	placing	one	foot	in	front	of	the
other	as	you	walk	down	the	street	reflects	
and	reinforces
	your	beliefs	in	your
own	muscular	strength,	health,	and	coordination	and	in	gravity,	to	name	just	a
few.	Or	if	you	think	you’re	overweight,	by	shopping	for	low-calorie	foods	you
both	reveal	
and	reinforce
	this	belief.	If	you	haven’t	surrounded	yourself	with
material	abundance	yet,	it’s	possible	that	by	simply	playing	the	lottery,	the
--- Page 78 ---
purchase	of	your	ticket	
may
	reflect	and	reinforce	your	sensed	lack	of	power	to
otherwise	change	your	financial	condition.	This	doesn’t	mean	you	shouldn’t	ever
buy	low-calorie	foods	or	lottery	tickets,	as	there	may	be	a	number	of	great
reasons	why	you	should	do	both,	but	these	small	examples	clearly	show	how
your	actions	point	directly	to	your	beliefs,	
serving	to	reinforce	them	as	further
evidence	of	your	present	state	of	affairs
.
The	message	your	“inner	witness,”	or	your	observing	self,	receives	is	that	you
buy	low-calorie	foods	because	you	
are
	overweight.	“Aha,”	it	notes,	“I’m
overweight!”	And	as	all	beliefs	do,	this	one	will	begin	generating	the
accompanying	mental	imagery,	which	in	turn	draws	you	silently	into	a	physical
reality	that	mirrors	the	reality	you	believe	in.	Effortlessly,	and	without	notice,
you’ll	eat	more	than	necessary,	you’ll	exercise	less,	and	you’ll	be	disposed	to	the
wrong	foods	at	the	wrong	time,	and	your	metabolism	may	even	slow,	not	as	a
result	of	body	chemistry	(although	this	too	will	be	
affected)	but	because	you
believe
	you	are	overweight.	Change	the	belief	and	your	diet,	
life	circumstances
and	buying	priorities	will	effortlessly	change	too,	as	will	all	things	you	associate
with	your	weight.
Now,	you’re	probably	thinking,	“If	I’m	overweight,	or	if	I’m	not	surrounded
by	wealth	and	abundance	yet,	how	can	I	start	believing	and	then	acting	like	I’m
not	overweight	or	pretending	that	I’m	not	just	barely	getting	by	financially?	Isn’t
it	a	bit	crazy	to	start	eating	fat-filled	foods	or	avoiding	the	lottery	in	my
situation?”
Let	me	answer	that	in	two	parts.	First,	you	can	start	changing	your	behavior
incrementally	by	occasionally	splurging	or	acting	
as	if
(more	on	that	later),	and
second,	and	most	important,	you	must	begin	realizing	that	your	present
conditions	have	nothing	to	do	with	what	you	eat	today	or	with	the	lottery.	Your
situation	arose	only	after	you	began	believing	that	you	were	overweight	or,
maybe	better,	as	you	gradually	and	incrementally	began	believing	that	you	were
overweight.	If	you’re	not	yet	surrounded	by	wealth,	your	present	situation	arose
when	you	stopped	seeing	that	the	world	was	pressing	out	its	abundance	to	you,
or	perhaps	because	you	never	learned	of	this	truth.
Chocolate	alone	doesn’t	make	anyone	overweight	any	more	than	not	playing
the	lottery	deprives	people	of	abundance.	
The	real	error	in	our	thinking	has	been
that	we	think	we	must	react	to	the	physical,	instead	of	the	spiritual,	side	of	life
.
When	you	understand	fully	that	your	present	conditions	sprang	from	your
thoughts	and	beliefs,	you’ll	also	realize	that	that’s	where	you	need	to	initiate	any
offsetting	changes.
The	real	error	in	our	thinking	has	been	that	we	think	we	must	react	to	the
--- Page 79 ---
physical,	instead	of	the	spiritual,	side	of	life.
I	know	this	can	seem	a	bit	tricky—learning	to	
behave
	according	to	your
dream,	your	inner	vision,	especially	when	you’ve	relied,	perhaps	
exclusively,
upon	your	physical	senses	to	decide	how	you	will	act	or	behave	up	to	this	point.
It’s	been	even	trickier	because	our	entire	planetary	culture,	so	far,	has
conditioned	us	to	look	outside	ourselves	for	direction,	meaning,	and	“proper”
behavior.	But	dancing	with	your	dreams	and	not	the	illusions	around	you
(obviously	only	to	the	degree	you	can	manage	this)	is	precisely	how	to	bring
those	dreams	about,	which	is	exactly	the	opposite	of	how	it	may	appear.	It	takes
practice	to	think	in	these	terms,	but	the	payoff	is	well	worth	it.	The	physical
world	is	simply	a	mirror	of	your	own	beliefs	and	thoughts,	which	means	that	if
there	are	any	appearances	you’d	like	to	change,	you	must	first	go	within.
Reverse	Engineering
Hopefully	I’ve	made	it	clear	that	our	actions	are	part	and	parcel	of	our	beliefs,	so
now	let	me	try	a	little	reverse	logic.	If	we	can	say	that	our	actions	are	simply	an
extension	of	our	beliefs,	then	obviously	you	can	begin	changing	how	you	behave
by	first	changing	what	you	believe.	Yet	if	they’re	one	and	the	same,	couldn’t	we
begin	changing	our	beliefs	by	first	changing	our	actions?	This	line	of	thinking
should	be	especially	plausible	considering	that	in	the	deepest	sense,	with	time
being	relative—or	an	illusion—all	things	are	actually	happening	simultaneously.
We	
can
	begin	changing	our	beliefs	by	first	changing	our	behaviors.	And
given	how	challenging	it	can	sometimes	be	to	decipher	our	beliefs,	with	lines
blurred	between	where	one	ends	and	the	next	begins,	or	when	we	struggle	to
differentiate	between	“reality”	and	what	we	think	we	believe	about	it,	it	makes	a
lot	of	sense	to	use	this	approach.	With	a	simple	awareness	of	the	beliefs	you’d
like	to	possess	or	the	end	results	you’d	like	to	achieve,	you	simply	start	working
on	some	of	the	things	you	
do
	throughout	each	day.
This	means	initiating	actions	that	are	presumably	just	“outside”	your	current
set	of	beliefs,	by	performing	some	token	deed	or	deeds,	on	a	regular	basis,	
that
don’t	make	sense
	in	the	context	of	your	normal	
life	or	normal	surroundings	but
that	
are
	in	line	with	the	life	you’d	like	to	lead.	These	new	actions	then	imply	the
existence	of	a	corresponding	
new
	belief,	and	when	they’re	consistently	repeated,
the	new	belief	has	to	emerge.
When	you	act	in	new	ways,	anticipation	of	the	unexpected	is	aroused	and
--- Page 80 ---
previously	closed	doors	to	fulfillment	begin	swinging	open.
By	acting	out	of	the	norm,	it’s	as	if	we	temporarily	suspend	the	old	beliefs
that	would	have	normally	prevented	us	from	behaving	in	this	new	way,	and	this
suspension	works	magic!	When	acting	
outside	your	norm
,	in	line	with	the	new
beliefs	you	wish	to	possess,	old	limiting	beliefs,	
even	unidentified	beliefs
	(as
shown	earlier	with	my	fear	of	flying),	begin	dissolving.	They	have	to,	because
obviously	they	no	longer	make	much	sense	in	view	of	your	new	actions	and
behaviors.	And	while	these	energies	set	into	motion	are	outside	our	normal
awareness,	proof	of	their	existence	is	everywhere	around	us.	By	simply	acting	in
some	new	ways,	with	small	deviations	from	the	life	we	normally	lead,	we
actually	tap	into	and	harness	the	power	of	the	Universe	and	our	thoughts.
So	your	actions,	in	addition	to	pointing	to	your	existing	beliefs,	can	be	used	to
form	and	install	new	ones.	In	an	instant,	you	can	begin	changing	some	of	your
behaviors,	which	in	turn	will	start	affecting	all	the	rules	you’ve	ever	made	up,
including	the	ties	that	may	have	bound	you	to	anything	unpleasant.
To	put	it	plainly,	you	can	decide	in	a	flash	to	turn	left	instead	of	right	or	to
laugh	instead	of	cry,	and	on	a	bigger	scale,	you	can	decide	to	behave	as	if	some
or	all	your	dreams	have	
already
	manifested.	These	kinds	of	actions	send	a	signal
to	your	inner	witness	that	tells	it	that	your	
reality
	is	no	longer	what	it	used	to	be.
And	by	repeatedly	catching	your	inner	witness	off	guard,	it’ll	find	that	it	can	no
longer	slumber	through	the	predictable	routine	patterns	it’s	become	accustomed
to,	nor	can	it	count	on	the	old	beliefs	it	has	
relied	upon	to	form	its	reality.	When
you	act	in	new	ways,	anticipation	of	the	unexpected	is	aroused	and	previously
closed	doors	to	fulfillment	begin	swinging	open.
It	works	like	this	because	our	focus	in	life	is	currently	skewed	by	the	effects
of	time	and	space	and	our	place	in	it,	which	means	that	our	beliefs	are	then
perpetually	developed	and	refined	
as	we	witness
	our	life’s	physical	progress.	Our
every	action	is	recorded	in	its	finest	detail	and	assimilated	through	the	layers	of
our	beliefs.	Your	behavior,	like	your	thoughts,	especially	when	repeated,	is
recorded,	and	these	recordings	then	prove	and	reinforce	the	belief	you	hold	that
says	“That’s	the	way	life	is.”	If,	however,	despite	contradictory	circumstances
that	surround	you,	you	can	gather	the	courage	to	act	even	a	little	out	of	step	with
your	old	beliefs—as	if	to	say	“That’s	not	the	way	it’s	going	to	continue”—it	will
be	recorded,	documented,	and	carry	a	message	that	states	“From	now	on	things
are	going	to	be	different!”
Acting	
As	If:
	Seeding	New	Beliefs
--- Page 81 ---
To	give	you	some	examples	of	actions	you	can	take	to	help	suspend	an	old	belief
and	install	a	new	one,	I’ll	start	with	something	I’ve	always	done	whenever	I	had
money	worries	(meaning	I	was	afraid	my	supply	was	drying	up).
Overcoming	Poverty	Consciousness
Whenever	I’ve	encountered	the	illusion	that	I	would	soon	be	out	of	money,	I
immediately	started	giving	more	money	to	charities.	In	addition	to	everything
else	I’ve	talked	about	so	far,	I’d	write	a	check	weekly	to	a	new	charity.	The
check	was	nothing	remotely	extravagant	but	large	enough	to	give	me	pause	to
suspend	the	belief	that	I	did	not	have	a	ready	source	of	predictable	income	or
revenue.	And	here’s	the	point:	When	I’ve	been	concerned	about	money,	it	was
never	easy	to	cut	those	checks,	which	told	me	that	I	
was	definitely	going	against
the	grain	of	my	old,	limiting	beliefs.	I’d	want	to	rationalize	and	say	to	myself,
“Oh,	I’ll	send	them	something	next	week,”	or	I	would	question	whether	or	not
I’d	already	sent	them	something	recently,	but	I	made	myself	do	it.	Once	I	set
myself	into	motion,	to	the	best	of	my	ability,	I’d	begin	feeling	a	sense	of
gratitude	that	I	was	in	a	position	to	help	others,	and	a	sense	of	knowing	that	my
coffers	would	be	replenished	by	the	Universe	(i.e.,	the	principles	that	would	be
triggered	by	my	demonstration)—and	they	
always
	were.
Another	example	of	what	you	might	do	to	eliminate	poverty	consciousness	is
adding	just	a	couple	of	dollars	to	the	“minimum	payments”	you	make	each
month	on	your	revolving	credit	card	bills	or	mortgage—
as	if
	you	now	had	more
money	than	in	prior	months	when	you	could	pay	only	the	minimum.
Using	this	understanding	of	how	your	actions	can	send	a	clear	signal	to	your
belief	system,	you	can	gradually	chip	away	at	your	old,	limiting	beliefs.	Of
course,	one	of	the	keys	here	is	sticking	with	it	and	repeating	such	actions	on	a
regular	basis,	without	regard	to	the	old	life	that	still	surrounds	you,	as	well	as
simultaneously	visualizing	and	becoming	aware	of	your	beliefs.
Overcoming	Illness
If	someone	were	ill	and	bedridden	for	months,	longing	to	resume	his	morning
walks	outdoors,	instead	of	just	waiting	to	feel	better,	he	might	first	begin
listening	to	the	weather	service	every	morning.	He	would	then	know	whether	or
not	he	would	get	rained	on	and	therefore	how	to	dress,	
acting	as	if
	he	were	going
for	a	walk	that	very	morning.	He	might	also	start	setting	his	alarm	in	the
morning	for	the	time	he	would	need	to	wake	up—
as	if
	he	knew	he	was	going	for
a	walk.	If	he	could	at	least	get	out	of	bed,	he	could	lay	out	his	walking	clothes
each	night	
as	if
	he	knew	he	was	going	for	a	walk	the	next	morning.	And	each
--- Page 82 ---
morning,	if	and	when	possible,	he	could	start	dressing	for	the	walk	
as	if
	he	were
capable	of	going	outdoors.	Once	
his	health	began	improving	to	the	point	where
he	could	get	out	of	bed,	he	could	at	least	begin	walking	around	the	house	
as	if
	he
were	just	getting	loosened	up	for	the	walk	outside.	Of	course,	also	visualizing
these	walks	would	be	a	powerful	aid	to	his	recovery	as	well.
All	these	actions	would	temporarily	suspend	his	belief	that	he	was	ill	and
bedridden,	and	coupled	with	the	desire	to	change	the	situation,	his	physical
condition	(which	is	intimately	connected	to	the	matrix	of	his	new	and	evolving
beliefs)	would	similarly	respond.	New	messages	would	be	received	and	stored
by	his	inner	witness—“prepare	all	systems	for	a	walk”—and	the	old	beliefs
would	begin	being	eroded.	Optimism	would	be	generated,	new	thoughts	would
be	thought,	and	the	healing	process	would	be	accelerated.
Of	course,	all	these	actions	would	supplement	the	customary	actions	one
performs	when	he	or	she	wants	to	recover	from	health	challenges,	such	as
consulting	with	physicians,	eating	properly,	and	so	on.
Finding	Employment
If	someone	were	without	a	job,	she	could	start	behaving	
as	if
	she	were	already
employed.	She	could	set	her	alarm	clock	each	night,	and	she	could	make	sure	her
wardrobe	was	up	to	par.	If	she	couldn’t	afford	all	the	clothes	she’d	need,	she
could	make	an	effort	to	go	window-shopping	for	whatever	she’d	buy	
as	if
	she
could	afford	it;	she	could	also	try	on	a	few	suits.	She	could	even	leave	for	work
on	the	occasional	morning	
as	if
	she	had	the	job	of	her	dreams.	She	wouldn’t
have	to	spend	the	day	away	from	home—just	enough	time	to	go	through	her
morning	“get	ready	for	work”	procedures.	Perhaps	the	outing	could	involve	a
visit	downtown	(if	that’s	where	she	wanted	to	work)	or	a	drive	to	different
prospective	employers’	buildings—
as	if
	she	already	worked	there.	She	could
meet	a	friend	and	have	coffee,	lunch,	or	dinner	wherever	people	employed	in	her
field	go	to	have	coffee,	lunch,	or	dinner.	And	again,	all	these	actions	would
supplement	the	customary	actions	people	perform	when	they	
want	such	a	life
change,	such	as	preparing	a	new	resume,	contacting	employment	agencies,
reading	“Help	Wanted”	ads,	and	so	on.	But	she’d	also	be	acting	the	part,	on
occasion,	of	someone	employed	in	the	manner	she	wished	to	be	employed—
as	if
she	were	already	employed.
Traveling	Internationally
If	you	dream	of	traveling	internationally	one	day,	get	a	passport	today,	call	travel
agents,	surf	the	internet,	price	trips,	and	read	up	on	the	places	you	want	to	go,
--- Page 83 ---
and	do	these	things	
as	if
	you	were	scheduled	to	go	wherever	it	is	you	dream	of
going,	even	if—
especially	if
—these	actions	go	against	the	grain	of	your	existing
beliefs.
Creating	Romance
If	you	want	a	significant	someone	in	your	life,	start	looking	for	the	kind	of	gifts
you’d	buy	for	him	or	her,	set	aside	time	in	your	calendar	for	weekends	away,
call	for	brochures	of	places	you’d	like	to	visit	with	that	person,	and	become
aware	of	things	you	could	do	as	a	couple,	like	theater	schedules	and	concert
dates.	Don’t	just	prepare;	act	
as	if
	you	already	have	a	romance.	I’ve	even	gone
so	far	as	buying	concert	tickets,	one	for	me	and	one	for	my	date,	without	even
knowing	anyone	I	could	invite	to	join	me.	Or	you	could	make	other	small
purchases,	like	a	tie	or	a	teddy	bear,	
as	if
	you	already	have	someone	to	give	it	to.
A	New	Car
If	you’re	dreaming	of	owning	a	particular	car,	go	to	the	car	dealership	that	sells
it	and	test-drive	it,	or	call	people	in	the	classified	ads	and	ask	them	about	their
cars.	Find	out	the	trade-in	value	of	your	present	car.	Finally,	call	an	insurance
company	to	get	a	quote	on	your	new	rates—all	
as	if
	you	have	your	new	car.
Prosperity	Consciousness
In	addition	to	many	of	the	examples	above	that	equally	apply	here,	if	you	dream
of	living	the	champagne-and-caviar	lifestyle,	buy	the	shoes!	Price	the	villa	in
Saint-Tropez,	call	the	country	club,	form	your	own	charitable	foundation,	or
open	an	online	investment	account—
as	if
	you	were	about	to	drop	a	load	of
money	into	it.	Window	shop,	order	catalogues	from	the	stores	you’ll	shop	from,
and	ask	your	credit	card	company	to	raise	your	spending	limits.	Plan	a
celebration	party,	create	the	invitation	list,	and	pick	the	location,	and	do	all	these
things	
as	if
	you	already	live	in	abundance.
Other	Handy	Miracles
If	you	want	your	health	to	improve,	do	something—anything—that	only	a
healthy	person	would	do.	Or	if	you	want	to	lose	weight,	then	for	a	day,	eat
whatever	you	think	only	thin	people	would	eat,	ideally	in	the	same	proportions
they	would	choose!	If	you	want	more	friends,	start	planning	the	kind	of	things
you’d	do	with	more	friends,	and	when	you	make	inquiries	about	events	or
--- Page 84 ---
programs	you’d	like	to	attend	with	your	friends,	always	speak	in	terms	of	“we.”
If	you	want	a	busy	social	calendar,	go	and	get	a	social	calendar.	If	you	want	to
overcome	your	fear	of	flying,	call	an	airline	and	enroll	in	its	frequent-flyer
program	(it’s	usually	free).	If	you	want	to	publish	your	writings,	get	them
copyrighted	and	start	doing	whatever	it	is	you	think	authors	do.	If	you	want	to	be
famous,	practice	signing	autographs.	If	you	want	to	help	others,	begin	at	home.
If	you	want	to	quit	smoking,	start	by	cleaning	and	putting	away	your	ashtrays.	If
you	want	to	double	your	sales,	pick	the	reward	you’re	going	to	give	yourself
once	you	succeed,	shop	for	that	reward,	and	learn	all	about	its	every	detail	(you
don’t	have	to	buy	it	...	yet).	If	you	want	to	hobnob	with	someone	special	or	with
a	particular	group	of	people,	begin	writing	their	names	in	your	date	book	for
lunch	or	for	weekend	trips.	If	you	want	to	start	
your	own	company,	jot	down
some	of	your	corporate	goals	and	write	a	mission	statement.
These	kinds	of	actions	are	fun	and	easy,	and	you	don’t	even	have	to	spend
money	doing	them.	You	just	need	to	be	a	little	creative.	Let	there	be	no	limit	to
your	ingenuity.
And	always,	as	I	said	in	the	previous	chapters,	
just	do	what	you	can
!	Don’t
wait	for	the	dam	to	burst	before	living	the	life	of	your	dreams;	begin	living	them
now	
to	any	extent	you	can
.	If	you	dream	of	having	big	money	to	spend	on
extravagances	one	day,	then	start	buying	little	extravagances	that	you	can
already	afford	today.	If	you	want	to	travel	far	and	wide,	start	now	by	traveling	as
far	as	you	can.	And	finally,	as	already	mentioned,	let	all	your	new	behaviors
supplement,	not	replace,	the	many	traditional	things	you	could	also	be	doing	to
bring	about	change	in	your	life.
In	most	of	these	examples,	notice	that	the	actions	were	all	actions	that	would
normally	be	taken	only	
after
	the	person’s	dreams	were	attained;	they	weren’t	just
preparatory	steps	in	line	with	the	goal’s	achievement.	Not	that	there’s	anything
wrong	with	preparing;	these	too	are	important	actions	to	take,	and	they	speak	of
your	confidence	in	and	expectation	of	moving	forward.	But	actions	that
presuppose	that	your	dream	has	
already
	come	true	are	even	more	powerful	than
those	that	prepare	for	your	dreams	to	come	true.
By	behaving	
as	if
	your	dream	has	already	come	true,	you	powerfully	impact
your	thought	processes	and	ultimately	your	belief	system.	Whatever	it	is	you
want	today,	to	the	degree	that	it’s	possible	and	feasible,	act	
as	if
	it’s	already	in
your	life.
Pretending	Is	Powerful
--- Page 85 ---
I	remember	preparing	to	run	a	marathon—26.2	miles—a	number	of	years	ago,
and	though	I	trained	well	for	it,	I	was	really	scared	that	
I’d	hit	the	proverbial
“wall,”	that	I’d	get	cramps,	or	that,	for	some	reason,	I	just	wouldn’t	be	able	to
finish.	I	was	so	scared	that	a	week	before	the	run	I	couldn’t	even	keep	some	of
my	meals	down.	Big	problem.
So	as	an	act	of	faith,	I	started	thinking	of	something	I’d	do	only	if	I	had
already
	successfully	run	the	marathon,	and	what	I	decided	was	to	write	a	letter
to	my	grandmother	in	New	York,	
as	if
	the	marathon	had	already	come	and	gone
and	I	had	happily	completed	it.	I	wrote	her	a	couple	of	pages,	excitedly	telling
her	how	easy	it	had	been	and	even	making	fun	of	myself	for	having	worried	so
much	the	week	before	the	race.	I	kept	this	letter	with	me	all	week,	because,	of
course,	I	didn’t	really	write	it	with	the	intention	of	mailing	it.	I	wrote	it	for
myself,	and	I	read	it	to	myself	from	time	to	time	throughout	the	week	whenever	I
felt	nervous	or	overwhelmed.	And	come	race	day,	I	ran	8.5-minute	miles	the
whole	way—no	wall,	no	cramps,	no	problem	whatsoever,	just	like	I’d	written	to
my	grandmother.	This	is	also	an	obvious	example	of	how	I	coupled	my	normal,
conventional	training	with	my	spiritually	motivated	act	of	faith.
Too	often	I	encounter	people	in	my	audiences	who	somehow	seem	to	think
that	because	they	suddenly	grasp	deeper	spiritual	truths,	they	no	longer	have	to
go	out	and	engage	life	by	taking	action.	Just	as	it	would	have	been	rather
ridiculous	for	me	to	forgo	my	physical	training	because	I	wrote	my	grandmother
this	letter,	it	is	equally	ridiculous	for	them	to	think	they	can	perhaps	live	in
abundance,	find	their	“soul	mate,”	improve	their	health,	or	even	simply	live
happily	without	taking	regular,	consistent	physical	action	in	those	directions.	Of
course,	knowing	the	truth	about	our	reality	does	mean	you	can	have	
far	more
and	get	it	
wildly	faster
	while	physically	doing	
much	less
.	But	knowing	the	truth
is	not	an	invitation	to	withdraw	from	life	so	that	the	Universe	can	live	your	life
for	you,	
especially
	not	when	you	wish	to	bring	about	major	life	changes.
To	supplement	the	more	traditional,	physical	actions	you	take	as	you	move
toward	your	dream,	you,	too,	can	write	an	old	friend,	an	anticipated	new	friend,
or	a	relative	a	long	letter,	telling	in	great	
detail	of	your	latest	adventures,
conquests,	and	accomplishments	
as	if
	you’ve	just	completed	whatever	it	is	you
still	want	to	do.	And	you	don’t	have	to	mail	it;	just	keep	it	around	and	read	it	to
yourself	from	time	to	time.
Here’s	another	idea:	write	yourself	a	letter,	
as	if
	you	were	someone	else
sending	you	praise,	inquiries,	offers,	or	business	proposals	that	are	all	in	line
with	your	dreams.	For	example,	if	you	wanted	to	land	a	certain	job,	you	could
write	yourself	a	letter	
as	if
	you	were	the	head	of	that	company’s	human
resources	department,	extending	yourself	an	offer	to	work	for	the	company	at	an
--- Page 86 ---
awesome	salary.	Or	the	letter	could	come	from	an	agent,	a	publisher,	a	romantic
interest—whomever	you’d	really	like	to	receive	these	kinds	of	letters	from.
These	are	the	letters	you	will	read	back	to	yourself	later	so	that	you	can	get	into
the	
feeling
	of	what	it	would	be	like	to	really	receive	one.
Another	playful	thing	you	can	do	is	go	on	lavish	shopping	sprees	through
expensive	mail	order	catalogues	and	write	down	the	items	and	prices	of
everything	you’d	like	to	buy	
as	if
	you	had	more	than	enough	money	to	purchase
them.	Total	your	order	and	say	out	loud,	“That’s	all?”	and	then	go	back	through
the	pages	to	see	if	you	missed	anything	else	you’d	like.	You	could	also	call
stores	with	picky	but	polite	questions	about	a	particular	item	you	want—
something	that	you’re	not	able	or	ready	to	buy	but	that	you	dream	of	having.
Call	
as	if
	you	were	about	to	make	the	purchase,	making	certain	that	the	item	is
just	right	for	you.
To	help	myself	think	of	some	new	actions,	I	make	a	list	of	whatever	dreams	I
have,	and	under	each	dream	I	write	down	simple,	inexpensive	acts	of	faith	that	I
can	start	doing	right	now.	These	are	things	that	I’d	normally	do	
only	after
	I’ve
achieved	whatever	it	is	I	want	to	achieve,	and	I	begin	doing	them	as	often	as	I
can.	I	try	to	do	at	least	one	of	these	things	every	day	or	at	least	several	things
each	week.	Try	it	and	you’ll	see.	It’s	actually	fun,	but	if	you	don’t	make	the
initial	list	ahead	of	time,	it’s	harder	to	think	of	how	to	go	out	of	your	way	each
day	to	do	these	things.	You	can	repeat	any	of	these	
actions	as	often	as	you	like,
but	mixing	them	up	helps	keep	them	fresh	and	believable.	The	possibilities	are
endless,	and	once	you	get	going,	keep	going.	Do	new	things	and	repeat	your
favorites.
It	should	go	without	saying	that	it’s	not	enough	to	do	one	thing,	write	one
letter,	or	make	one	purchase	and	then	wait.	You	must	be	
consistently
	active,
repeatedly	behaving	as	if	your	dream	is	
already
	a	reality.	You	wouldn’t	work	out
at	a	gym	once	and	call	it	exercising;	you’d	go	regularly.	And	always—this	is
important,	which	is	why	I	keep	repeating	it—imagine	that	you’re	doing	what
you’re	doing	because	your	dream	has	
already
	arrived,	not	because	you	want	it	to
arrive	and	you	think	these	steps	will	help.	Don’t	think	of	these	actions	as
preparation	for	your	dream,	but	experience	them	as	
living
	your	dream.
When	performing	your	acts	of	faith,	really	get	into	it.	At	first	it	may	seem
awkward	or	even	ridiculous,	but	neither	of	those	feelings	will	diminish	the
message	you	send	within.	Do	your	best	to	play	the	part	as	though	you	were
auditioning	for	a	role	in	a	movie;	think	of	every	consideration	that	would	make
the	situation	and	your	part	seem	more	“real.”	And	while	you’d	want	it	to	appear
real	to	any	bystanders,	it’s	most	important	that	it	feels	
real	to	you
!	Keep	with	it
as	best	you	can,	and	as	the	changes	begin	to	manifest	around	you,	remain	alert.
--- Page 87 ---
Just	because	the	results	may	be	suddenly	successful,	make	sure	that	their
foundation	is	just	as	solid	as	your	old	way	of	life	was.	Don’t	let	jubilation
dampen	your	drive	for	consistency.	Keep	with	it	until	every	area	of	your	life
matches	your	inner	dreamworld,	and	let	the	exercises	of	visualizing	and	acting
be	ongoing	and	intertwined	with	your	many	other	habits	and	routines.
This	acting,	or	pretending,	
is
	game	playing,	but	it’s	no	less	significant	than	the
acting	and	roleplaying	you	already	do	based	on	your	existing	beliefs.	Watch
yourself	and	you’ll	see	by	your	“involuntary”	actions	what	your	beliefs	are.	For
instance,	if	you	find	yourself	saving	or	preparing	for	a	rainy	day,	what	does	that
say	about	your	belief	in	the	“weather”	ahead	and	your	ability	to	handle	it?	This
doesn’t	mean	you	shouldn’t	be	prudent,	but	it	does	mean	you	can	start
identifying	
your	hindering	beliefs	and	begin	eroding	them	with	token	acts	of
faith	(while	continuing	to	be	prudent).	Or	if	lately	you	find	yourself	reading	up
more	and	more	on	“challenges”	shared	by	people	like	you,	maybe	it’s	time	you
changed	your	focus	to	the	successes	shared	by	people	like	you—
if	there	really
are	“people	like	you
.”
After	one	talk	I	gave,	an	older	man	came	up	and	told	me	that	the	U.S.	military
has	some	beliefs	similar	to	mine.	He	explained	that	whenever	a	serviceman	went
to	his	superior	and	began	asking	about	retirement,	that	person	would	be	helped
to	retire	as	soon	as	possible,	because	his	action	alone—inquiring	about
retirement—meant	that	his	heart	was	no	longer	behind	his	military	service.	What
we	do	says	a	lot	about	our	so-called	invisible	beliefs,	especially	when	we	can
catch	ourselves	preparing	for	certain	future	outcomes.
You	must	be	
consistently
	active,	repeatedly	behaving	as	if	your	dream	is
already
	a	reality.
The	Power	of	Your	Words
There’s	another	type	of	action	that	some	books	address	in	their	entirety,	and	it	is
your	word
.	Your	word	is	thought	crystallized,	taken	to	another	level	in
specificity	and	clarity.	You	may	think	sixty	thousand	thoughts	each	day,	but	the
number	of	words	you	speak	pales	in	comparison.	And	your	words	often	reflect
the	thoughts	that	you	most	intensely	believe	in.	You	may	think	thoughts	of
abundance—lots	of	thoughts	of	abundance—but	if	you	also	have	dominant
beliefs	in	scarcity,	you’ll	likely	hear	yourself	say	things	like	“Good-paying	jobs
are	hard	to	find.”	The	beliefs	of	yours	that	are	the	strongest	will	ultimately
muster	up	the	most	powerful	thoughts	you	think,	determine	the	words	you	speak,
--- Page 88 ---
and	eventually	manifest	the	life	you	lead.
It’s	as	if	your	words	are	the	thoughts	you’ve	selectively	brought	down	to
Earth	to	show	the	light	of	day,	based	upon	the	beliefs	that	gave	them	rise,	so	they
lead	the	pack	of	your	other	as-yet-unmanifested	thoughts.
Your	words,	like	the	actions	they	are,	can	be	broken	down	into	two	types:
those	you	speak	somewhat	spontaneously	in	conversations—the	words	that
mirror	your	beliefs—and	those	you	deliberately	choose,	such	as	affirmations	or
mantras,	that	can	begin	installing	new	beliefs.
Your	word	is	thought	crystallized,	taken	to	another	level	in	specificity	and
clarity.
Exposing	Your	Beliefs
The	first	type—words	spoken	spontaneously—provides	an	excellent	roadmap	to
your	beliefs,	which	is	why	I	always	strive	to	pay	close	attention	to	everything	I
say.	When	we	listen	to	ourselves	as	we	converse	with	others,	we	can	catch
ourselves	espousing	our	beliefs,	as	was	true	about	observing	our	actions.	For	this
reason,	it	could	be	said	that	our	words	are	simply	our	thoughts	that	will	become
things	the	soonest.	But	by	following	those	words	back	to	the	beliefs	they	were
drawn	from,	we	can	begin	identifying	which	ones	either	support	or	deny	our
dreams.
Creating	New	Possibilities
The	second	type—words	that	you	deliberately	choose,	such	as	affirmations—can
be	an	amazing	tool	for	installing	new	beliefs	and	attracting	new	thoughts	and
ideas	that	are	in	line	with	your	dreams.	Affirmations	are	not	only	helpful	in
installing	new	beliefs,	but	like	our	
acts	of	faith
,	they	can	also	help	us	make
strides	in	eroding	invisible,	limiting	ones.	In	case	affirmations,	which	are
sometimes	also	called	mantras,	are	new	to	you,	they’re	simply	short,
empowering	statements	that	you	repeatedly	say	to	yourself.	An	example	would
be	a	statement	such	as	“I	am	surrounded	by	wealth	and	abundance,”	or	instead	of
“wealth	and	abundance,”	you	might	choose	“friends	and	laughter”—anything	at
all	that	you	want	to	be	
surrounded	by	(stated	
as	if
	they	
already
	surround	you).
There’s	no	format	and	there	are	no	magic	patterns;	it’s	just	a	short	phrase	or	two
(or	three)	that	you	repeat	again	and	again,	usually	out	loud	but	sometimes
silently.
Using	affirmations	and	mantras	is	actually	a	simple	form	of	self-hypnosis,
because	by	repeatedly	saying	and	
feeling
	what	you	want	to	experience
--- Page 89 ---
emotionally—
as	if
	you	were	already	there	(as	opposed	to	repeatedly	stating	your
desires,	such	as	“I	want	xyz,	I	want	xyz,	I	want	xyz	...”),	you	create	an	energy
that	gives	them	and	their	related	thoughts	more	permanence	and	credibility	in
your	own	mind.	And	I	hope	you	noticed	that	I	did	just	use	the	word	“feeling,”
because	without	
feeling
	the	things	you’re	saying,	there’s	little	point	in	saying
them.	There	must	be	emotion,	or	these	words	and	their	related	thoughts	won’t	be
able	to	compete	with	all	your	other	thoughts	vying	for	your	emotional	support,
be	it	through	fear	or	happiness.	By	feeling	the	emotion	of	the	words	you	speak,
you	magnify	the	power	of	the	thoughts	behind	them	and	you	intensify	the	beliefs
you	want	to	embrace.	Really	get	into	the	words	you	choose,	and	listen	to
yourself	as	if	you	were	listening	to	some	higher	authority	telling	you	about	the
way	your	life	already	is.
I’ve	never	been	very	consistent	with	using	affirmations	myself,	but	sometimes
I	go	through	spells	when	I’ll	use	them	a	lot.	I	think	that	one	of	the	tricks	with
using	them	is	mixing	them	up	and	not	being	too	methodical—not	using	the	same
ones	again	and	again—because	they	lose	their	freshness	with	too	much	use	and
the	words	begin	to	sound	hollow.
Along	these	same	lines,	something	that’s	always	helped	me	in	choosing
affirmations	is	to	use	language	that	has	personal	meaning	to	me.	For	instance,
when	we	first	started	TUT,	I	lived	for	over	a	year	without	a	paycheck,	and	my
spending	habits	were	generally	very,	very	frugal.	But	when	we	first	started
getting	some	consistently	large	orders,	I	noticed	that	when	I	had	personal
spending	decisions	to	make,	ranging	from	groceries	to	vacations,	I	started	to	hear
myself	thinking	and	saying,	“It’s	okay;	the	money’s	coming	in	now.”	I	hadn’t
formulated	those	words	to	be	meaningful,	but	I	heard	myself	thinking	them
involuntarily	and	they	gave	me	comfort.	They	were	naturally	chosen,	and	they
signified	that	I	believed	I	was	achieving	a	certain	financial	freedom.	So	in
subsequent	times,	whenever	business	slowed	or	cash	was	tight,	I	recalled	my
prior	little	mantra	and	would	start	
deliberately
	saying	to	myself,	“It’s	okay;	the
money’s	coming	in	now”	over	and	over	again.
Whenever	we	want	something—an	event	or	a	thing—to	come	into	our	lives,
it’s	obviously	because	that	event	or	thing	is	not	currently	in	our	lives,	and	the
trick	is	that	we	must	begin	thinking	and	acting	as	if	it	is	already	there.	We	must
talk	as	if	it’s	already	there,	and	while	saying	such	things	seems	a	bit	crazy,	that’s
the	way	it	works.	That’s	the	key	to	living	your	dreams:	you	must	live	them	first,
at	least	in	your	thoughts,	in	order	to	manifest	them.
Words	are	simply	our	thoughts	that	will	become	things	the	soonest.
--- Page 90 ---
When	I	go	jogging,	I	often	begin	a	mantra	(usually	spoken	in	a	whisper)	that
affirms	my	body’s	health,	and	I	use	each	step	to	create	a	beat	or	cadence	to	my
running.	I	say	something	like	“My	heart	is	perfect	and	healthy.”	Then	I’ll	say,
“My	lungs	are	perfect	and	healthy,”	then	my	kidneys,	and	then	my	skin,	my
eyes,	my	blood—everything	I	can	think	of.
Other	times,	when	I’m	jogging	or	driving,	I’ll	verbally	give	thanks:	thanks	for
my	life,	for	my	dogs,	for	my	perspectives,	for	my	wealth,	for	my	peace	of	mind,
for	my	divinity,	for	my	car,	for	my	family	and	friends,	and,	just	as	often,	
for
things	that	I	do	not	yet	materially	have
,	as	if	
I	already	have	them
.
Why	Gratitude	Rocks
When	you	think	or	speak	thoughts	of	thanks,	what	you’re	really	doing	is	
thinking
thoughts	of	having	received
	or	of	having	been	
blessed	(however	you	want	to
name	it).	Remember	what	happens	when	you	think	thoughts—any	thoughts?
They	become	things
	in	your	life.	This	means	that	when	you	think	thoughts	of
having	received
,	those	thoughts	seek	to	come	back	to	you	experientially
(manifesting	in	time	and	space).	And	they	can	only	do	this	by	
crafting
circumstances
	in	which	you	will	physically	receive	whatever	you	were	giving
thanks	for	so	that	you	can	then	experience	that	gratitude	you	“previously”	sent
out.
As	always,	
it’s	the	feeling
	you	put	out	that	matters	the	most.	In	fact,	you	don’t
even	have	to	be	thankful	for	anything	in	particular	when	you	send	out	gratitude
as	long	as	you	send	out	the	feeling	“I	have	received.”	In	response,	the	Universe
(your	Greater	Self,	
your	thoughts
)	will	give	you	reason	to	experientially	feel	the
gratitude	you	first	put	out,	crafting	occurrences	and	surprises	
that	you	may	have
never	even	thought	about
	but	that	were	exactly	the	kinds	of	things	that	would
manifest	the	feeling	that	you	
did
	think	about!
This
	is	why	gratitude	works	in	bringing	about	fantastic	change.	Contrary	to
popular	belief,	it’s	not	because	the	Universe	is	happy	to	hear	you’re	grateful	and
will	therefore	send	you	more;	there’s	no	such	judgment	system.	In	fact,	there
couldn’t	be
	without	it	interfering	with	your	ability	to	create	or	without	it	limiting
you	and	the	infallible	principle	
thoughts	become	things
!	It	works	because	of	the
thoughts	and	feelings	it	generates,	which	can	only	be	made	physical	by
becoming	the	appropriate	things	and	events	of	your	life.
Now,	if	you	think	that	giving	out	gratitude	in	order	to	receive	something	back
is	very	self-serving	and	therefore	undignified	(just	wanting	and	receiving	more),
it’s	not.	That’s	just	a	limiting	belief.	The	truth	is	that	there	is	enough	for
everyone,	and	your	receiving	your	heart’s	desires	does	not	mean	others	are	going
--- Page 91 ---
without	theirs.	Plus,	how	can	you	give	to	others	until	you	have	first	received?
And	how	could	anything	manufactured	of	thought	be	limited?
Give	thanks	and	praise	to	life,	its	grace,	and	its	unfailing	principles	for
having	
already
	manifested	your	dreams.
Gratitude	is	powerful	and	it	
does
	work	magic,	so	it’s	great	to	work	it	into	your
affirmations	whenever	you	can.	Give	thanks	and	praise	to	life,	its	grace,	and	its
unfailing	principles	for	having	
already
	manifested	your	dreams;	say	things	like
“Thanks	for	surrounding	me	with	health,	wealth,	friends,	and	laughter!	Thank
you,	thank	you,	thank	you!”	and	really	feel	it.
Life	is	waiting	for	you—waiting	for	you	to	give	it	direction,	give	it	meaning,	and
provide	just	a	spark.	When	acting	in	line	with	your	dreams,	you	invoke	life’s
inviolate	principles,	you	set	into	motion	an	array	of	unseen	forces,	and	you
unleash	the	magic	behind	the	illusions	of	time	and	space.	It’s	the	same	magic
that	helps	you	finish	a	sentence	before	you	even	know	how	it’ll	end,	knows	just
how	fast	to	beat	your	heart,	and	spins	your	dreams	each	and	every	night.	It’s	also
the	magic	that	sweeps	birds	into	formation,	sends	bears	into	hibernation	and	bees
after	honey,	and	pushes	up	trees	and	all	things	green.	This	is	the	magic	
you
invoke	when	you	act	with	certainty	and	the	magic	that	makes	dreams	come	true;
all	that’s	needed	to	get	the	ball	rolling	is	for	you	to	aim	and	throw.	And	like	a
boomerang,	your	intentions—supported	by	your	thoughts,	deeds,	and	words—
will	indeed	return	to	you,	manifested	within	time	and	space.
We’re	all	sorcerers.	We’re	all	magicians.	And	we	can	each	invoke	this	magic
to	live	the	life	of	our	dreams.	Indeed,	it’s	our	greatest	birthright.
--- Page 92 ---