
HOW	TO	CLEAR	THE	
NEGATIVE	EGO
	
	
	
	
Dr.	Joshua	David	Stone
	
	
Marcia	Dale	Lopez,	Ph.D.
Rev.	Linda	L.	Schweke
	
	
	
	
	
Writers	Club	Press
San	Jose	New	York	Lincoln	Shanghai
	
How	to	Clear	the	Negative	Ego
	
All	Rights	Reserved	©	2001	by	Dr.	Joshua	David	Stone
	
No	part	of	this	book	may	be	reproduced	or	transmitted	in
any	form	or	by	any	means,	graphic,	electronic,	or	mechanical,
including	photocopying,	recording,	taping,	or	by	any
information	storage	or	retrieval	system,	without	the
permission	in	writing	from	the	publisher.
	
	
Writers	Club	Press
an	imprint	of	iUniverse.com,	Inc.
	
	
For	information	address:
iUniverse.com,	Inc.
5220	S	16th,	Ste.	200
Lincoln,	NE	68512
www.iuniverse.com
	
	
	
ISBN:	0-595-16932-5
ISBN:	978-1-4697-1658-9	(ebook)
	
	
Printed	in	the	United	States	of	America
Contents
Preface
	
Introduction
	
1
	
What	is	the	Negative	Ego	and	How	to	Clear	It	
	
2
	
Ascension	Psychology	
	
3
	
Who	Am	I?	
	
4
	
Why	Am	I	Here?	
	
5
	
Where	Am	I	Going?	
	
6
	
The	Three	Levels	of	Integrated	Spiritual	Growth	
	
7
	
The	Personality	of	GOD	
	
8
	
The	Glory	and	the	Corruption	of	the	Seven	Great	Rays	of	GOD	
	
9
	
How	to	Clear	the	Negative	Ego	through	Balancing	the	Feminine	and
Masculine	
	
10
	
Spiritual	Tests	
	
11
	
The	Spiritual	Science	of	Blind	Spots,	Mind	Locks	and	Lenses	
	
12
	
How	to	Deal	with	Attacking	and	Critical	Energy	from	Others	
	
13
	
Turning	Lemons	into	Lemonade:	A	Millennium	Perspective	
	
14
	
Seeing	Life	through	the	Eyes	of	Love	
	
15
	
The	Solution	to	Every	Problem	and	Challenge	on	a	Personal	and	Collective
Level	in	the	World	Today	
	
16
	
The	Negative	Ego	and	the	Dangers	of	Lower	Psychism	
	
17
	
How	to	Clear	the	Negative	Ego	through	the	Ascension	Buddy	System	
	
18
	
How	to	Clear	Specific	Diseases	from	the	Perspective	of	the	Masters	
	
19
	
The	Psychological	Causes	of	Disease	
by	Djwhal	Khul	
	
20
	
A	Battleplan	as	to	How	to	Deal	with	Chronic	Health	Problems	
	
21
	
The	Restructuring	of	the	Ego	
	
22
	
How	to	Clear	the	Negative	Ego	through	the	Science	of	the	Tree	of	Life	
	
23
	
My	Spiritual	Mission	and	Purpose	
by	Dr.	Joshua	David	Stone	
	
About	the	Author
	
	
Preface
You	are	about	to	read	a	book	that	bears	the	title	
How	To	Clear	the	Negative	Ego
.
The	preface	for	this	book,	however,	is	of	a	genuinely	unique	nature.
This	particular	book	is	geared	to	helped	you,	my	beloved	readers,	to	learn	to
understand	the	nature	of	“the	Negative	Ego”	itself,	and	by	the	understanding
thereof,	to	learn	how	to	replace	thinking	and	processing	life	from	it’s
	point	of
view	to	that	of	God’s	Point	of	View!	The	“Negative	Ego”	‘sees	through	a	glass
darkly’,	processing	both	the	inner	and	outer	world	through	a	separate,	lower-self
centered,	fear-based	and	isolated	lens.	It	“sees”	through	a	Godless	mind,	which
by	it’s	very	nature	anchors	itself	in	separation,	manipulation,	greed,	and
selfishness.
Understanding	how	the	Negative	Ego	functions,	one	can
	then	make	use	of	the
God-given	quality	of	free	will,	and	doing	so,	choose	to	see	the	world	through	the
polar	opposite	of	the	negative	ego,	which	is	that	of	the	Higher	Self,	and/or
Monadic	Realm.	The	nature	of	the	Higher	Self/Monad/Mighty	I	Am	Presence,	is
the	nature	of	God	or	the	Christ/Buddha/Spiritual	Mind,	which	both	“sees”	and
processes	the	inner	and	outer	world	through	the	Lens	of	Pure	Love,
	Unity	and
Oneness!	The	Christ/Buddha/Spiritual	or	God	Mind	is	“the	mind	in	you	which
was	in	Christ	Jesus.”	It	is,	therefore,	“At	One	With	The	Father/Mother	God	Who
Art	In	Heaven,”	and	is,	in	the	ultimate	sense,	the	only	“True	Seeing,”	for	it	“sees
by	the	nature	of	that	which	in	reality	is	our	“Essential	Self”!!!	It	is	the	mind	that
is	in	all	Saints	and	Sages,	from	all	religions	and	spiritual	paths
	that	have
achieved	liberation.
For	this	very	reason,	the	Masters	wish	me	to	make	clear	at	the	outset	of	your
venture	through	this	book,	to	Be	Vigilantly	On	Guard	That	You	“Do	Not”
Pursue	The	Study	of	It	From	The	Point	of	View	of	The	Negative	Ego!	I	realize
that	this	is	quite	a	request,	for	as	you	have	not	yet	begun	to	read	the	book.	I	am
told	to	ask	you	to	read	it	from	the	point	of	view
	of	God	Awareness	and	the
Christ/Buddha/Spiritual	Mind	and	not	that	of	the	Negative	Ego!
The	question	then	arises,	how	to	do	this.	The	answer	is	surprisingly	simple.
All	you	need	to	do,	beloved	readers,	is	to	let	go	of	the	idea	that	you	need	to	hold
onto	any	judgments	of	Self,	others,	or	the	material	contained	herein,	and	to	link
up	with	your	own	Divine	I	Am	Presence	or	Higher	Self	to	whatever
	degree	you
are	able.	This	does	not	mean	that	you	“blindly	believe”	every	word	that	you
read,	for	no	Advanced	Initiate	or	Master	would	ask	another	to	throw	away	their
faculty	of	“discrimination.”	It	does	mean,	however,	that	you	set	the	Intent	to	read
this	material	from	within	your	own	Christ/Buddha/Spiritual	Consciousness,
letting	the	intuitive	faculty	of	the	Highest	within	you	discern	the	“true”
	from	the
“not	true.”
Following	this	simple	process,	I	am	sure	that	you	will	then	understand	that	it	is
the	Negative	Ego	Itself	which	is	the	false	and	separate	“lens”	and	that	it	is	the
Christ/Buddha/Spiritual	Mind	that	“sees	things	
as	they	are
.”	This	book	is
designed	to	bring	you	into	the	full	understanding	of	how	the	faulty	belief	system
with	which	we	may	at	any	time	view	the	world	keeps
	us	in	a	state	of	isolation,
separateness,	fear,	doubt,	greed,	bondage,	bewilderment	and	ultimately	“pain.”
The	pain	I	speak	of	here	is	the	pain	of	separation,	or	more	aptly	put,	“the	false
belief	”	that	we	are	separate	and	alone.
The	goal	of	this	book	is	to	help	you	lift	yourself	out	of	this	miasma	of	faulty
thinking,	into	that	of	the	realm	of	“the	Divine	Thinker,”	who	knows	themselves
to
	be	the	Higher	Self,	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness,	God,	“One	With	The	One.”
All	that	I	ask,	therefore,	is	that	you	do	the	very	best	that	you	are	able	at	any
given	point	to	keep	yourself	“hooked	up”	to	the	Christ	Principle,	the	Spiritual
Mind,	the	Ultimate	Truth	of	Unity	and	Oneness,	and	to	venture	forward	in	the
study	of	this	material	with	“The	Highest	of	Your	God-Self	Ever	In	the	Fore	of
Your	Consciousness.”
In	essence,	what	I	am	saying	or	asking	you	to	do	is	to	read	this	material	As	the
Christ	or	Buddha,	and	not	as	the	isolated	separate	self,	which	is	in	its	isolation
the	“Negative	Ego.”	Therefore,	call	upon	your	Higher	Self	and	Monad,	center
your	Mind	within	the	Christ/Buddha	Mind,	and	share	with	me	the	journey	of
purification,	cleansing,	balancing,	harmonizing	and	synthesizing	all	that	still
needs	further	purification,	cleansing	and	clarity	in	order	to	be	the	Full	and	Total
Expression	of	the	Christed	God	Being	Which	You	and	All	of	Us	Ultimately	Are!
The	Negative	Ego,	caught	in	the	delusion	of	needing	to	feel	superior	or
inferior,	will	tell	you	that	you	mastered	this	material	in	the	“Spring	of	’72.”
Alternatively,	it	will	tell	you	that	you	can’t	allow	yourself	to	admit	a	mistake,
	for
that	makes	you	inferior	which,	of	course,	is	delusion	also.	The	Negative	Ego	will
also	tell	you	that	it	is	more	interested	in	other	celestial	and	esoteric	matters
dealing	with	the	Ascended	Masters	and	such	a	book	is	not	necessary	for	you	to
read.	I	am	here	to	tell	you	myself	and	on	behalf	of	the	inner	plane	Ascended
Masters	of	the	Spiritual	Hierarchy,	that	there	is	no	subject	on	planet	Earth
	in
dealing	with	your	spiritual	life	more	important	than	this.	The	transcendence	of
Negative	Ego	is	the	core	foundation	of	Ascension	and	all	spiritual	development
no	matter	what	spiritual	path	you	are	on.
I	conclude	this	preface	with	the	famous	quote	from	His	Holiness,	the	Lord	Sai
Baba,	defining	God	in	the	following	statement:	“God	equals	man	minus	ego.”
You	may	be	a	seventh	degree	initiate
	and	may	be	holding	98%	light	quotient,
however,	until	the	Negative	Ego	is	transcended	and	the	Christ/Buddha/Spiritual
consciousness	replaces	the	deluded	and	illusionary	thought	system,	God	has	not
yet	been	realized!
	
Introduction
The	conception	of	this	book	came	about	in	a	very	interesting	manner.	About	four
months	ago	during	a	very	accelerated	spiritual	period	in	our	collective	growth
cycle,	my	friend	had	a	dream	that	I	came	to	her,	entered	her	office	and	firmly
placed	two	books	on	her	desk	with	a	loud	thump.	She	was	sitting	at	her	desk	in
the	dream,	and	I	said	to	her	that	if	we	really	want	to	make	spiritual
	progress,	this
is	what	we	need	to	focus	on.	My	friend	looked	down	at	the	books	and	they	read
“How	to	Clear	the	Negative	Ego	Archetypes.”
My	friend	shared	the	dream	with	me	the	next	morning.	I	was	deeply	moved
for	this	is	a	subject	I	am	very	impassioned	about	as	can	be	witnessed	by	reading
my	second	book	
Soul	Psychology:	Keys	to	
A
scension.	
In	my	personal	opinion,
the	issue	of	releasing	the
	negative	ego	is	the	single	most	important	spiritual
practice	bar	none.	This	is	why	I	so	often	quote	Sai	Baba	who	says	the	definition
of	God	is,	“God	equals	man	minus	ego.”
In	our	next	collective	meditation,	I	explored	this	dream.	We	were	told	that
these	were	books	that	I	(Joshua)	had	written	on	the	inner	plane,	and	the	Masters
wanted	me	to	bring	them	forth	into	material	reality.	I	was	very
	excited	about	this
prospect,	however	Wesak	1995	was	three	weeks	away,	and	I	was	extremely
busy.	So	I	put	the	manifestation	of	this	idea	on	the	shelf	and	let	it	incubate.
The	importance	of	this	particular	book	cannot	be	over-estimated.	One	of	the
key	insights	in	the	ascension	process	that	has	deeply	startled	me	is	the	degree	to
which	the	negative	ego	is	still	in	control	of	lightworkers,	although
	they	have
taken	initiations	as	high	as	the	fifth,	sixth	and	seventh	degree.	This	is	obviously
not	true	of	all	lightworkers,	but	is	true	of	a	great	many.	In	my	opinion,	the
inability	to	master	and	clear	the	negative	ego	is	the	number	one	weak	area	of
lightworkers	generally.	This	book	was	inspired	to	remedy	and	help	in	this
regard!
Sanat	Kumara	recently	told	me	that	one	of	the	dangers	of	the
	period	of	history
that	we	live	in	is	that	lightworkers	are	advancing	spiritually	at	an	awesome	rate
of	speed;	however	their	mental,	emotional	and	physical	selves	are	not	keeping
pace.
The	key	insight	here	is	that	ascension,	and	the	passing	of	the	seven	levels	of
initiation	has	more	to	do	with	spiritual	development	and	light	quotient	increase
than	it	does	with	mental,	emotional	or	psychological
	development.	I	personally
was	shocked	to	find	this	out.	I	began	meeting	extremely	high	level	initiates,
some	who	had	completed	their	seven	levels	of	initiation,	who	were	egomaniacs,
emotional	victims,	and	extremely	damaged	psychologically.
As	more	and	more	examples	of	this	began	to	confront	me,	we	finally
approached	the	Masters	about	this.	In	our	mediations,	we	were	told	that	in	the
past
	initiates	were	stuck	at	the	fifth	initiation	until	the	psychological	levels	were
cleaned	up.	In	this	speeded	up	period	of	Earth’s	history,	however,	beginning
really	in	and	around	1990,	this	was	changed	to	the	seventh	initiation.
Now,	I	am	personally	pleased	that	lightworkers	are	being	allowed	to	achieve
their	ascension	and	break	the	wheel	of	reincarnation	more	easily.	However,	there
must
	be	a	point	of	“accountability.”	I	was	firmly	told	that	no	lightworker	would
be	allowed	to	fully	complete	their	seven	levels	of	initiation	or	50	chakra
anchoring,	or	movement	to	solar,	galactic,	and	universal	levels	unless	this	level
is	cleaned	up.	They	may	be	able	to	get	to	the	seventh	sublevel	of	the	seventh
initiation,	but	their	evolution	will	be	stopped	in	its	tracks	until	the	three	minds
and
	the	four	bodies	are	balanced,	the	negative	ego	is	gotten	under	control,	and
the	three-fold	personality	(mind,	emotions,	and	body)	are	mastered.
You	only	need	to	master	51%	of	your	karma	to	pass	the	initiations	at	the
seventh	initiation,	however,	there	is	a	ring	pass	not,	to	further	evolution.	The
Masters	and	the	Powers	That	Be	will	hold	you	at	that	level	no	matter	how	much
ascension	activation
	work,	light	quotient	building	and	meditation	you	do	if	your
emotional	body,	negative	ego,	and	inner	child,	are	not	dealt	with	properly.	The
buck	stops	here.
This	book	is	written	to	help	lightworkers	master	their	negative	ego	and
“Dweller	on	the	Threshold,”	and	to	clear	the	fields	of	all	the	negative	ego
manifestations	such	as	alien	implants,	negative	elementals,	parasites,	negative
imprints,
	astral	entities,	psychological	disturbance,	physical	disease,	negative
ego	archetypes,	and	fear-based	programming,	to	name	a	few.	This	book,	in	truth,
may	be	one	of	the	most	important	books	you	ever	read.	The	negative	ego	and
how	to	clear	it	is	definitely	one	of	the	least	understood	aspects	of	the	spiritual
path	and	yet	one	of	the	most	important.	I	also	recommend	reading	this	book	in
conjunction
	with	my	book	on	
Soul	Psychology
.	
Soul	Psychology	
lays	the	entire
foundation	for	all	I	will	be	speaking	of	in	this	book.
So	what	that	you	achieve	ascension	and	complete	your	initiations	if	you	are	an
egomaniac,	feeling	inferior	all	the	time,	an	emotional	victim,	don’t	have	inner
peace,	live	in	poverty,	fight	with	your	mate	all	the	time,	or	are	chronically
physically	ill.	This	is	not	meant
	as	a	judgment,	but	rather	very	directly	bringing
the	point	home	that	just	because	you	are	ascended	or	at	a	very	high	level	of
initiation	doesn’t	mean	that	this	psychological	level	is	mastered.
This	very	easy-to-read	and	practical	book	has	been	channeled	forth	to	help	in
this	regard.	One	of	the	biggest	reasons	that	lightworkers	are	often	weak	in	this
area	is	not	really	their	fault:	it	is
	because	of	lack	of	education.	There	are	not	that
many	spiritual	teachers,	healers,	psychologists,	ministers,	marriage,	family,	and
child	counselors,	psychiatrists,	or	social	workers	that	truly	understand	what	it
means	to	transcend	negative	ego	consciousness	in	all	its	ramifications.	It	is	my
hope	that	this	book	will	be	the	answer	to	many	people’s	heart-felt	prayers.
It	has	been	very	healing
	for	me	personally	to	write	this	book.	What	is	the
saying?	“You	teach	what	you	want	to	learn.”	Even	Masters	such	as	Sanat
Kumara	and	Vywamus	still	have	a	little	bit	of	negative	ego	left.	It	is	probably
unrealistic	to	get	rid	of	it	completely,	but	the	goal	is	to	realize	Christ
Consciousness	as	much	as	humanly	possible	at	this	level	of	existence.	On	this
note,	we	will	begin	our	in-depth	discussion!
1
What	is	the	Negative	Ego	and	How	to	Clear	It
	
Before	a	person	can	clear	the	negative	ego,	they	must	know	what	the	negative
ego	is.	This	may	seem	elementary	to	some;	however,	I	assure	you	to	the	vast
majority	of	humanity,	and	even	lightworkers,	it	isn’t.	As	I	have	already	stated	in
my	introduction,	it	is	probably	the	least	understood	lesson	of	the	entire	spiritual
path.	Since	I	have
	written	about	this	extensively	in	my	book	
Soul	Psychology
,	I
am	going	to	be	brief	here	and	get	right	to	the	point.
Everyone	has	an	ego	or	personality	which	the	soul	and	spirit	work	through
which	is	good.	The	key	idea	though	is	that	people	want	to	ideally	spiritualize
their	ego	and	not	have	a	negative	ego.	The	key	to	the	mastering	of	this	lesson	is
to	understand	that	there	are	two	ways	of
	thinking	in	the	world	and	only	two.	This
might	be	stated	that	there	are	two	distinct	philosophies	of	life	that	all	of
humanity	fit	into	regardless	of	their	spiritual	beliefs	or	lack	there	of.	Every
person	in	God’s	infinite	universe	thinks	with	their	spiritual,	soul,	or	Christ	mind
or	they	think	with	the	negative	ego	mind.
In	the	beginning,	prior	to	creation	and	just	after	creation,	there
	was	no
negative	ego	mind.	God	didn’t	create	the	negative	ego	mind,	humanity	did.	It
developed	as	a	result	of	God’s	sons	and	daughters	coming	into	matter	and
physical	human	bodies	and	“overidentifying”	with	them.	In	that	moment	when
the	sons	and	daughters	of	God	thought	they	were	a	physical	body	rather	than	a
son	and	daughter	of	God	just	inhabiting	and	visiting	a	physical	body	is	when
negative	ego
	developed.
This	is	referenced	in	the	Bible	as	the	story	of	Adam	and	Eve	and	the	eating	of
the	forbidden	fruit	and	the	serpent	or	snake	which	was	the	symbol	of	the
negative	ego	mind	or	lower	self.	These	two	philosophies	could	be	called	the
philosophies	of	the	lower	self	and	the	Higher	Self.	If	you	listen	to	the	lower	self,
you	live	a	“low	life	existence”.	If	you	listen	to	the	philosophy	of
	the	Higher	Self,
Holy	Spirit,	the	soul,	the	monad,	the	I	Am,	or	the	Christ	mind,	you	live	a	high
life	existence.	To	realize	God	you	must	remove	your	attention	from	the	lower-
self	interpretations	and	perceptions	of	life,	and	instead	keep	interpreting	and
perceiving	life	from	the	Higher	Self.
Since	our	thoughts	create	our	reality,	which	philosophy	you	choose	will
determine	what	you	see.	In
	truth,	you	don’t	see	with	your	eyes,	you	see	with
your	mind.	This	is	why	Sai	Baba	has	said	that	“Your	mind	creates	bondage,	or
your	mind	creates	liberation.”	You	will	have	negative	emotions	if	you	think	with
your	negative	ego	mind.	You	will	have	positive	emotions	if	you	think	with	your
Spiritual	Mind.	Your	thoughts	create	your	feelings,	emotions,	behavior,	and
physical	health	or	lack	thereof.	Psychological
	health	is	nothing	more	than
maintaining	a	good	mental	diet.	As	the	Master	Jesus	said	in	
A	Course	in
Miracles
,	the	key	is	to	deny	any	thought	that	is	not	of	God	to	enter	your	mind.
The	key	is	to	be	vigilant	for	God	and	His	Kingdom	at	all	times	and	never	to	go
on	automatic	pilot.
Whenever	a	negative	ego	thought	tries	to	enter	your	mind	just	deny	it	entrance
and	push	it	out.	Switch	your	mind
	like	a	channel	changer	to	a	positive	and/or
more	spiritual	thought.	This	is	the	concept	of	denial	and	affirmation.	It	is
occurring	literally	a	million	times	a	day.	You	are	the	executive	director	of	your
personality	and	it	is	your	choice.	God	and	the	Ascended	Masters	will	not	do	this
for	you	no	matter	how	much	you	ask.	This	is	your	job.	By	denying	the	negative
thoughts	and	keeping	your	mind	steady
	in	the	Light	at	all	times,	the	negative
thoughts	will	die	from	lack	energy	and	a	new	positive	habit	will	be	formed	in
your	subconscious	mind.	Moreover,	it	will	become	easy	to	be	positive.
It	is	only	hard	in	the	beginning,	although	vigilance	must	always	be	retained
regardless	of	your	level	of	development.	The	essence	of	negative	ego	is	fear,
separation,	and	self-centeredness.	The	funny	thing
	is	that	the	negative	ego,	in
truth,	doesn’t	really	exist.	Jesus	said	in	
A	Course	in	Miracles	
“the	fall	never
really	happened,	we	just	think	it	did”!	In	other	words	we	have	all	always	been
one	with	God	and	have	always	been	the	Christ,	or	Sons	and	Daughters	of	God.
However,	if	we	give	into	negative	ego	thinking	in	our	own	minds,	we	will	live	in
that	state	of	consciousness	although,	in	truth,	it
	is	not	true.
This	is	much	like	living	in	a	negative	hypnosis,	or	like	dreaming.	When	we
dream	at	night	we	really	believe	and	feel	that	the	dream	is	real.	When	we	wake
up	in	the	morning	from	a	nightmare	we	are	so	relieved	and	say	to	ourselves,	“I
am	so	glad	that	was	just	a	dream.”	This	is	what	I	am	trying	to	say	to	you	now
about	your	normal	waking	life.	You	have	been	dreaming	with	your	eyes
	open,
living	your	conscious	life.	You	are	living	in	a	dream	of	the	negative	ego’s
interpretation	of	life,	rather	than	interpreting	life	from	your	Christ	Mind.
It	is	much	like	the	glass	of	water:	is	it	half	empty	or	half	full.	This	simple
analogy	applies	to	every	moment	of	life!	There	is	a	way	of	interpreting	life	that
will	bring	you	inner	peace,	calmness,	joy,	happiness,	unconditional	love,
evenmindedness,	equanimity	all	the	time	regardless	of	what	is	going	on	outside
of	self.	There	is	another	way	of	interpreting	life	that	will	make	you	angry,	upset,
irritable,	impatient,	moody,	emotional,	unstable,	manic-depressive,	depressed,
and	sad!	This	has	absolutely	nothing	to	do	with	what	is	going	on	outside	of
yourself.	It	has	everything	to	do	with	how	you	are	interpreting	life.
One
	example	of	this	that	the	Masters	want	me	to	discuss	on	this	point	of	how
to	flow	with	the	universe	instead	of	fighting	it,	is	the	“Blessing	Method.”	The
Holy	Spirit	and	the	Masters	would	have	us	bless	and	give	thanks	for	everything
that	happens	in	our	lives.	Kind	of	like	the	saying	in	the	Bible,	“Not	my	will	but
thine”	and	thank	you	for	the	lesson.
The	negative	ego	does	not	interpret	things
	as	teachings,	lessons,	challenges,	or
gifts;	it	curses	and	gets	angry	when	its	attachments	and/or	expectations	are	not
met.	The	Christ	Mind	only	having	preferences,	rather	than	attachments,	is	happy
either	way	for	its	inner	peace	is	a	state	of	mind	rather	than	attached	to	something
out	side	of	Self.	Bless	everything	that	comes	into	your	life	and	welcome
adversity	as	Sai	Baba	has	said,	for	everything
	that	comes	into	your	area	of
influence	happens	for	a	reason	and	is	God	teaching	you	something	you	need	to
learn.	This	is	just	one	example	of	what	I	am	speaking	of	here	in	terms	of	the	two
distinct	philosophies	of	life.
My	book	
Soul	Psychology	
is	a	master	thesis	explaining	these	two	distinct	ways
of	thinking	so	I	am	not	going	to	repeat	myself	here.	If	you	have	not	read	the
book	do	get	it
	for	I	have	explained	this	process	in	one	of	the	most
comprehensive	yet	easy-to-read	forms	that	has	ever	been	put	forth	in	written
form.	It	is	kind	of	like	
A	Course	In	Miracles	
made	easy-to-understand.
It	is	essential	to	understand	that	every	person	on	planet	Earth	only	has	one	real
problem	and	that	is	the	negative	ego.	The	negative	ego	is	the	cause	of	all
negative	emotions,	all	negative
	thoughts,	all	negative	behaviors,	all	physical
diseases,	all	psychological	diseases,	all	relationship	problems,	poverty
consciousness	or	lack	of	money.	In	essence,	the	negative	ego	is	blocking	you
from	God-realization.	Sai	Baba	says,	“God	is	hidden	by	the	mountain	range	of
ego”!	It	is	the	negative	ego	in	all	its	infantile	variations	and	manifestations	that
leaves	us	open	to	negative	implants,	negative
	elementals,	parasites,	negative
imprints,	etheric	damage,	etheric	mucous,	astral	entities,	core	fear,	gray	fields,
and	negative	archetypes.	In	essence,	the	negative	ego	could	be	defined	as
“imbalance”.
Anytime	we	are	getting	out	of	balance;	it	is	the	negative	ego	that	is	causing	it.
This	comes	down	to	which	voice	you	are	listening	to.	Are	you	listening	to	the
voice	of	separation,	or	the
	voice	of	oneness?	Are	you	listening	to	the	voice	of
fear	or	the	voice	of	perfect	love?	Are	you	listening	to	the	voice	of	self-centered-
ness,	or	group	consciousness?	As	
A	Course	in	Miracles	
says,	“Choose	once
again.”
Every	moment	of	our	lives	we	are	choosing	either	God	or	ego.	I	challenge	you
to	make	a	pact	and	vow	with	yourself	and	God	to	choose	only	God	and	the	Holy
Spirit	no	matter	what,
	from	this	day	forward.	This	vow	is	one	I	made
approximately	seven	or	eight	years	ago	and	is	the	number	one	reason	I	have
made	the	progress	I	have	made	in	my	life.	I	closed	the	door	on	the	negative	ego
and	lower	self	for	God,	and	made	a	choice	I	would	never	“consciously”	choose
this	path	again.	Perfection	is	not	ever	making	a	mistake,	but	rather	never	making
a	conscious	mistake.	I	am	confronting
	you	now	with	the	ultimate	existential
choice	of	existence.	Do	you	want	God	or	do	you	want	your	ego,	which	is	a	life
of	overidentification	with	matter?
As	Yogananda	said,	if	you	want	God	you	must	want	Him	like	a	drowning	man
wants	air.	You	will	not	find	God	being	indecisive	or	sitting	on	the	fence.	Jesus
said	the	whole	commandment	can	be	summed	up	as,	“Love	the	Lord	thy	God
with	all	thy	heart
	and	soul	and	mind	and	might,	and	love	thy	neighbor	as	you
love	yourself.”	We	each,	in	truth,	are	not	a	physical	body	but	the	“Eternal	Self
”living	in	a	physical	body.
We	all	share	the	same	identity	as	the	Eternal	Self.	Quoting	from	
A	Course	in
Miracles,	
“Nothing	real	can	be	threatened,	nothing	unreal	exists.	Herein	lies	the
peace	of	God”.	In	India	they	call	this	vow	the	“vow	of	the	Bramacharya,”
	or	the
“Vow	of	Purity.”	Gandhi	took	it	and	it	was	the	key	to	his	success.	The	taking	of
this	vow	will	move	you	forward	faster	than	all	the	ascension	activations	in	all
my	books.	This	is	the	real	key	to	Self-realization	and	God-realization.
Do	you	see	my	point	now?	Lightworkers	have	been	focusing	on	the	spiritual
level	and	making	great	progress	but	if	this	core	psychological	level	is	not
mastered,	there	is	a	cancer.	This	can	be	healed	very	quickly	for	all	I	am	really
discussing	here	is	the	science	of	“attitudinal	healing.”	Just	because	you	have
achieved	your	ascension	or	taken	your	seventh	initiation	and	broken	the	wheel	of
reincarnation	doesn’t	mean	your	work	is	done	and	you	are	some	God-realized
Master.
Remember	there	are	352	levels	of	initiation	to	return	to	Source	at
	the	highest
cosmic	level	and	the	seventh	initiation	although	high	for	our	planet	is	minuscule
in	the	whole	scheme	of	things.	It	is	when	you	get	to	this	level	the	real	work
begins.	If	you	thought	you	were	going	on	vacation	after	reaching	this	goal,	think
again.	It	is	just	the	opposite.
The	Masters	have	given	much,	and	much	is	now	expected.	The	expectation	is
to,	number	one;	act	like	God	or
	act	like	Christ	at	all	times	in	all	situations	in	all
contacts	with	people.	Secondly,	the	expectation	is	planetary	world	service.	The
form	it	takes	is	up	to	you	but	this	is	a	requirement	to	move	forward.	You	cannot
move	forward	without	helping	your	brothers	and	sisters	in	some	capacity.	In
truth,	this	is	the	only	reason	you	are	here.
There	are	corollary	lessons	that	are	also	required	that
	emanate	out	from	this
initial	lesson	of	denying	the	negative	ego	and	choosing	the	Christ
Consciousness.	The	main	corollary	lessons	are:	learning	to	balance	the	four
bodies	(physical,	emotional,	mental	and	spiritual),	learning	to	integrate	the	three
minds,	(conscious,	subconscious	and	superconscious),	learning	to	properly
parent	the	inner	child,	developing	self	love	and	self	worth,	learning	to	own
	your
personal	power	at	all	times,	learning	to	reprogram	the	subconscious	mind,	proper
control	of	sexual	energy,	psychic	self	defense,	right	human	relationships,	proper
care	of	the	physical	vehicle,	and	mastery	of	desire	body.
Imbalances	in	any	of	these	areas	are,	of	course,	because	the	negative	ego
programming	is	still	present.	Much	of	these	areas	I	have	focused	on	in	my	S
oul
Psychology	
book	so	I	will	not	repeat	myself	here.	My	friend,	however,	had	a
very	good	metaphor	for	balancing	the	four	bodies,	which	she	received	from	the
Masters.	They	suggested	to	look	at	the	four-body	system	as	four	tubes	filled	with
water.	The	water	actually	is	energy,	but	it	is	easier	to	understand	what	happens	if
you	see	it	as	water.	Many	Lightworkers	are	top	heavy.	They	are	filtering	a	great
deal	of	their
	water	into	the	spiritual	tube,	which	leaves	the	mental,	emotional	and
physical	tubes	depleted.	This	creates	imbalances,	leakages,	and	a	whole	host	of
problems.
The	same	can	be	seen	in	the	chakras.	When	certain	chakras	are
overemphasized,	causing	over-activity	in	some	and	under-activity	in	others,	this
effects	the	glandular	system	and	causes	a	whole	other	manifestation	of	lessons
which	I
	will	explore	in	great	detail	later	in	this	book.	The	idea	here	is	to	keep	the
water	balanced	in	all	four	tubes.	Other	Lightworkers	may	be	more	mental,	others
too	feeling,	and	emotional,	some	even	too	fixated	on	the	physical	body.	The	key
lesson	is	always	balance	and	moderation	in	all	things.
All	these	issues	must	be	addressed	and	mastered	to	truly	achieve	Self-
realization,	and	complete	your
	ascension	fully.	It	is	kind	of	like	you	can	install
and	activate	your	seven	levels	of	initiation	prior	to	really	mastering	this
psychological	level;	however,	you	will	not	fully	“actualize”	your	ascension	until
you	master	this	area	also.	This	will	allow	you	to	become	a	truly	Self-realized
being	on	all	levels.
The	rest	of	this	book	will	be	dealing	with	some	of	the	more	esoteric	and	more
refined
	levels	of	this	process	beyond	just	the	psychological	level	such	as	how	to
clear	the	negative	ego	archetypes,	implants,	elementals,	parasites,	negative
imprints,	astral	entities,	psychological	diseases,	and	physical	diseases	that	can
develop	when	the	negative	ego	is	not	mastered,	cleared	and	transcended.
One	more	word	that	describes	the	negative	ego	could	be	the	word	“duality.”	In
transcending
	negative	ego	in	its	fullest	extent,	one	has	learned	to	transcend	the
world	of	duality.	Another	reason	this	is	important	is	that	as	one	moves	into	their
ascension	and	seven	levels	of	initiation	one	begins	clearing	not	only	one’s	own
karmic	stuff	but	also	the	planetary	mass	karma,	clearing	on	some	level	the	karma
from	all	ones	soul	extensions	from	one’s	oversoul,	and	the	144	soul	extensions
from
	one’s	monad.	As	one	continues	to	evolve	this	continues	to	the	group	soul
level,	the	group	monadic	level,	and	eventually	to	clearing	on	the	solar,	galactic,
and	universal	levels.	If	you	haven’t	done	it	completely	in	your	Self,	how	can	you
possibly	consider	doing	it	on	these	larger	more	expansive	levels?	In	this	most
accelerated	period	in	Earth’s	history,	we	are	now	receiving	a	more	expanded	and
full	understanding	of	what	the	ascension	process	is	really	about.	I	think	you	will
agree	it	is	all	very	exciting!
How	Do	You	Know	When	You	Are	Out	Of	Balance	And	In	Balance?
On	the	physical	level	being	out	of	balance	may	manifest	as	fatigue,	on	the
emotional	level	as	mood	swings,	or	negative	emotions,	on	the	mental	level	as
negative	thinking.	Improper	diet	may	be	another	example	on
	the	physical	level.
On	the	spiritual	level,	it	may	be	meditating	too	much	or	too	little.	A	balanced
person	is	a	calm	person,	who	has	inner	peace.	A	balanced	person	has	detachment
but	is	also	very	responsive	to	self,	other	people,	and	life.	Balancing	the	four
bodies	is	not	a	point	of	stillness	or	non-movement	but	more	like	a	gentle	teeter-
totter	or	like	driving	a	car	where	you	are	constantly	making
	subtle	adjustments.
The	balanced	person	can	feel	themselves	going	out	of	that	subtle	appropriate
range	and	will	then	be	vigilant	and	make	the	appropriate	correction,	within	an
individual	body	or	within	the	entire	organism.
In	a	sense,	we	live	within	a	group	consciousness	within	our	own	being.	We
must	strike	a	balance	between	our	physical	body,	emotional	body,	mental	body,
spiritual	body,
	inner	child,	inner	parent,	subconscious	mind,	conscious	mind,
super	conscious	mind,	our	seven	major	chakras,	our	Christ	Mind	over	the
negative	ego	mind,	our	soul,	our	monad	and	our	personality.	Each	part	has	a
voice	and	a	place,	except	for	the	negative	ego	in	the	ideal	state,	which	allows	for
the	full	merger	with	the	soul	and	monad.	All	these	other	parts	form	a	vast
communication	system	within	us
	that	we	must	stay	attuned	to,	and	honor.	When
we	don’t,	imbalance	occurs	which	then	can	lead	to	a	whole	host	of	other
problems,	like	dominoes	falling.
One	must	be	right	with	self,	before	one	can	be	right	with	God	and	right	with
other	people.	Each	of	us	as	the	conscious	mind	and/or	president	must	be	like	an
orchestra	leader	bringing	them	all	together	in	balance	like	a	beautiful	symphony,
which	is	called	“God	realization,”	every	day.	It	is	a	good	idea	to	do	a	super	quick
inventory	of	all	these	parts	to	make	sure	everybody	is	happy.	All	these	parts
really	want	is	to	be	part	of	the	team.	Sometimes	they	can	get	a	little	greedy	and	it
is	the	job	of	the	orchestra	leader,	conscious	mind,	or	inner	parent	to	demonstrate
tough	love	and	be	a	strong	loving	president,	so	to	speak,	and	to	let	all
	these	parts
know	who	is	in	charge.
Even	though	the	president	or	conscious	mind	is	in	charge,	the	president	and
whole	team	is	totally	subservient	to	the	dictates	of	the	soul	and	Mighty	I	Am
Presence.	In	Eastern	religion,	this	is	called	the	“satvic	personality”	as	opposed	to
the	tamasic	or	rajasic	(read	about	this	in	
Hidden	Mysteries	
in	the	chapter	on	the
teachings	of	the	Bhagavad-Gita).	It
	is	being	in	tune	with	the	rhythm	of	the	soul.
So,	I	say	to	you	now	my	brothers	and	sisters,	are	you	willing	in	this	moment	to
make	a	commitment	to	maintaining	this	subtle	synergistic	balance	in	service	of
the	soul	and	monad	for	the	purpose	of	demonstrating	God-realization	on	Earth?
This	is	the	challenge	and	the	“Mantle	of	the	Christ”,	which	God	wishes	us	all	to
put	on	in	this	moment,	and	to	demonstrate
	as	a	tribute	of	our	love	and	devotion
to	Him	on	Earth.	Are	you	willing	to	dedicate	your	life	to	such	a	noble	purpose?
This	is	the	path	of	all	religions,	all	mystery	schools,	and	all	spiritual	traditions.
God	is	awaiting	your	answer!
Before	such	things	as	levitation,	teleportation,	and	materialization	can	even	be
approached	or	broached	this	other	aspect	must	be	100%	committed	to	and
demonstrated
	in	your	daily	life.	This	has	been	called	in	some	circles	“practicing
the	Presence	of	God”	in	our	daily	life.	Can	there	be	a	more	noble	purpose	for	us
all?	Is	there	anything	else	in	the	infinite	universe	we	should	be	focusing	our
energies	upon?	As	the	Master	Jesus	said,	“Be	ye	faithful	unto	death,	and	I	will
give	thee	a	crown	of	life”!
2
Ascension	Psychology	
	
Ascension	Psychology	is	a	revolutionary	new	understanding	in	the	field	of	the
psychological	movement.	It	has	a	number	of	premises	that	are	completely	new
and	cutting	edge	in	relationship	to	the	traditional	practice	of	psychology	in	the
past.	The	first	basic	premise	is	that	in	ascension	psychology	it	is	understood	that
one’s	thoughts	create	their	reality.	Our
	thoughts	create	our	feelings,	emotions,
behavior,	and	what	we	attract,	magnetize,	and/or	repel	in	our	lives.	The	second
key	understanding	in	ascension	psychology	is	that	there	are	two	ways	of	thinking
in	the	world	and	only	two.	Every	person	in	the	world	thinks	with	their	Spiritual
Mind,	Positive	Mind,	Higher	Self	Mind,	Christ	Consciousness,	Buddha
Consciousness,	and/or	God	Consciousness,	or	each	person
	in	the	world	thinks
with	their	negative	ego	mind,	lower	self	mind,	fear	based	mind,	separative	mind,
self-centered	mind,	and/or	personality-level	mind.	People	in	the	world	don’t	just
see	with	their	eyes;	we	see	also	with	our	mind.	In	every	situation	in	life,	one	can
interpret	the	world	and	any	situation	through	one	of	these	two	opposing
attitudes,	interpretations,	and	philosophies.	By	how	you
	interpret	each	situation
will	govern	how	you	feel.	The	spiritual	interpretation	of	life	always	looks	at
everything	as	a	lesson	and	a	spiritual	test	to	remain	in	unconditional	love	and
oneness	with	Self,	God,	and	others.	Interpreting	life	from	the	spiritual	mind	will
only	create	loving,	positive,	and	harmonious	feeling	and	emotions.	Interpreting
the	same	situation	from	the	negative	ego	or	lower	self
	mind	will	create
conditional	love,	judgment,	fear,	separation,	anger,	impatience,	attack,	upset,
sadness,	and	depression.	It	is	not	outside	things	that	create	these	emotions	as
some	would	suggest	and	it	is	not	chemicals	in	the	body	that	create	these	feelings
and	emotions.	It	is	the	attitude	and	perspective	we	take	towards	life	in	all
situations	that	determine	this.	Every	person	in	life	is	a	master
	and	cause	of	their
reality	or	a	victim	and	an	effect.
To	achieve	God	realization	and	inner	peace	His	Holiness	in	India	the	Lord	Sai
Baba	has	summed	it	up	the	best	in	his	definition	of	God.	Sai	Baba	has	said	the
definition	of	God	is	“God	equals	man	minus	ego.”	This	is	a	revolutionary	new
concept	to	the	field	of	psychology.	It	is	the	key	to	achieving	God	realization,
inner	peace,	harmonizing
	relationships,	ending	war,	stopping	terrorism,	ending
gang	violence,	and	ultimately	curing	all	mental	and	physical	disease.	The	source
of	all	problems	stems	from	only	one	thing:	you	can	call	this	fear,	you	can	call	it
separation,	or	you	can	call	it	negative	ego	thinking.	It	is	all	the	same	thing.	Every
problem	in	life	will	find	its	initial	source	and	cause	in	this	place.
Ascension	psychology
	teaches	the	transcendence	of	negative	ego	thinking	and
the	consistent	on-going	thinking	and	feeling	of	your	spiritual	Christ/Buddha
attitude	and	perspective.	As	the	Bible	says,	“Let	this	mind	be	in	you	that	was	in
Christ	Jesus.”	One	could	also	say	“Let	this	mind	be	in	you	that	was	in	Lord
Buddha,	Lord	Krishna,	Rama,	Moses,	Mohammed	and	all	the	great	prophets	and
saints	from	our	religions	and
	great	mystery	schools.	What	you	choose	to	call	it
does	not	matter	and	what	religion	or	mystery	school	or	spiritual	path	you	choose
to	follow	does	not	matter	for	they	all	taught	and	teach	unconditional	love,
forgiveness,	nonjudgmentalness,	oneness,	positivity	and	faith.
Ascension	psychology	also	teaches	the	importance	of	balance	in	all	things.
Balancing	the	feminine	and	masculine	and/or	yin/yang
	aspects	of	self,	balancing
the	heavenly	and	earthly	aspects	of	self,	balancing	the	four	bodies	(physical,
emotional,	mental,	and	spiritual),	balancing	the	three-fold	flame	that	lives	within
each	person’s	heart	(love,	wisdom,	and	power),	and	also	the	importance	of
integrating	and	balancing	the	conscious,	subconscious,	and	superconscious
minds.
In	ascension	psychology	it	is	understood	that
	the	subconscious	mind	is	a	non-
reasoning	mind	that	is	the	storehouse	of	all	of	our	programming	which	also	has
certain	abilities	within	it.	Ascension	psychology	teaches	that	we	must	learn	to
master	the	subconscious	mind,	make	it	our	servant,	and	not	let	it	be	our	director.
We	must	be	our	own	computer	programmers	of	the	subconscious	mind	to	utilize
its	abilities.	Just	as	we	must	train	the	subconscious
	mind	to	be	subservient	to	our
conscious	minds,	the	conscious	mind	must	become	subservient	to	the
superconscious	mind	and/or	to	the	Mighty	I	AM	Presence	within.	It	is	through
this	combined	process	that	the	three	minds	learn	to	function	as	one	integrated
mind.
Ascension	psychology	also	teaches	the	importance	of	learning	to	properly
parent	the	inner	child	with	firmness	and	love.	When	we	parent
	our	inner	child	by
being	too	critical	or	spoiling	the	inner	child	acts	out	in	inappropriate	ways	and
often	becomes	the	director	of	people’s	lives	because	of	this	lack	of	training.	The
inner	child	becomes	either	filled	with	feelings	of	being	unloved	and	unworthy	or
acts	out	in	anger	and	rebelliousness.
In	Ascension	psychology,	it	is	understood	that	the	two	most	important
relationships	in
	a	person’s	life	are	the	relationship	to	self	and	relationship	to
God.	If	one	does	not	have	a	right	relationship	to	self,	all	other	relationships	in	a
person’s	life	will	be	out	of	harmony	and	balance.	This	even	includes	one’s
relationship	to	God.	When	we	do	not	have	a	right	relationship	with	self,	we
project	this	wrong	relationship	on	to	everything.	This	is	why	we	see	so	much
misunderstanding	in	many
	of	the	different	traditional	religions	and	false	prophets
and	cults	that	we	are	all	aware	of.
Ascension	psychology	teaches	that	there	are	four	levels	of	mastery	which	each
must	be	mastered	on	its	own	plane	of	existence.	Many	consciousness	seekers
seek	to	master	one	level	or	two	levels,	but	are	weak	in	the	others,	which	creates
imbalance.	The	four	levels	of	mastery	are	the	spiritual	level,
	the	psychological
level,	the	physical	body	level,	and	one’s	environmental	and	outer	life	level.
Many	people	in	the	spiritual	movement	are	highly	developed	spiritually	but
much	less	developed	psychologically.	Often	there	is	high	spiritual	development
but	this	does	not	translate	into	mastery	of	the	outer	world	and	manifestation	of
one’s	overall	vision	into	earthly	manifestation.	This	is	not	a	judgment,
	just	an
important	reminder	that	God	lives	in	all	dimensions	and	in	all	levels	and	all
levels	including	one’s	third-dimensional	reality	need	to	be	mastered,	loved,
sanctified,	and	manifested	in	God’s	Divine	Image	and	Divine	Plan.	This	is	why
it	is	not	enough,	in	truth,	just	to	achieve	one’s	ascension,	which	is	the
achievement	of	one’s	sixth	initiation.	It	is	essential	to	achieve	what	I	call
“Integrated
	Ascension.”	This	means	not	only	spiritual	mastery	but	also
psychological,	physical	and	earthly	mastery	as	well	in	service	of	God.	It	also
means	transcending	negative	ego,	fear-based	thinking	and	feeling	and	learning	to
demonstrate	Christ/Buddha	thinking	and	feeling	in	a	consistent	ongoing	manner.
Ascension	psychology	also	teaches	the	importance	of	stepping	forward	and
claiming	one’s	spiritual
	leadership	and	commitment	to	planetary	world	service	in
whatever	way,	manner,	and	puzzle	piece	that	feels	comfortable	and	harmonious
to	you.
If	one	does	not	learn	to	transcend	negative	ego	thinking	and	feeling	and
replace	it	with	Christ/Buddha	thinking	and	feeling	no	matter	what	level	of
initiation	a	person	is	at,	this	will	begin	to	corrupt	the	spiritual	work	that	one	is
doing.	The	psychological
	level	is	like	the	first	floor	of	a	two-story	house.	If	the
foundation	of	your	symbolic	house	is	not	built	properly	on	the	first	floor,	the
second	floor	or	the	spiritual	level	will	not	be	supported	and	may	ultimately
collapse.	Not	properly	addressing	the	psychological	level	will	cause	corruption
in	one’s	channelings	and	clairvoyance	and	inner	guidance	causing	them	to	be
filled	with	personal
	agendas,	selfish	motivations,	self	aggrandizement	and
glamour.	This	again	is	not	a	judgment,	just	a	keen	and	insightful	warning	from
the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters	as	to	the	importance	of	developing	a	flawless
character	on	the	psychological	level.	Without	this,	clear	channeling	and
clairvoyance	can	not	take	place.	There	is	no	exception	to	this	psychological	law.
A	person’s	channeling	ability	always
	flows	through	one’s	consciousness,
subconscious	programming,	character	development,	subconscious	information
banks,	and	conscious	attitudes	and	belief	systems.	The	Masters	bring	this	insight
forward	to	emphasize	the	importance	of	spiritual	discernment	within	one’s	self,
one’s	channelings,	and	the	channelings	of	others.	Lightworkers	are	sometimes
far	too	undiscerning	and	impressionable	in	these
	matters	and	need	to	see	the
enormous	effect	of	one’s	psychological	development	on	the	channeling	and
clairvoyant	abilities	as	a	whole.
The	ultimate	process	of	full-fledged	ascension	and	realization	and	merging
one’s	total	being	into	the	light,	love	and	power	of	God,	which	is	what	ascension
means,	cannot	take	place	unless	each	of	these	levels	is	mastered	and	balanced	in
the	manner	and	direction
	outlined	in	the	above	writings.	For	more	information
on	this	process,	I	would	highly	recommend	that	you	also	read	my	book	
Soul
Psychology
,	which	has	just	come	out	in	a	newly	revised	edition	with	new
chapters	and	new	information	just	published	by	Ballantine.
3
Who	Am	I?	
	
One	of	the	great	Spiritual	questions	of	all	time	is	“Who	Am	I?”	A	friend	of	mine
asked	me	to	write	an	article	on	this	subject	and	I	think	my	answer	here	will
surprise	all	my	readers.	The	reason	I	say	this	is	that	it	all	depends	on	the	lens	you
are	answering	this	question	from.	For	example,	if	you	answer	this	question	from
the	lens	of	a	worldly,	third	dimensional	person
	who	is	an	atheist,	they	would	say
that	they	are	their	physical	bodies.	Strangely	enough,	many	fundamentalist
Christians	would	say	the	same	thing.	They	think	that	when	a	person	dies,	it	is
oblivion	unless	they	are	one	of	the	chosen	few	who	are	resurrected	by	Christ.
They	see	no	distinction	between	the	soul	and	the	physical	body.
Now	if	you	saw	life	through	the	lens	of	a	philosopher	you	might
	say,	“I	think
therefore	I	Am.”	Philosophers	being	more	identified	with	the	mind	to	the	neglect
of	Spirit	and	the	emotional	and	physical	body.
Now	if	you	were	into	Humanistic	Psychology,	the	answer	would	be	“I	feel
therefore	I	Am.”	All	Humanistic	Psychology	thinks	about	is	feelings.
Feelings	are	GOD	to	them.	As	long	as	you	are	expressing	your	feelings	and
emotions,	all	is	well.
If	you	are	a	Freudian	Psychologist,	the	answer	to	this	question	is	you	are	the
combination	of	your	ego,	id,	and	superego.
If	you	ask	a	Transactional	Psychologist,	the	answer	to	this	question	is	you	are
the	combination	of	your	adult,	parent,	and	child.
If	you	ask	a	Behavioral	Psychologist,	the	answer	to	this	question	is	you	are	the
product	of	all	your	positive	and	negative	reinforcement
	of	your	environment.
If	you	ask	a	Cognitive	Psychologist	this	question,	he	would	say,	you	are	what
you	think	because	your	thoughts	cause	your	reality.
If	you	asked	a	Family	Systems	Therapist	this	question,	they	would	say	you	are
a	product	of	the	Family	System	you	grew	up	in.
Now	if	you	look	at	life	through	the	lens	of	Psychology	or	a	Psychologist	they
would	answer	this	question
	you	are	the	consciousness	or	conscious	mind	that
chooses	which	thoughts	to	think,	which	feelings	to	feel	and	how	to	deal	with	the
physical	body.	As	with	all	these	lenses,	there	is	a	sliver	of	truth	to	them	all.
Now	if	you	were	a	First,	Second	or	Third	Degree	Disciple	or	Initiate	on	the
Path	of	Initiation	the	answer	to	this	question	would	be	you	are	the	soul	or	Higher
Self.	This	could	also
	be	described	as	the	Oversoul	or	Superconscious	Mind.
Now	if	you	answer	this	question	from	the	lens	of	a	Fourth,	Fifth,	Sixth	and
Seventh	Degree	Initiate	on	the	Path	of	Initiation,	then	the	answer	to	this	question
would	be,	you	are	the	Monad	and/or	Mighty	I	Am	Presence.
If	you	answer	this	question	from	the	standpoint	of	a	completed	Seventh
Degree	Initiate,	the	answer	would	be	you	are
	an	Ascended	Master.
If	you	answer	this	question	from	the	perspective	of	an	initiate	who	has
completed	their	seven	levels	of	initiation	and	integrated	these	initiations	fully
into	their	mental,	emotional	and	physical	bodies,	then	the	answer	to	this	question
would	be,	they	are	an	“Integrated	Ascended	Master.”
If	you	ask	this	question	of	some	of	the	well	known	Ascended	Masters	they
might
	answer	by	saying	they	are	Solar	or	Galactic	Ascended	Masters	rather	than
Planetary	Ascended	Masters.
If	you	ask	this	of	Sai	Baba	he	would	say,	“I	am	a	Universal	Ascended
Master.”
Now	if	you	ask	this	question	to	a	Buddhist,	they	would	say,	“I	am	the
Buddha.”
If	you	ask	this	question	to	a	Christian,	they	might	say,	“I	am	a	Son	or
Daughter	of	GOD.”
If	you	asked	this	question
	of	a	Hindu,	they	would	say,	I	am	the	Atma.
If	you	ask	this	question	of	a	person	in	a	Western	Mystery	School,	they	might
say,	“I	am	the	Eternal	Self.”
In	other	Western	Mystery	schools,	the	answer	might	be	“I	am	an	incarnated
soul.”
In	other	Western	Traditions,	the	answer	might	be	“I	am	Spirit.”
In	the	Islamic	religion,	they	might	answer	that	they	are	embodiments	of	Allah.
In	the	Kabbalah,	a	Kabbalist	might	answer	“embodiments	of	YHWH!”
Now	if	you	asked	this	question	of	Melchizedek,	the	Universal	Logos,	he	might
respond	that	he	is	a	Cosmic	Ascended	Master	rather	than	a	Planetary	Ascended
Master.	He	also	might	say	he	is	the	Cosmic	Monad	not	a	Planetary	Monad.	He
might	also	say	he	is	the	“Cosmic	Eternal	Self.”
If	you	ask	this	question	of	someone	on
	the	Path	of	Devotion	they	might
respond	by	saying,	“I	am	love!”
If	you	ask	this	question	of	someone	who	is	a	First	Ray	Initiate	they	might	say,
“I	am	the	Power	of	GOD!”
If	you	ask	this	of	a	Second	Ray	initiate,	they	might	say,	“I	am	the	Wisdom	of
GOD.”
If	you	ask	this	of	an	initiate	on	the	Path	of	Ascension	they	might	say,	“I	am	the
balanced	integration	of	the	Love/Wisdom	and
	Power	of	GOD!”
If	you	ask	this	of	an	astrologer,	they	might	say	they	are	the	embodiment	of
their	horoscope	at	the	time	of	incarnation.
If	you	ask	this	of	a	numerologist,	they	might	give	you	the	numbers	in	their
numerology	configuration	of	their	name.	If	you	ask	this	question	of	someone
who	doesn’t	believe	in	GOD,	they	might	say	they	are	their	personality.
If	you	asked	a	Biblical
	Prophet	the	answer	might	be,	“I	Am	GOD!”
So,	my	beloved	readers,	as	you	can	see	this	is	not	the	easiest	question	to
answer.	It	depends	on	your	perspective	and	your	lens.	Therefore,	I	ask	you	what
is	the	truth.	I	would	say	the	truth	depends	on	your	level	of	Spiritual
Development	and	the	lens	you	wish	to	look	through.	Certainly,	we	each	are
incarnating	souls.	We	also	each	are	the	“I”	or	chooser
	that	creates	our	reality	by
the	choices	we	make	in	regard	to	every	thought,	feeling,	impulse,	desire	and
piece	of	energy	that	comes	to	us	from	within	or	without.
It	is	also	true,	however,	that	we	are	Spirit,	the	Monad,	the	Mighty	I	Am
Presence	even	if	we	have	not	realized	it	yet,	in	our	path	of	initiation	and
Ascension.
In	the	ultimate	sense	the	answer	is,	we	are	God!	The	important
	distinction	here
is,	are	we	talking	about	the	ultimate	ideal	of	what	we	are	or	what	we	have
actually	realized?
There	are	some	that	have	realized	their	Higher	Self	and	some	that	have	not.
Some	have	realized	their	Mighty	I	am	Presence	and	some	have	not.	There	is	no
one	on	Earth,	including	Sai	Baba,	who	has	realized	the	Eternal	Self	in	the
highest	Cosmic	sense.	The	most	advanced	realization
	of	GOD	on	this	Planet	is
Sai	Baba,	who	has	done	it	up	to	the	Universal	level.	He	has	not	done	it	to	the
Multiuniversal	level	and	to	the	Cosmic	level	yet.	He	is	the	closest	on	Earth.
However,	it	would	not	be	untruthful	to	answer	the	question	“Who	Am	I?”with
the	answer,“I	am	God	or	I	am	the	Eternal	Self,”	because	in	the	ultimate	reality
this	is	the	truth.
It	is	also	important;	however,	to
	not	claim	realization	of	something	you	have
not	truly	achieved	or	realized.	Many,	many	people	on	Earth	claim	to	have
realized	GOD	in	the	ultimate	sense.	This	is	complete	illusion	and	a	manifestation
of	the	negative	ego	and	misunderstanding.	They	may	have	realized	GOD	on	a
Planetary	level,	however,	not	on	a	Solar,	Galactic,	Universal,	Multiuniversal,
and	Cosmic	level.	The	truth	is,	it	is	impossible
	to	fully	realize	GOD	on	Earth.
One	can	realize	their	Higher	Self,	Monad,	Mighty	I	Am	Presence,	become	a	full-
fledged	Ascended	Master	and	even	begin	realizing	Solar	and	Galactic
Ascension.	No	one	will	go	beyond	this	level,	except	in	the	decent	of	an	Avatar.
The	only	true	Avatar	on	this	Planet	is	Sai	Baba.	The	meaning	of	an	Avatar
means	you	are	God	Realized	at	birth,	and	need	no	Spiritual	training
	at	all.	There
are	some	that	claim	to	be	Avatars,	however,	this	is	a	misunderstanding	of	the
term	and	in	some	cases	a	massive	ego	trip.
So,	my	beloved	readers,	the	answer	to	this	eternal	question	lies	in	if	you	are
looking	through	the	lens	of	what	you	have	realized	or	what	the	ultimate	truth	of
your	identity	is.	From	another	lens	or	perspective	it	would	also	be	truthful	to	say
that	you	are
	what	you	have	realized	and	you	are	the	Ultimate	Goal	you	seek	as
well.	So,	in	truth,	all	of	the	answers	to	this	question	are	true	at	certain	moments.
Maybe	the	best	answer	is	that	you	are	a	synthesis	of	all	of	these	in	their	proper
perspective,	as	GOD	would	have	it	be!
In	conclusion,	I	would	say	the	only	answer	that	is	not	true	is	that	“we	are
GOD,”	with	all	capital	letters.	As	I	have	already
	stated,	“we	are	God”	with	only
the	“G”	capitalized,	but	we	are	not	GOD	with	all	capital	letters.	This	is	because
GOD	with	all	capital	letters	is	the	androgynous	Being	who	created	us.	The
reason	that	“we	are	not	GOD”	with	all	capital	letters	is	because	GOD	created	us;
we	did	not	create	GOD.	So	a	more	apt	answer	is,	we	are	Sons	and	Daughters	of
GOD.	Another	term	I	heard	from	the	process	of	Realization
	point	of	view	is	that
we	are	“Apprentice	Gods.”	Once	we	realize	Planetary	Godhood,	then	we	can
begin	working	on	Solar	Godhood.	When	that	is	complete,	we	can	evolve	to
Galactic,	Universal,	Multiuniversal,	and	Cosmic	Godhood.	Even	when	Cosmic
Ascension	is	achieved	at	the	352
nd	
level	of	Divinity,	evolution	still	continues	for
there	is	always	a	greater	level	of	GOD	to	realize	and	refine.	This,	my
	beloved
readers,	is	because	of	the	“unfathomableness	of	GOD!”	To	claim	that	one	has
fully	realized	GOD	as	we	can	see	is	faulty	thinking	at	best,	especially	given	that
one	has	not	even	done	it	once	one	has	realized	all	352	levels	of	initiation	at	the
352
nd	
level	of	Divinity.	This	understanding	of	the	unfathomableness	of	GOD,	I
feel	brings	forth	a	healthy	humbleness	and	humility,	my	beloved	readers,
	which
is	good	for	us	all.	On	that	note,	I	think	its	time	to	close	this	chapter	which	I	hope
has	enlarged	your	“Full	Spectrum	Prism	Consciousness”	of	who	you	really	are!
4
Why	Am	I	Here?	
	
This	is	another	one	of	those	Age-old	questions	which	people	have	been	asking
since	the	beginning	of	time.	The	answer	to	this	question	is	multifaceted.	The	first
answer	would	be	if	you	want	to	be	with	GOD	in	Heaven,	then	act	like	him	on
Earth.	Simple	but	true.	The	second	answer	to	this	question	is	to	be	the
embodiment	of	unconditional	love	on	Earth.	The	third	answer
	would	be	to
complete	your	seven	levels	of	initiation	and	become	hence	an	Ascended	Master
and	therefore	break	the	wheel	of	reincarnation	and	achieve	liberation.
The	fourth	answer	is	to	become	an	integrated	Ascended	Master	which	means,
embodying	your	Mighty	I	Am	Presence	and/or	Monad	on	Earth	not	just	in	your
Spiritual	body,	but	also	in	your	mental,	emotional,	etheric,	physical	bodies	and
in	your	environment	and	Earthly	Civilization.
The	fifth	answer	to	this	question	is	to	be	of	service,	and	help	others	do	the
same,	in	the	way	and	manner	that	you	feel	most	guided	to	help;	everyone	has	a
puzzle	piece	in	GOD’s	Divine	Plan,	and	a	part	of	our	purpose	is	to	become
aware	of	what	our	puzzle	piece	is,	and	what	is	the	best	way	to	be	of	service.	If
any	of	you,	my	beloved	readers,	feel
	stuck	in	this	area,	I	would	guide	you	to	read
my	book	
Your	Ascension	Mission:	Embracing	Your	Puzzle	Piece
.	This	book	has
been	written	to	help	guide	you	to	stimulate	a	greater	awareness	of	this	aspect
within	self.
The	first	stage	of	everyone’s	purpose	is	to	become	whole	within	self,	and	to
become	right	with	self	and	right	with	GOD.	It	is	only	when	these	are	achieved
that	true	service	of	others
	can	take	place.	Part	of	this	process	is	to	become	a
cause	of	your	reality	rather	than	an	effect,	to	become	a	Master	rather	than	a
victim.
The	sixth	purpose	for	being	here	is	to	demonstrate	egolessness,	or	to
demonstrate	Sai	Baba’s	famous	statement,	“God	equals	man	minus	ego.”
The	seventh	reason	you	are	here	is	to	bring	Heaven	to	Earth,	not	only	within
self,	but	to	do	everything	you
	can	to	help	manifest	a	fifth	dimensional	society	on
the	Earthly	plane.
The	eighth	reason	you	are	here	is	not	only	to	demonstrate	Godliness	and
practice	the	Presence	of	GOD	in	big	ways,	but	also	in	an	infinite	number	of
small	ways.	By	this	I	mean	greeting	your	neighbor,	taking	care	of	your	garden,
being	kind	to	animals,	smiling	at	people	on	the	street,	being	friendly	to	the	bank
teller	and
	grocery	clerk,	cleaning	your	house,	helping	the	elderly	person	across
the	street,	picking	up	trash	off	the	ground	even	if	it	isn’t	your	house.	I	think	you
catch	my	drift	here.	Your	purpose	in	life	isn’t	necessarily	to	just	focus	on
something	big.	It	is	also	all	the	moments	in	between.
The	ninth	answer	to	this	question	is	to	not	compare	your	Spiritual	Path	to
others,	and	to	not	embrace	another
	person’s	puzzle	piece.	Not	everyone	is
supposed	to	be	a	channel,	public	speaker,	another	healer,	or	Spiritual	Teacher.
Not	everyone	is	meant	to	be	famous	and	rightly	so.	Some	people	are	here	to	raise
their	children	and	serve	in	what	seems	like	a	smaller	way,	but,	in	truth,	is	a	big
way.
The	tenth	answer	to	this	question,	and	maybe	most	important,	is	to	manifest
and	demonstrate	Melchizedek/Christ/Buddha
	Consciousness	in	your	every
thought,	word,	deed	and	motive.	If	you	live	each	moment	properly,	always
choosing	GOD	and	not	fear,	separation	and	lack	of	love	then	your	entire	life	will
unfold	in	a	Godly	and	Divine	manner!
5
Where	Am	I	Going?	
	
This	is	a	most	interesting	topic!	As	with	all	questions	in	life,	the	answer	to	this
question	depends	on	the	lens	you	are	looking	from.	From	the	perspective	of	a
Fundamentalist	Christian,	you	are	going	to	Heaven	or	Hell,	depending	on
whether	you	accept	Jesus.	They	might	also	say	you	are	going	into	oblivion,
because	they	think	death	is	real,	unless	you	accept	Jesus.
	Now	if	you	accept
Jesus,	St.	Peter,	will	be	waiting	for	you	at	the	“Pearly	Gates”	to	let	you	into
Heaven.
If	you	are	an	atheist,	then	oblivion	is	the	answer,	for	you	are	a	physical	body,
and	the	physical	body	definitely	dies.	If	you	are	someone	who	is	more
emotionally	or	astrally	focused,	then	you	are	going	to	the	astral	worlds,	probably
in	the	medium	or	upper	levels	which	looks	a	lot	like
	this	world,	but	is	astral	in
nature	and	not	physical.
If	you	are	mentally	focused,	and	below	the	fifth	initiation,	you	will	probably
be	going	to	the	Mental	Worlds	on	the	inner	plane,	which	again	looks	like	this
world	but	is	a	little	more	refined	and	a	little	higher	vibration	then	the	astral
realms.
If	a	person	is	a	criminal	and	evil	person,	they	will	be	going	to	the	lower	astral
plane,
	which	is	commonly	referred	to	as	hell,	but	in	truth	is	just	the	lowest
vibratory	rate	you	can	attune	to	in	the	astral	realm.
If	you	have	passed	the	Seventh	Initiation,	you	vibrate	and	go	to	the	Spiritual
Plane	on	leaving	this	world.	I	should	also	explain	here	that	all	Souls	who	have
not	completed	their	Seventh	Initiation	will	go	to	Planes,	below	the	Spiritual
Plane	and	will	have	to	return
	again	to	Earth	to	complete	their	Initiation	Process
and	learn	the	lessons	they	need	to	learn.
Those	Souls	who	are	below	the	Third	and	Fourth	level	of	Initiation	will	be
reincarnating	on	a	different	planet	other	than	Earth,	for	the	Earth	is	evolving	to	a
Higher	Level	now,	and	will	not	be	a	school	for	Souls	who	have	not	at	least
reached	this	level.	Another	more	suitable	Planet	will	be	made
	available	to	these
other	Souls	that	is	more	suitable	to	their	level	of	evolution.
I	should	also	say	that	all	Souls	no	matter	what	level	of	evolution,	will	after
death	be	going	to	a	three	day	Bardo	or	death	processing	time,	where	they	will
review	their	life	with	Spirit’s	help	to	see	if	they	lived	a	Christ/Buddha/Love
filled	Consciousness.	In	Fundamentalist	Christian	terms	this	might	be	called
	the
“Last	Judgement.”	In	truth,	this	is	Self	looking	at	Self,	with	the	Spiritual	eye	of
discernment,	to	see	how	one	has	lived	from	a	more	fully	open	Spiritual
perspective.
For	a	Buddhist,	they	will	be	going	to	the	inner	worlds	and	will	vibrate	and
attune	to	Spiritual	levels	with	other	Buddhists.	The	same	could	be	stated	for
Hindus,	Moslems,	and	those	of	the	Jewish	Faith.	Each	soul	will	go
	to	their	Level
of	Initiation,	Consciousness,	and	Vibratory	Rate	in	the	four-body	system
(Spiritually,	mentally,	emotionally,	etherically,	and	physically).
For	those	more	advanced	Initiates	and	Ascended	Beings	on	Earth,	they	have
the	potentiality,	after	completing	their	12	Levels	of	Initiation	to	resurrect	or
dematerialize	their	physical	bodies	at	death	or	before	and	transform	them	into
Light.
	This	is	also	called	“Physical	Ascension.”	Some	advanced	Souls	do	not
care	about	bringing	their	physical	body	into	Light,	and	do	not	choose	to	use	their
energies	in	this	way	and	choose	to	leave	their	physical	body	behind,	which	is
fine	as	well.
Some	more	advanced	initiates	will	go	and	serve	in	one	or	more	of	the	seven
Inner	Plane	Ashrams	of	the	Christ,	headed	by	the	Chohans	of	the	Seven	Rays
	(El
Morya,	Kuthumi,	Djwhal	Khul,	Serapis	Bey,	Paul	the	Venetian,	Hilarion,
Sananda,	and	Saint	Germain	and	Lady	Portia).	Other	more	advanced	Initiates
will	very	quickly	continue	on,	onto	what	is	called	the	Seven	Paths	to	Cosmic
Evolution.	These	Seven	Paths	to	Cosmic	Evolution	are:
1.			The	Path	of	Earth	Service
2.			The	Path	of	Magnetic	Work
3.			The	Path	of	Training	to	Become
	a	Planetary	Logos
4.			The	Path	to	Sirius
5.			The	Ray	Path
6.			The	Path	on	which	The	Solar	Logos	Himself	is	Found
7.	The	Path	of	Absolute	Sonship	If	you	would	like	to	learn	more	about	this,
please	read	my	books	
The	Complete	Ascension	Manua
l	and	
Beyond	Ascension
.
Fundamentalist	Christians	say	that	they	will	go	to	Heaven.	What	they	do	not
understand	is	that	there
	are	seven	Heavens.	These	could	be	termed	as	follows:
1.			The	Cosmic	Physical	Plane
2.			The	Cosmic	Astral	Plane
3.			The	Cosmic	Mental	Plane
4.			The	Cosmic	Buddhic	Plane
5.			The	Cosmic	Atmic	Plane
6.			The	Cosmic	Monadic	Plane
7.			The	Cosmic	Logoic	Plane
A	great	many	lightworkers	claim	to	be	one	with	GOD,	and	think	at	death	that
they	will	be
	one	with	GOD	in	Heaven.	This	is	illusion.	For,	“In	my	Fathers
House	there	are	many	Mansions.”	In	our	Universe,	there	are	352	levels	to	return
to	Source.	This	could	also	be	termed	352	Levels	of	Initiation.	The	most
advanced	Souls	on	this	Planet	except	for	maybe	Sai	Baba,	who	is	an	Avatar,	are
not	beyond	the	13
th	
or	14
th	
Level	of	Initiation.	You	can	only	go	to	a	Heavenly
Realm	if	you	have	realized
	that	level	of	initiation.	So	I	think	you	can	see	that
people	who	claim	to	be	one	with	GOD	and	fully	GOD	realized	are	channeling
their	egos	and	have	a	confused	understanding.
Where	you	are	going	when	you	die	is	just	another	plane	or	dimension	to
continue	your	own	evolution	and	continue	your	service	work.	After	mastering
“Planetary	Ascension,”	you	will	begin	“Solar	Ascension,”	then	working
	on
“Galactic	Ascension,”	then	“Universal	Ascension,”	then	“Multi-Universal
Ascension,”	then	“Cosmic	Ascension.”	Each	person	must	go	through	all	352
Levels	of	Initiation	to	return	to	Source.	Each	person	must	serve	and	demonstrate
GOD	at	each	level	and	must	realize	each	level,	before	being	allowed	to	move	to
the	next.
Now	here	is	the	next	kicker	in	the	process	so	to	speak.	It	is	not	enough
	to
achieve	each	Level	of	Initiation.	You	also	must	integrate	those	initiations	into
your	mental,	emotional,	etheric,	and	physical	bodies.	All	initiations	are	taken	on
the	Spiritual	level	first.	Most	people,	who	have	taken	their	initiations	even
beyond	the	Seventh,	have	not	integrated	them	fully	or	properly	into	their	mental,
emotional,	etheric	and	physical	bodies.	If	this	is	not	done,	for	example,
	even	if
you	have	completed	your	Seven	levels	of	initiation	or	12	levels	of	initiation	for
that	matter,	you	will	have	to	reincarnate	back	into	the	Astral,	or	Mental	Realms
if	those	Psychological	lessons	have	not	been	worked	out.	This	means	learning	to
completely	master	negative	ego/fear-based/separative	thinking,	and	learning	to
think	only	with	your	Spiritual/Christ/Buddha	Mind!	So	where	you	go	when
	you
die	is	not	just	determined	by	your	Spiritual	Level	of	Initiation,	but	also	by	how
you	psychologically	integrate	those	Initiations	into	your	four-body	system.
I	should	also	mention	here	that	the	Bhagavad-Gita	says,	that	where	you	go
when	you	die	is	the	last	thought	in	your	mind.	This	is	true,	but	this	must	be
properly	understood.	Every	person	when	they	die	has	the	opportunity	to	merge
with	the	“Clear	Light	of	GOD,”	at	death.	This	is	what	all	Souls	should	strive	to
do.	Earthbound	concerns	often	cause	a	great	many	Souls	to	miss	this
opportunity.	This	experience	does	not	give	total	GOD	Realization,	but	does	give
a	great	boost	to	your	Spiritual	Evolutionary	Process.
Now	getting	back	to	what	the	Bhagavad-Gita	said.	Our	thoughts	create	our
reality,	and,	in	truth,	we	travel
	with	our	mind.	So	when	we	die	if	your	are
thinking	only	about	the	Earth,	you	will	remain	on	Earth	as	an	Earthbound	Spirit.
If	you	think	death	is	the	“Pearly	Gates”	you	might	be	given	this	experience	to
help	you	in	your	passing	but	this	won’t	be	the	true	“Pearly	Gates.”	People,	in
other	words,	will	create	their	own	visual	death	process	according	to	their	belief
system.	Angels	and	Spirit	Guides	will
	enter	those	visualizations	and	then	bring
those	Souls	into	the	true	nature	of	reality.	So	if	you	think	about	GOD	when	you
die,	this	is	the	ideal,	for	then	your	mind	will	help	you	vibrate	to	the	highest
possible	plane	of	existence	that	you	are	capable	of	achieving.	This	is	not	to	say,
however,	you	can	live	an	evil	life	and	then	just	think	about	GOD	at	the	last
second	and	all	is	well.	Because	the	last
	thought	in	your	mind	is	not	just	one
conscious	thought,	but	the	conglomeration	of	all	your	thoughts	in	your	conscious
and	subconscious	mind	you	have	thought	that	lifetime,	and	for	that	matter	all	the
conscious	and	subconscious	thoughts	you	have	thought	in	all	your	lifetimes,
which	is	also	what	is	meant	by	this	statement	in	the	Bhagavad-Gita.	So	the	ideal
is	to	only	think	GOD	thoughts	your	entire
	lifetime,	and	at	the	moment	of	Death,
and	this	way	the	place	you	go,	will	be	of	your	highest	Spiritual	Potential.
Now	some	Souls	who	are	less	evolved	who	have	a	lot	of	drugs	in	them	at
death	or	die	a	violent	unexpected	death,	may	sleep	for	a	while	on	the	inner	plane
as	a	type	of	integration	experience.	Soon	they	will	wake	up	and	if	they	are	at	all
Spiritually	inclined	will	be	met	by	Angels
	or	Spirit	Guide	helpers,	who	will	help
them	get	back	on	a	more	efficient	course.
When	most	people	die	they	will	go	through	a	type	of	tunnel	and	hear	a
buzzing	sound	in	the	background,	and	they	will	be	met	by	friends	and	relatives
in	this	life	and	past	lives	who	have	served	as	Spirit	Guides,	for	Love	is	the
strongest	force	in	the	Universe.
So,	in	conclusion,	this	has	been	a	summary
	of	all	the	possible	places	people
may	go	at	death	and	beyond	in	their	Spiritual	Evolutionary	Process!
6
The	Three	Levels	of	Integrated	Spiritual
Growth	
	
There	are	three	levels	of	integrated	Spiritual	growth	that	each	person	on	Earth
must	master	to	truly	achieve	God	Realization.	These	three	levels	are	the	Spiritual
Level,	the	Psychological	Level,	and	the	Physical/Earthly	Level.	The	Spiritual	or
Heavenly	Level	of	God	Realization	deals	with	building	one’s	Light	Quotient	and
Light	Body,
	building	one’s	Love	Quotient	and	Love	Body	and	it	deals	with
building	one’s	Power	Quotient	and	Power	Body.	This	Spiritual	level	also	deals
with	the	anchoring,	activation,	and	actualization	of	your	Higher	Chakras	eight
through	three	hundred	thirty.	It	also	deals	with	the	anchoring	and	activation	of
your	Higher	Bodies.	Some	of	these	are	the	Anointed	Christ	Overself	Body,	the
Zohar	Body	of	Light,	the
	Higher	Admon	Kadmon	Body,	the	Lord’s	Mystical
Body,	the	activation	of	the	Electromagnetic	Body,	the	activation	of	the	Epi-
Kenetic	Body,	the	activation	of	the	Gematrian	Body,	the	Overself	Body,	the
Paradise	Son’s	Body,	the	Elohistic	Lord’s	Body,	the	Monadic	Body,	the	Causal
Body,	the	Buddhic	Body,	the	Atmic	Body,	the	Logoic	Body,	the	Cosmic	Astral
Body,	the	Cosmic	Mental	Body,	the	Cosmic	Buddhic
	Body,	the	Cosmic	Atmic
Body,	the	Cosmic	Monadic	Body,	the	Cosmic	Logoic	Body,	the	Light	Body	of
Metatron,	the	Light	Body	of	Melchizedek,	the	Light	Body	of	the	Mahatma,	and
the	Light	Bodies	of	the	entire	Planetary	and	Cosmic	Hierarchy.
The	Spiritual	or	Heavenly	Level	of	growth	also	deals	with	one’s	ability	to
channel,	pray,	meditate,	and	co-create	with	GOD,	Christ,	the	Holy	Spirit,	your
own
	Mighty	I	Am	Presence,	your	Higher	Self,	the	inner	plane	Ascended
Masters,	the	Archangels	and	Angels,	the	Elohim	Masters,	and	the	Christed
Extraterrestrials.	The	Spiritual	or	Heavenly	Level	of	growth	also	deals	with	the
creation	and	establishment	of	one’s	Antakarana	back	to	one’s	Monad	and	back
to	Source.	This	level	also	deals	with	many	of	the	other	forms	of	Spiritual
practice	such	as	chanting,
	repeating	the	names	of	GOD,	and	reciting	mantras,	to
name	a	few.	It	also	deals	with	the	process	of	completing	your	Twelve	Levels	of
Initiation	and	the	fine-tuning	of	your	Intuition	and	Inner	Guidance.	Lastly,	it
deals	with	the	cleansing	and	integration	of	all	your	Soul	Extensions	from	your
Oversoul	(Higher	Self)	and	Monad/Mighty	I	Am	Presence!
The	Psychological	Level	of	Spiritual	Growth
The	Psychological	level	of	Spiritual	growth	is	a	totally	unique	level	and	must
be	mastered	in	its	own	right.	Spiritual	practices	will	not	help	you	achieve
psychological	mastery.	Most	lightworkers	on	this	Planet	are	much	more
developed	in	their	Spiritual	Body	than	they	are	in	their	Psychological	Body.	This
often	leads	to	massive	corruption	of	the	Spiritual	Body	later	on	the	path	if	this	is
not	corrected.	The	psychological	level	is	your	foundation	of	your	entire	Spiritual
house.	The	reason	for	this	is	that	your	thoughts	create	your	reality,	hence	this
level	of	Spiritual	growth	enormously	affects	the	Spiritual	and	Physical/Earthly
Level.
The	Psychological	Level	deals	with	key	core	issues	such	as	owning	your	own
personal	power,	self-love,	self-worth,	your	bubble	of	protection,
	Christ/Buddha
thinking	rather	than	negative	ego/fear-based	thinking,	balance,	integration,
transcending	lower-self	desire,	proper	parenting	of	the	inner	child,
reprogramming	the	subconscious	mind,	mastering	the	subconscious	mind,
mastering	and	properly	integrating	your	feelings	and	emotions,	developing	your
inner	Spiritual	Higher	Senses,	letting	go	of	attachments	and	replacing	them	with
preferences,
	balancing	your	Threefold	Flame	of	Love,	Wisdom	and	Power,
becoming	a	cause	of	your	reality	instead	of	an	effect,	balancing	your	Four-Body
System,	balancing	and	integrating	your	Conscious/Subconscious/Superconscious
minds,	integrating	and	balancing	your	Seven	Rays,	removing	implants	and	the
negative	elementals,	learning	to	make	appropriate	choices	at	all	times,	and
developing	your	psychic	abilities.
	The	importance	of	developing	a	healthy	and
balanced	psychoepistemology	is	one	of	the	most	important	aspects	of	the
Psychological	Level.	A	person’s	psychoepistemology	is	the	thoughts,	paradigm,
philosophy,	and/or	belief	system	that	filter	all	other	thoughts.	For	example,	if	a
person	believes	their	feelings	and	emotions	are	the	most	important	thing	to	the
neglect	of	their	mind,	intuition	and
	physical	body	then	they	are	going	to	not	have
a	right	relationship	to	self.	This	imbalanced	psychoepistemology	will	cause	them
to	be	a	victim	of	their	feelings	and	emotions	and	to	be	psychologically	and
Spiritually	off	balanced	in	every	thing	they	do.	It	will	also	knock	off	balance	all
relationships	with	other	people	for	one	cannot	be	wrong	with	self	and	right	with
others.
The	same	is	true
	with	someone	who	is	overidentified	with	the	mind,	intuition,
or	the	physical	body.	The	only	proper	healthy	psychoepistemology	is	to	be
integrated	and	balanced	in	all	four	aspects.
Another	example	of	an	unhealthy	psychoepistemology	is	someone	who	does
not	understand	the	difference	between	negative	ego/fearbased/separative
thinking	and	Melchizedek/Christ/Buddha	thinking.	These	are	the	only
	two	ways
of	thinking	in	the	world.	This	is	why	Sai	Baba	says,	“God	equals	man	minus
ego.”	We	must	transcend	negative	ego	thinking	and	only	think	with	our
Positive/Spiritual	mind.	This	is	why	the	Bible	says,	“Let	this	mind	be	in	you	that
was	in	Christ	Jesus.”	Most	people	in	this	world	including	lightworkers	have	not
been	trained	in	this	understanding.	This	is	why	we	see	so	much	corruption	and
glamour
	in	the	world	and	in	the	New	Age	Movement.	Not	having	this
understanding	causes	one’s	psycho-epistemology,	or	how	one	filters	their	reality
to	be	off	center.	Sai	Baba	has	said	that	seventy-five	percent	of	one’s	Spiritual
path	is	the	process	of	self-inquiry.	Self-inquiry	is	the	process	of	how	we	filter	all
our	thoughts,	feelings,	emotions,	and	the	content	of	one’s	consciousness	from
within	and	without
	every	moment	of	one’s	life.	If	one	does	not	have	a	healthy,
balanced,	well-integrated	psychoepistemology	or	belief	system	that	filters	one’s
reality	properly,	it	will	cause	an	off-kilteredness	that	will	cause	an	imbalance	in
every	aspect	of	one’s	life.	If	one	doesn’t	know	that	one	should	be	Spiritually
vigilant	against	negative	ego	thoughts	and	emotions	at	all	times	and	doesn’t
know	to	replace
	them	with	Christ/Buddha	Spiritual	thoughts	and	feelings,	do	you
see	the	problem	that	this	will	create.	Most	people	in	this	world	do	not	have	the
slightest	idea	what	the	negative	ego/fearbased/separative	thought	system	is	as	it
relates	to	the	Christ/Buddha	thought	system.	This	being	the	case	they	end	up
being	run	by	the	negative	ego.	This	is	why	so	many	people	in	this	world	are
lacking	in	happiness,
	inner	peace,	lack	of	self-love	and/or	self-worth,	successful
romantic	relationships,	career,	and	with	finances,	to	name	a	few.
When	one	develops	a	healthy	psychoepistemology	and/or	Spiritual	philosophy
for	properly	filtering	their	reality,	they	then	develop	the	“Midas	Touch.”	The
reason	for	this	is	a	healthy,	balanced	well-integrated	Spiritual	philosophy	and
psychoepistemology	allows	one
	to	hence	be	right	with	self	and	right	with	GOD.
One	cannot	be	right	with	any	other	relationship	in	life	if	one’s	relationship	with
self	is	not	right	first.	The	science	of	developing	a	proper	psychoepistemology	is
the	key	to	learning	how	to	properly	deal	with	all	the	thoughts,	feelings,	impulses,
desires,	intuitions,	subpersonalities,	instincts,	inner	child,	energies,	sensations,
arising	from	the
	subconscious	mind	and	our	physical	bodies	every	moment	of
our	lives.	It	also	allows	us	to	deal	properly	with	all	these	aspects	coming	towards
us	from	the	outside	world.	An	unhealthy	psychoepistemology	causes	us	to	not
filter	all	these	energies	properly,	as	GOD	would	have	us	process	them.	The
slightest	improper	processing	will	cause	a	negative	reality	to	manifest	on	a
thought,	feeling,	or	Physical/Earthly
	Level	if	you	are	not	vigilant,	clear,	and
centered	every	moment	of	your	life.
So,	the	most	dangerous	imbalanced	psychoepistemology	you	can	have	is	not
understanding	the	importance	of	keeping	the	negative	ego	thoughts,	feelings,
emotions,	and	behaviors	out	of	your	consciousness.	Only	allowing	yourself	to
manifest	Melchizedek/Christ/Buddha	thoughts,	feelings,	emotions,	and
behaviors.	The	lack
	of	this	key	understanding	on	the	Psychological	Level	has
corrupted	more	people	in	this	world,	and	more	lightworkers,	Spiritual	Teachers,
Spiritual	Channels,	Spiritual	Scientists,	and	Spiritual	Leaders	than	you	ever	want
to	know.	No	matter	how	advanced	you	are	Spiritually	and	no	matter	how	good	a
Channel	or	Spiritual	Teacher	you	are,	and	no	matter	how	famous	a	person	is,	if
they	have	not	done	their
	homework	on	the	Psychological	level,	their	entire
Spiritual	Program	will	become	corrupted	over	time.	It	is	like	a	cancer	that
spreads	behind	the	scenes	over	time	and	spreads	to	every	aspect	of	life	within
and	without.	It	corrupts	the	channeled	information,	it	corrupts	the	Spiritual
teachings,	and	it	corrupts	one’s	motivations.	Even	if	one	has	controlled	it
somewhat,	when	the	true	Spiritual	Tests
	come,	when	a	person	moves	into
Spiritual	Leadership,	power,	and	control	over	others,	fame,	success,	money,	to
name	a	few	that	negative	ego	cancer	begins	to	spread	that	was	not	nipped	at	the
bud.	That	slightly	imbalanced	psychoepistemology	pours	forth.	It	is	like	a	dam
with	a	crack	in	the	wall,	as	soon	as	the	big	Spiritual	Tests	come	and	there	is
more	stress,	and	the	ego	has	tasted	power,	fame,
	money	and	sex,	the	crack	in	the
dam	moves	to	a	crack	to	a	major	breach	and	gaping	hole.	I	share	this	metaphor
as	a	warning	to	light-workers	to	be	“Spiritually	vigilant”	against	the	negative
ego.	The	number	of	lightworkers,	Spiritual	Teachers,	Spiritual	Channels,
Spiritual	Scientist,	I	have	seen	fall	and	become	corrupted	and	contaminated	by
negative	ego	and	glamour	is	astronomical.	I	say	this	with
	no	judgement	intended.
I	do	say	it	with	Spiritual	discernment	for	those	who	have	the	eyes	to	see	and	the
ears	to	hear.
Another	psychoepisteomological	blind	spot	is	the	over	or	under	identification
with	the	God/Goddess	balance.	Usually	this	manifests	as	a	disownment	of	the
Goddess	aspect	within	self,	and	hence	the	inability	to	appreciate	it	within	others.
Another	psychoepisteomological
	blind	spot	is	having	too	much	fire,	air,	water,
or	earth	in	one’s	horoscope	and	psyche.	People	end	up	seeing	through	one	lens
and	disowning	the	other	aspects	or	being	slightly	imbalanced	which	then	of
course	affects	ones	psychological	and	spiritual	vision	of	oneself	and	their	world.
Another	potential	psychoepisteomological	imbalance	is	being	overidentified
with	mastery	to	the	diminishment
	of	love.	For	some	mastery	is	more	important,
and	for	others	love	is	more	important.	In	truth,	both	points	of	view	are
psychoepisteomological	imbalances.	A	person	who	is	just	interested	in	love	to
the	exclusion	of	power	will	make	tons	of	mistakes	all	over	the	place	and	be	very
flighty	in	their	energy.	The	person	identified	with	power	over	love	will	be	very
efficient	and	masterful	but	will	often	lose
	the	unconditional	love	connection	and
be	prone	to	angry	and	being	to	critical	and	judgmental.	Both	sides	of	this	coin
are	a	pitfall	and	trap.	These	again	are	the	first	two	rays	of	GOD	and	they	both
must	be	balanced.
Another	psychoepisteomological	trap	is	being	too	masculine	or	too	feminine.
This	may	manifest	as	being	a	workaholic	or	too	much	of	a	hedonist.	It	can	also
manifest	as	being	to
	serious	and	or	playful	and	fun	loving	at	inappropriate	times
when	it	is	really	time	to	be	focused	and	take	care	of	business.	It	is	also	essential
to	cultivate	the	emotional	body	properly	and	part	of	this	is	having	enthusiasm
and	passion,	and	not	being	too	detached	to	properly	integrate	the	feminine	side.
Another	psychoepisteomological	pitfall	and	trap	is	to	be	overidentified	with
the	parent
	and	or	child.	The	ideal	is	to	identify	with	the	adult	and	integrate	the
parent	and	child	in	their	appropriate	balance	and	integration.
Other	imbalanced	psychoepisteomologies	or	Spiritual	philosophies	are
lightworkers	being	highly	Spiritual,	but	not	knowing	how	to	properly	parent
their	inner	child.	Another	common	imbalanced	psychoepistemology	is	people
not	realizing	and	being	able	to	demonstrate
	that	their	thoughts	create	their
feelings	and	emotions.	Another	imbalanced	Spiritual	philosophy	is	a	person	or
lightworker	flowing	with	the	content	of	their	consciousness	rather	than	choosing
it	every	moment	of	their	life.	Another	imbalanced	example	is	someone	who	does
not	realize	that	the	subconscious	mind	has	no	reasoning	and	that	they	have	to	be
the	master	of	it	at	all	times.	Another	common
	imbalance	in	a	person’s	belief
system	is	they	don’t	realize	that	they	need	to	be	the	master	of	their	thoughts,
feelings,	and	physical	body	at	all	times.	Another	common	imbalanced
psychoepistemology	is	the	overidentification	with	Heaven/Earth.	This	is
extremely	common.	Another	example	might	be	the	overidentification	of	one	of
the	Rays	instead	of	being	balanced	in	all	the	Rays.	Another	example
	would	be
the	overidentification	to	one	of	the	twelve	Major	Archetypes	to	the	neglect	of	the
proper	integration	of	the	others.	Another	example	is	the	overidentification	with
one	of	the	Astrological	Signs	to	the	neglect	of	the	others.	Another	classic
example	is	the	identification	with	a	traditional	form	of	Psychology	that	does	not
fully	integrate	the	Soul	or	Spirit.	Another	example	is	a	Spiritual	philosophy
	that
is	highly	Spiritual,	but	not	integrated	on	the	Psychological	or	Physical/Earthly
Level.	One	other	extremely	common	imbalanced	psychoepistemology	is	people
who	try	to	balance	negative	ego	thinking	and	feeling	with	Christ/Buddha
thinking	and	feeling.	They	do	this	because	they	think	they	have	to	be	balanced	in
everything.	It	is	true	that	you	want	to	be	balanced	in	self	and	in	life.	The
	one
thing	you	do	not	want	to	balance	is	negative	ego	consciousness	versus	Christ
Consciousness.	Said	another	way,	you	don’t	want	to	balance	Spiritual
consciousness	and	fear	based/separative	consciousness.	Said	one	last	way,	you
don’t	want	to	balance	lower	self	consciousness	and	Higher	Self	Consciousness.
Because	of	lack	of	Psychological	training	lightworkers	get	the	crazy	thought	in
their	mind	that
	the	positive	and	negative	should	be	balanced,	and/or	the	light	and
dark	should	be	balanced.	Boy,	does	the	negative	ego	love	this	psycho-
epistemology.	My	beloved	readers,	you	would	be	amazed	at	how	many
lightworkers	fall	into	this	one.	This	is	like	saying	love	and	fear	should	be
balanced.	Unconditional	love	and	conditional	love	should	be	balanced.
Forgiveness	and	holding	grudges	should	be	balanced.
	Christ	and	Satan	should	be
balanced.	Anger	and	love	should	be	balanced.	Lower-self	desires	and	Higher
Self	desires	should	be	balanced.	Judgementalness	and	nonjudgementalness
should	be	balanced.	I	think	you	can	see	how	absurd	such	a	philosophy	is,	and	I
tell	you,	it	is	the	height	of	negative	ego	corruption.	Adopting	such	a	philosophy
will	not	only	manifest	massive	amounts	of	negative	energy	in	yourself
	and	your
life,	but	it	will	also	cut	you	off	from	your	Higher	Self	and	Mighty	I	Am
Presence.	There	are	only	two	voices	in	the	world	in	truth.	These	are	the	voices	of
negative	ego	and	the	voice	of	Spirit.	Do	you	really	think	these	should	be
balanced?	A	great	many	confused	lightworkers	will	tell	you	so.	The	nature	of	the
mind	is	“argue	for	your	limitations	and	they	are	yours.”	Listening	to	counselors,
psychologists,	marriage	and	family	counselors,	and	social	workers	that	are
steeped	in	traditional	psychology	confuses	many	people.	They	have	not	realized
their	own	Soul	or	Monad,	yet	are	counseling	people.	This	is	called	personality
level	psychology	and	99	percent	of	the	books	on	the	market	and	colleges	and
universities	are	steeped	and	stuck	in	it.	I	do	not	say	these	things	as	judgement,
but	rather	I	bring	forward	the	light	of	Spiritual	observations	and	discernments	to
help	you	avoid	the	pitfalls	and	traps	of	the	negative	ego.	Be	discerning	as	to	the
Spiritual	Teachers,	Channels,	Psychologists	and	Counselors	you	choose	for
yourself,	for	very	few	are	well	versed	in	Soul	and	Spiritual	Psychology	as
opposed	to	Traditional	Psychology	or	personality	level	psychology.	Another
common	psychoepistemology
	is	that	similar	books,	counselors,	and	teachers	will
tell	you	that	negative	feelings	and	emotions	are	good.	My	beloved	readers,
“Argue	for	your	limitations	and	they	are	yours.”	From	the	perspective	of	Soul
and	the	Holy	Spirit,	they	are	not	good	and	they	are	not	necessary.	Personality
level	psychology	teaches	victim	consciousness.	They	do	not	have	a	clue	that	it	is
their	thoughts	that
	are	creating	their	reality.	Negative	ego	feelings	and	emotions
come	from	negative	ego	thinking.	Stop	thinking	from	your	lower	self/fear	based
mind	and	they	will	disappear.	Start	thinking	from	your	Christed,	Higher	Self
mind	and	you	will	have	Christed,	Higher	Self,	positive	feelings	and	emotions.
Your	anger	and	upset	does	not	come	from	any	person	or	situation	outside
yourself.	It	is	coming	from
	your	interpretation,	perception,	and	negative	ego
belief	system.	So,	in	this	chapter	today	we	are	busting	the	negative	ego’s
corruption	of	psychology.	It	has	entered	every	field	of	Earth	life	including
religion	and	the	New	Age	Movement.	Today’s	discussion	in	this	section	was	to
explore	its	corruption	and	contamination	of	Traditional	Psychology.
My	beloved	readers,	in	conclusion,	as	we	can
	see	the	list	of	imbalanced
psychoepisteomologies	is	infinite	and	complex.	This	is	why	it	is	incredibly
important	to	do	your	homework	on	the	Psychological	level	and	not	just	focus
your	energies	on	the	Celestial	Realms,	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters	and
Angels,	and	Spiritually	Esoteric	knowledge	and	information.	I	cannot	tell	you
how	many	lightworkers,	Spiritual	Leaders,	Spiritual	Channels,	and	Spiritual
Teachers	have	become	corrupted	and	contaminated	by	negative	ego	and
imbalanced	psychoepisteomologies	from	focusing	too	much	on	the	Spiritual
level,	and	not	enough	on	the	Psychological	Level	as	well	as	the	Physical/Earthly
Level.
Each	one	of	these	potentially	imbalanced	psychoepisteomologies	I	have
mentioned,	causes	the	individual	to	see	life	from	not	only	an	imbalanced	and
slightly	skewed
	state	of	consciousness,	it	also	causes	one	to	have	a	slightly
imbalanced	and	skewed	relationship	to	GOD	and	the	inner	plane	Ascended
Masters	and	Angels.	You	cannot	be	wrong	with	self	and	right	with	GOD	and	the
Masters.	Being	wrong	with	self	will	cause	imbalance	in	every	aspect	of	your	life
including	your	relationship	to	GOD	and	the	Masters.	This	is	an	indisputable	law
and	fact	of	the	mind.	It	is
	a	mathematical	equation.	I	share	these	insights	in	this
clear	manner	so	there	is	no	room	for	the	negative	ego	to	seduce	and	manipulate
you	into	its	corruption	and	its	illusionary	web	of	deceit.
It	also	must	be	understood	that	every	time	you	buy	into	one	of	these
potentially	imbalanced	psychoepisteomologies,	it	limits	your	Full	Spectrum
Prism	Consciousness	that	GOD	would	have	you	see	from.
	GOD	would	have	us
see	life	from	thousands	of	lenses	simultaneously.	Each	lens	being	an	aspect	of
our	integrated	and	multidimensional	nature.	Each	time	we	buy	into	an
imbalanced	psychoepistemology	we	see	life	from	a	smaller	and	smaller	prism.
Most	people	on	this	Earth	see	themselves	and	life	through	an	extremely	limited
prism.	Instead	of	seeing	themselves	and	life	through	the	Full	Spectrum	Prism
	of
GOD,	they	see	themselves	not	through	a	prism	but	through	an	extremely	small
number	of	lenses.	The	illusionary	nature	of	consciousness,	the	mind,	and	the
negative	ego	thought	system	will	cause	these	people	to	believe	that	they	are
totally	centered	and	clear,	and	they	will	even	most	often	believe	that	they	are
God	Realized.	This	is	at	least	what	they	tell	themselves	and	advertise	to	others.
When
	one	is	caught	in	these	imbalanced	psychoepisteomologies	they	do	not
realize	they	are	seeing	life	from	an	extremely	small	number	of	lenses.	The
negative	ego	tells	them	they	are	totally	clear,	and	clearer	than	anyone	else	is.
This	again	is	the	delusionary	nature	of	the	negative	ego.	Do	not	underestimate	its
powers	to	seduce	and	take	you	over.	The	first	second	you	do	underestimate	its
powers,	you	will
	be	its	next	victim.	Very	few	in	the	world	are	able	to	escape	its
seduction,	manipulation,	and	deceit.	It	takes	enormous	honesty	and	GOD	purity
to	not	let	it	take	you	over	for	a	whole	lifetime.
Some	do	it	for	awhile,	however,	as	soon	as	they	think	they	have	mastered	it,	is	in
truth	when	they	lost	it.	As	the	Bible	says,	“After	pride	cometh	the	fall.”	Let	this
be	a	warning	to	us	all.	No	matter
	what	level	of	Spiritual,	Psychological,	and
Physical/Earthly	development,	and	no	matter	what	level	of	Initiation,	Spiritual
Leadership,	Success,	Fame,	or	Fortune,	one	must	be	“ever	vigilant	for	GOD	and
His	Kingdom.”	True	GOD	Purity	through	a	whole	lifetime	is	something	rarely
seen	in	this	world.	This	section	of	this	chapter	is	a	“Spiritual	Challenge”	to	each
of	you	my	beloved	readers,	to	strive
	to	hold	this	ideal.	Mistakes	are	okay	for
they	are	just	lessons.	If	you	fall	for	a	moment	or	a	brief	period,	forgive	self,	learn
the	lesson,	and	get	back	on	your	“Spiritual	Horse.”	As	you	do	so,	be	ever	more
determined	and	Spiritually	Vigilant	to	retain	your	“Purity	in	GOD.”
One	more	interesting	insight	into	these	three	levels	of	growth	is	that	the
physical	body	grows	automatically.	If	an
	adolescent	drinks	and	smokes	too
much,	and	never	psychologically	matures,	they	will	still	physically	grow,
although	their	physical	growth	could	be	slightly	physically	stunted.	Spiritually,	if
a	person	focuses	on	the	light	and	continues	to	do	Spiritual	activations	they	will
continue	to	Spiritually	grow,	even	if	they	have	chronic	health	problems	and	are
undeveloped	and	immature	psychologically.	The
	psychological	level	is	slightly
different	because	it	does	not	grow	automatically	as	the	physical	body	does.	Just
because	a	person	physically	grows	into	an	adult,	it	doesn’t	mean	that	they	are
psychologically	one.	Just	because	the	Spiritual	body	achieves	Ascension	and/or
the	Seven	Levels	of	Initiation	doesn’t	mean	the	psychological	self	is	evolved	in
the	slightest.	I	know	above	and	beyond	seventh
	degree	initiates	who	have
achieved	their	ascension	initiation	and	are	some	of	the	biggest	egomaniacs	I
have	ever	met.	I	have	met	others	in	this	category	that	are	absolute	victims	of
their	emotional	body.	I	have	met	ninth,	tenth,	and	eleventh	degree	initiates	who
have	been	completely	taken	over	by	power	and	greed.	I	have	met	others	who	are
filled	with	imbalanced	psychoepisteomologies	and	are	run	by
	the	negative	ego
thought	system.	So	just	because	the	physical	body	grows	and	the	Spiritual	body
may	be	growing,	this	says	absolutely	nothing	about	their	Psychological	Level	of
development.	The	physical	body	and	Spiritual	body	once	you	get	tapped	in	can
grow	and	evolve	almost	automatically.	This	is	not	true	of	the	psychological
body.
An	enormous	number	of	people	on	this	Earth	including	a
	great	number	of
lightworkers,	are	still	stuck	in	an	adolescent	level	of	psychological	development.
An	enormous	number	of	Spiritual	Leaders,	Spiritual	Teachers,	Spiritual
Counselors,	and	Spiritual	Channels	are	extremely	run	by	the	inner	child	the
second	they	get	off	stage.	There	are	an	enormous	number	of	ways	that	this
adolescent	Psychology	manifests.	Some	are	victims;	some	are	too	run	by	the
emotional
	body,	some	are	too	run	by	the	negative	ego,	some	have	bizarre
psychoepisteomologies.	The	list	is	endless,	for	there	are	infinite	numbers	of
ways	that	the	negative	ego	can	distort	and	create	illusion.	Always	remember	that
every	thought	the	negative	ego	has,	the	Holy	Spirit	and	the	Christ/Buddha
Consciousness	has	an	opposite	thought	and	attitude.	Whatever	your	problems	or
dilemma,	the	Holy	Spirit
	and	Christ	Consciousness	can	help	you	find	a	way	out.
GOD	did	not	create	the	negative	ego,	people	did.	It	is	the	misuse	of	free	choice.
So	the	key	point	here	is	that	GOD	and	the	Masters	cannot	help	you	develop
Psychologically,	and	your	physical	body	cannot	help	you.	They	cannot	create	a
healthy	psychoepistemology	for	you,	for	this	is	a	by-product	of	your	own
thinking	and	GOD,	the	Masters,	and	the
	Angels	cannot	control	your	mind,	your
feelings	and	emotions.	This	is	your	job.	So	being	an	adult	Psychologically,	and
becoming	a	Master	Psychologically,	will	only	happen	when	a	person	takes
responsibility	for	being	the	cause	of	their	reality,	and	becomes	the	Master	of
their	thoughts	and	emotions,	and	develops	a	healthy,	well	balanced
psychoepistemology	and/or	Spiritual	Philosophy	on	all	levels.
	On	the
Psychological	Level	there	is	no	free	ride.	Building	Light	Quotient	is	easy,	it	is
just	a	matter	of	calling	it	in	from	the	Celestial	Realms.	Physically	feeding	the
physical	body	is	easy,	and	the	physical	body	will	grow	even	when	we	abuse	it
and	feed	it	junk	food.	My	beloved	readers,	the	real	“nuts	and	bolts”	of	the
Spiritual	Path	is	the	Psychological	Level.	It	again	is	the	foundation	of	your
Spiritual	House.	If	you	do	not	address	this	level	properly	it	will	totally	corrupt
the	Spiritual	work	one	has	done,	and	it	will	make	the	physical	body	ill	over	time.
Too	many	lightworkers	are	fragmented	in	their	Spiritual	growth.	Too	many
lightworkers	are	falling	into	the	glamour	of	the	Celestial	Realms	and	not	doing
their	psychological	homework.	Because	of	this,	a	new	term	has	had	to	be
invented
	called	“Fragmented	Ascension.”	This	would	seem	to	be	paradoxical.
How	can	you	Ascend	and	achieve	the	Seven	Levels	of	Initiation	and	still	be
completely	fragmented,	have	imbalanced	psychoepisteomologies,	and	be	run	by
the	negative	ego?	My	beloved	readers,	unfortunately	this	is	happening	and	it	is
happening	in	mass.	It	is	for	this	purpose	that	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters
have	guided	me	to	write
	this	chapter.
Strive	with	all	your	heart	and	soul	and	mind	and	might	to	develop	a
psychoepistemology	that	is	centered,	balanced,	and	well	integrated	as	GOD,	the
Holy	Spirit,	your	Higher	Self,	and	your	own	Mighty	I	Am	Presence	would	have
it	be.	I	humbly	suggest	that	reading	some	of	my	other	books	on	these	subjects
might	help	you	refine	this	process	a	bit.	The	books	I	recommend	are	
Soul
Psychology
,	
How	to	Clear	the	Negative	Ego
,	
Integrated	Ascension
,	
The	Golden
Book	of	Ascension
,	
The	Golden	Book	of	Melchizedek
,	
Ascension	and	Romantic
Relationships
,	and	
The	Golden	Keys	to	Ascension	and	Healing
.	I	have	great	faith
and	trust	in	you	my	beloved	brothers	and	sisters	to	learn	these	lessons	and	to	be
“Pure	in	GOD.”	The	main	problem	in	this	world	is	not	that	people	or
lightworkers	are	bad	or	have
	any	negative	intent.	It	is	more	a	matter	of	not
having	the	information	and	proper	Integrated	Spiritual	and	Psychological
training	they	need,	to	avoid	these	traps	and	pitfalls.	It	is	to	this	humble	purpose
that	I	have	written	this	chapter	and	this	series	of	books.	It	is	my	humble	hope
and	prayer	that	you	my	beloved	readers,	will	find	the	information	and	tools
useful,	and	will	help	you	to	accelerate
	your	path	to	true	God	Realization.
Physical/Earthly	Spiritual	Level
This	third	and	final	level	of	Spiritual	growth	deals	with	the	Physical/Earthly
Level.	Now	we	have	already	established	that	the	physical	body	will	grow
physically	into	adulthood	no	matter	how	evolved	or	unevolved	one	is	Spiritually,
Psychologically,	or	Physically.	Again,	if	an	adolescent	smokes	cigarettes	and
drinks
	too	much	alcohol	and	doesn’t	get	enough	exercise,	that	can	stunt	one’s
growth	but	will	not	stop	one	from	growing	into	an	adult	physical	body.	What	a
lot	of	lightworkers	do	not	realize	is	that	there	is	an	evolutionary	process	for	the
physical	body	as	well.	One	aspect	of	this	is	having	a	healthy	physical	body.	If
the	physical	body	is	ill	or	chronically	ill,	it	makes	learning	one’s	Psychological
and
	Spiritual	lessons	more	difficult.	So	part	of	evolving	the	physical	vehicle	is
eating	a	good	diet,	physical	exercise,	fresh	air,	sunshine,	drinking	lots	of	pure
water,	getting	enough	sleep,	not	taking	recreational	drugs,	work/play	balance,
affirming	and	visualizing	good	health,	praying	for	good	health	and	help	from	the
Masters	for	maintaining	this	state.
Besides	the	health	of	one’s	physical
	body	there	is	also	the	issue	of	bringing
light	quotient,	love	quotient	and	power	quotient	into	the	physical	vehicle	itself.
The	process	of	Ascension,	in	truth,	would	be	better	termed	“Descension.”	For
the	ideal	is	to	fully	ground	one’s	Mighty	I	Am	Presence	and	Light/Love/Power
Bodies	fully	into	the	four-body	system,	which	includes	the	physical	vehicle.	We
are	meant	to	become	embodiments	of	GOD
	in	our	physical	bodies	on	Earth.	We
are	also	meant	to	physically	ground	all	the	Higher	bodies	I	mentioned	in	the	first
section	of	this	chapter	from	the	Spiritual	realm	into	the	four-body	system
(Spiritual,	Mental,	Emotional,	and	Physical).	We	are	also	meant	to	anchor	all	of
our	330	chakras	into	the	physical	body.	So	just	because	one	has	past	their	Seven
Levels	of	Initiation,	this	does	not	mean	they
	have	fully	integrated	these
initiations	into	their	mental,	emotional,	and	physical	bodies.	People	are	allowed
to	pass	their	initiations	when	it	is	accomplished	in	the	Spiritual	Body.	This	is
very	gracious	and	generous	of	GOD	to	allow	this	to	happen.	Once	we	pass	these
initiations	it	is	then	our	job	to	make	sure	that	we	have	fully	integrated	them	into
all	four	bodies,	which	includes	the	physical.
Another	aspect	of	evolving	the	physical	vehicle	is	building	one’s	immune
system	Spiritually,	Psychologically,	and	Physically.	This	is	done	first	by
mastering	the	Spiritual	and	Psychological	level.	This	is	so	because	every
negative	thought	and/or	negative	feeling	and	emotions	and	every	piece	of
negative	energy	is	a	toxin	to	the	physical	body,	just	as	pesticides	would	be	on	a
physical	level!
	When	you	learn	to	master	the	Spiritual	and	Psychological	Levels,
this	will	greatly	help	your	physical	health	and	immune	system.	This	is	also	true
because	the	subconscious	mind	runs	the	physical	body.	When	it	is	out	of	control
and	run	by	the	negative	ego	it	will	do	havoc	to	the	physical	vehicle.	This	is	the
case	because	it	operates	like	a	computer.	It	has	the	intelligence	to	create	perfect
health
	or	cancer,	or	any	other	illness.	It	doesn’t	have	the	reasoning	however	to
know	which	one	to	create.	It	needs	a	computer	programmer,	which	is	you,	to	tell
it	what	to	do.	There	is	a	natural	intelligence	in	the	body	that	does	move	towards
perfect	health,	however	it	can	be	short	circuited	by	giving	too	many	negative	ego
orders	to	the	subconscious	mind.
The	other	key	to	evolving	your	immune	system
	is	removing	all	the	physical
toxins	from	your	physical	body.	Your	cells,	organs,	and	glands	store	toxins	even
form	childhood.	These	toxins	also	come	from	environmental	pollution,	the	food
we	eat,	the	drugs	we	take,	electrical	pollution	to	name	a	few.	Some	of	these
toxins	are:	(pesticides,	petrochemicals,	heavy	metals,	bacteria,	viruses,	funguses,
mercury	from	our	silver	fillings,	radiation	from
	such	things	as	color	television.
Electrical	pollution	from	the	myriad	of	electrical	appliances,	phones,	telephone
wire,	preservatives,	junk	food,	recreational	drugs,	antibiotics,	drugs	given	by
traditional	doctors,	air,	water,	and	Earth	pollution,	manufactured	dead	food,	lead
paint,	dental	and	traditional	medical	x-rays,	to	name	just	a	few.	Part	of	the
evolution	of	the	physical	body	is	to	remove
	all	negative	thoughts,	feelings,
emotions,	energy,	and	physical	toxins	from	its	physical	and	etheric	cells,	organs,
glands,	tissue,	and	blood	stream.	This	is	a	field	of	endeavor	that	traditional
Western	medicine	does	not	have	a	clue	about.	Western	medicine,	although
extremely	useful,	is	the	cause	of	the	great	many	of	these	toxins	by	all	the	drugs
they	prescribe,	x-rays,	invasive	tests,	and	dyes
	they	pump	into	the	body	for	these
tests.	In	the	future	energetic	testing	will	replace	this	form	of	invasive	testing.
The	best	way	to	remove	all	these	toxins	is	through	homeopathic	medical	care
and	herbal	medicine.	If	you	are	interested	in	doing	so	I	suggest	you	find	a	really
good	homeopathic	and/or	naturopathic	doctor	who	can	help	guide	you	in	a
process	of	finding	the	right	homeopathics
	to	remove	all	these	toxins.	Never
forget	that	GOD	exists	as	much	in	the	Material	Universe	as	He	does	in	the
Mental,	Emotional,	and	Spiritual	Universe.	Never	forget	the	purpose	of	life	is	to
bring	Heaven	to	Earth.
When	these	processes	that	I	have	mentioned	in	this	section	are	done,	the
physical	vehicle	will	be	filled	with	Light,	Love,	and	Power.	You	will	have	tons
of	energy,	you	will	hardly
	ever	get	sick,	you	will	need	much	less	sleep	and	your
physical	vehicle	will	be	able	to	withstand	enormous	amounts	of	stress	and	not
break	down.	Most	of	all,	you	will	be	filled	with	energy	and	vitality	to	fulfill	your
Spiritual	Mission	on	Earth.
The	last	and	highest	level	of	evolution	of	the	physical	vehicle	is	the	process	of
bringing	and	anchoring	so	much	of	GOD’s	and	your	own	Mighty	I	Am
Presence’s	Light,	Love	and	Power	into	the	physical	vehicle	itself,	that	there	is	a
process	of	etherialization	that	takes	place	of	the	physical	body	itself.	In	other
words,	the	physical	body	becomes	fused	and	integrated	in	a	sense,	with	the
Light,	Love	and	Power	Body,	so	the	subatomic	particles	begin	almost	to	take	on
the	nature	of	a	more	etherial-type	body	that	is	still	very	grounded	and	connected
to	the	Earth	Mother	and	one’s	Spiritual	Mission	on	Earth.	The	highest	level	and
form	of	this	evolutionary	process	is	where	at	death,	Translation	or	Ascension
occurs	and	an	individual	can	choose	if	they	want	to,	Ascend	the	physical	body	as
well.	This	means	at	death	the	physical	body	is	translated	into	the	Light	and	taken
with	you	into	the	next	dimension	of	reality	that	it	is	your	destiny	to	magnetize
and	vibrate	to.	I	need	to	say	here	that	this	is	not	required	or	even	necessary	to
Ascend	the	physical	vehicle	for	it	does	take	some	extra	energy	and	training	on
the	inner	planes	to	do	this.	It	is,	however,	every	Initiate’s	choice	as	to	if	this	is
something	they	want	to	pursue.	One	choice	is	not	better	than	another,	it	is	just	a
choice,	an	option.
In	conclusion,	on	this	topic	of	the	evolution
	of	the	physical	vehicle,	I	think	you
can	see	that	a	great	many	lightworkers	ignore,	abuse	their	physical	bodies	by
improper	care	and	nurturing.	They	have	a	faulty	belief	that	their	physical	bodies
and	even	the	Earth	has	nothing	to	do	with	their	Spiritual	evolution.	They	put	all
their	energies	into	the	Spiritual	level.	Others	put	their	energy	into	the	Spiritual
and	Psychological	level	and	feel
	the	physical	body	and	Earth	is	not	as	important.
This	is	illusion	for	all	Four	Faces	of	GOD	(Spiritual,	Mental,	Emotional,	and
Physical)	are	equally	important.	It	is	essential	to	do	one’s	“Spiritual	Homework”
to	evolve	all	Four	Faces	of	GOD	within	self,	and	within	one’s	service	work
outside	of	Self.	The	Material	Physical/Earthly	plane	is	one	of	GOD’s	Seven
Heavens.
The	final	aspect	of	evolving
	the	Material	Face	of	GOD	deals	with	the
evolution	of	not	only	the	physical	body	of	your	self,	but	also	the	physical	body
of	GOD.	In	our	case,	this	is	the	Earth	Mother,	our	worldly	civilization,	and	our
Solar	System.	Again,	a	great	many	lightworkers	do	not	pay	much	attention	to	the
Earth	Mother,	Worldly	Civilization,	Politics,	Social	Issues,	Changing	the	World,
and	Current	Events.	They	believe
	this	has	nothing	to	do	with	their	Spiritual	life.	I
am	here	to	tell	you	that	it	has	everything	to	do	with	Spiritual	life	and	one	will	not
fully	Realize	God,	or	their	own	Personal	full-fledged	Integrated	Ascension,
unless	they	integrate	and	realize	the	“Material	Earthly	Face	of	GOD.”	You	can
not	hate	the	Earth	and	the	Earthly	world	or	even	ignore	this	process	and	fully
achieve	your	personal	Ascension.
	GOD	is	realized	through	Mastery	of	all	four
levels	(Spiritual,	Mental,	Emotional,	and	Physical/Earthly.	The	ignoring	of
anyone	will	be	a	blind	spot	and	lack	of	Realization	of	GOD.
So	let	us	now	examine	what	the	Earthly	level	of	God	Realization	is	about.	It
deals	with	taking	care	of	the	Earth	Mother	on	a	personal	and	collective	level	and
not	polluting	and/or	abusing	her.	It	is	to	take	responsibility
	on	a	personal	level	to
do	one’s	part	in	loving	the	Earth	Mother	and	attuning	to	nature.	It	has	to	do	with
developing	a	relationship	to	the	Kingdoms	of	the	Earth	Mother	(Animal,	Plant,
and	Mineral).	It	has	to	do	with	developing	a	relationship	to	the	Ethereal	Nature
Kingdoms	(Nature	Spirits,	Devas,	Tree	Spirits,	Elves,	Gnomes,	Salamanders,
Undines,	Sylphs,	Fairies,	Pan,	and	the	Elemental
	Kingdom).
Evolution	of	the	Earthly	Level	has	to	do	with	grounding	your	physical	service
mission	on	Earth.	A	great	many	lightworkers	have	great	visions,	wonderful
ideas,	great	love	and	passion,	but	never	do	anything	on	Earth.	Their	Spirituality
remains	on	a	Spiritual,	Mental,	and	Emotional	plane,	and	never	grounds	into	and
with	the	Material	Face	of	GOD.
Evolution	of	the	Earthly	Level
	also	deals	with	learning	to	make	money	and	not
depending	on	others	to	support	you.	It	also	has	to	do	with	maintaining	self-
mastery	over	Earth	life.	This	means	cleaning	your	house,	doing	all	your	errands,
personal	hygiene,	respecting	Earthly	laws,	and	paying	your	taxes	to	name	a	few.
It	also	means	not	only	loving	the	Earth	Mother,	but	also	loving	“Worldly
Civilization.”	This	means	caring	about	all
	the	problems	and	inequities	going	on
in	the	world,	such	as	hunger,	homeless	people,	child	abuse,	spousal	abuse,	gang
violence,	equal	rights,	education,	racism,	saving	endangered	species,	animal
abuse,	repairing	the	ozone	level,	stopping	the	destruction	of	our	rain	forests,
repairing	and	remediating	all	the	pollution	and	abuse	mankind	has	done	to	the
Earth	Mother.	My	beloved	readers,	this	is	a	wake-up
	call.	Our	Spiritual	Paths	are
not	separate	from	these	issues.	These	issues	and	many	more	are	our	Spiritual
Path.As	Sai	Baba	has	said,“Hands	that	help	are	holier	than	lips	that	pray.”	It	is
our	job	to	create	Heaven	on	Earth.	Who	is	going	to	create	a	Utopian	Society	on
Earth	if	we	as	the	Spiritual	Leaders	and	Lightworkers	don’t	do	it?	We	are	the
“Externalization	of	the	Hierarchy.”	It	is	our	mission
	to	get	involved	with	Earth
life	in	the	way	and	manner	GOD	has	created	us	to	fulfill	in	the	“Divine	Plan”	of
things.	Each	person	has	a	puzzle	piece	to	fulfill	and	this	means	getting	your
hands	a	little	dirty	in	the	Earth,	soil,	and	in	helping	those	on	the	Earth	less
fortunate	who	need	our	help.	It	is	our	job	to	change	all	the	institutions	of	this
world	from	negative	ego	based	institutions	to
	Christ/Buddha	based	institutions.
This	applies	to	the	political	system,	legal	system,	social	work,	gardening,
religion,	the	arts,	sciences,	economic	system,	business,	psychology,	education,
traditional	medicine,	child	care,	and	the	list	goes	on	and	on.	This	also	means
becoming	educated	on	all	these	issues	and	raising	consciousness	whenever	you
can.	If	you	can’t	help	physically	or	politically	in	certain
	areas	then	pray	on	these
issues	and	make	them	part	of	your	meditations.	Have	compassion	for	your
brothers	and	sisters	in	other	parts	of	the	world	who	are	being	abused	and
mistreated.	Ignoring	the	Earthly	world	and	civilization	is	ignoring	an	enormous
part	of	your	Spiritual	Path.	I	am	not	saying	here	that	everyone	has	to	go	to
Washington	and	march	or	write	their	congressman.	What	I	am	saying
	is	that
everyone	must	do	their	part	as	GOD	guides	them	to.	You	will	not	realize	GOD	if
you	do	not	love	the	Earth	Mother,	love	our	Earthly	World,	and	dedicate	your	life
to	being	of	service	to	both.	To	be	perfectly	honest,	the	Celestial	Realms	can	be
like	a	drug	or	glamour	to	some	people.	They	believe	they	are	being	Spiritual	by
ignoring	Earth	life	and	in	truth,	what	they	are	doing	is	ignoring	at	least
	one
quarter	of	their	own	God	Realization,	if	not	more.	Jesus	taught	and	set	an
example	of	living	in	the	market	place.
The	purpose	of	life	is	not	just	to	achieve	liberation	and	check	out	as	soon	as
possible.	It	is	to	love	the	Earth	Mother,	Earth	life,	and	the	Material	Face	of	GOD
so	much	that	you	want	to	remain	on	Earth	and	help	her	become	the	shining	Fifth
Dimensional	Civilization	she	is
	meant	to	realize	on	all	levels.	If	you	do	not	learn
how	to	be	happy	on	the	Earth	in	truth,	you	have	not	fully	learned	your	lessons	in
coming	here.	I	am	not	saying	that	this	is	an	easy	school	and	I	am	not	saying	that
Earth	life	isn’t	difficult	at	times;	however,	GOD	lives	and	is	in	all	facets	of	the
Material	Universe.	If	we	do	not	love	the	Earth	and	Earth	life	and	take
responsibility	for	serving	her
	and	helping	her	heal	then,	in	truth,	we	are	not
loving	GOD	fully.	Remember	the	Earth	and	the	Material	Universe	is	one	of
GOD’s	Heavens	and	is	GOD’s	Physical	Body.	We	have	just	talked	about	the
importance	of	evolving	your	own	physical	body	and	not	ignoring	and	abusing	it.
If	we	are	going	to	do	this,	then	why	would	we	ignore	and	abuse	GOD’s	Physical
body.	The	microcosm	is	like	the	macrocosm.
Look	at	the	example	Mother	Teresa	set.	She	got	her	hands	dirty.	Look	at	how
Ghandi	transformed	India.	Look	at	all	the	schools	and	hospitals	that	Sai	Baba
has	helped	set	up	and	develop.	My	beloved	readers,	do	not	just	let	your
Spirituality	live	in	the	Celestial	Realm,	or	on	the	Mental	and	Emotional	plane.
Ground	your	Spirituality	and	Ascension	process	not	only	onto,	but	also	into	the
Earth,
	and	Earth	life	itself.	Ground	your	Spiritual	Mission	onto	Earth,	and	not
just	in	some	Spiritual	Visions	and	Good	Ideas.	Do	not	let	your	negative	ego	go
on	an	ego	trip	of	having	to	do	some	glamorous	super	large	Spiritual	Vision	that
will,	in	truth,	never	manifest	on	the	Earthly	plane.	It	is	time	to	put	our	actions
where	our	visions	and	thoughts	are.	It	is	time	to	put	our	money	where	our	mouth
is.	The
	two	thousand	year	Piscean	cycle	never	made	it	to	the	Earthly	plane,	and
neither	did	very	many	lightworkers.	The	Aquarian	Age	and	our	new	Seventh
Ray	Cycle	are	about	grounding	our	Spiritual	Visions	and	Good	Ideas	on	Earth.
Talk	is	cheap!	It	is	time	for	physical	action	and	demonstration	on	the
Physical/Earthly	plane.	GOD	is	from	Missouri,	which	is	the	“Show	Me”	state.
GOD,	in	truth,	is	from	everywhere,
	but	for	this	next	two	thousand	year	Cycle,
He	is	from	Missouri.	The	Seventh	Golden	Age	on	Earth	is	the	complete
transformation	of	the	Earth	and	our	Worldly	Civilization	into	a	Fifth
Dimensional	Society	on	Earth!	Whatever	profession	or	field	of	endeavor	you	are
involved	with	in	the	Divine	Plan,	it	is	time	now	to	love	the	Earth	Mother	and	our
Worldly	Civilization,	with	all	your	Heart	and	Soul
	and	Mind	and	Might,	and	to
be	about	the	“Father’s	and	Mother’s	business”	of	healing	and	redeeming	all
aspects	of	our	society	for	our	children	and	grandchildren	to	come!	This	is	the
True	Mantle	of	the	Christ	and	Buddha	Consciousness	that	is	now	being	placed
on	each	and	every	person	reading	this	chapter.	This	is	the	Spiritual	Leadership
and	Spiritual	Mission	of	Planetary	World	Service	that	is	now	being
	placed	on
your	shoulders.	It	is	not	a	heavy	load	for	all	that	is	required	is	for	you	to	do	your
puzzle	piece	and	part.	It	is	also	not	a	heavy	load	because	each	of	us	as
lightworkers	and	Masters	on	Earth	stand	arm-in-arm,	and	shoulder	to	shoulder	in
the	“Great	Work”	of	redeeming	the	Earth	and	Worldly	Civilization.	It	is	not	a
heavy	load	because	GOD,	Christ,	the	Holy	Spirit,	our	Mighty	I	Am	Presence,
our	Higher	Self,	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters,	the	Archangels	and	Angels,
the	Elohim	Masters,	the	Christed	Extraterrestrials,	the	Earth	Mother,	and	Pan
and	the	Nature	Kingdoms	both	ethereal	and	physical,	will	be	helping	us	every
step	of	the	way!
So	let	it	be	Written,	So	let	it	be	Done!
7
The	Personality	of	GOD	
	
We	have	here	one	of	the	age	old	questions	from	the	beginning	of	time,	which	is
what	is	the	Personality	of	GOD?	If	we	could	understand	what	the	Personality	of
GOD	was	then	we	could	really	have	a	Golden	Key	to	how	to	Realize	GOD	on
Earth.	By	the	Grace	of	GOD	and	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters,	I	will	share
with	you	just	this	in	this	chapter.
GOD’s	Personality
	is	divided	into	three	parts	and	seven	parts.	This	is	part	of
why	the	numbers	three	and	seven	are	considered	some	of	the	holiest	numbers.
GOD	is	first	divided	into	the	Trinity	of	GOD,	which,	of	course,	is	GOD,	Christ,
and	the	Holy	Spirit.	GOD	being	the	Creator.	The	Christ	being	the	Eternal	Self
we	as	the	Sons	and	Daughters	of	GOD	are,	in	truth,	but	are	in	the	process	of
Realizing.	The	Holy
	Spirit,	which	is	the	Voice	of	GOD	and	the	“still,	small
voice	within,”	which	speaks	for	the	Atonement	or	the	At-One-Ment.	The	Holy
Spirit	is	GOD’s	answer	to	every	question	and	ever	problem.	For	every
miscreation	of	the	negative	ego/fear-based/separative	mind,	the	Holy	Spirit	is	the
antidote.	The	Holy	Spirit	speaks	for	the	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness,	which	of
course	is	the	opposite	of	the	negative
	ego/fear-based	consciousness.	The	Holy
Spirit	speaks	for	the	Atonement,	which	is	the	undoing	of	all	problems,	which
come	from	separative	thinking.	It	can	help	undo	everything	in	your	personality
that	is	not	of	GOD.	Most	people,	and	even	lightworkers,	do	not	take	advantage
of	the	incredible	powers	of	the	Holy	Spirit.
Now,	we	are	made	in	GOD’s	Image,	as	the	Bible	says,	so	we	are	a	Trinity
	as
well.	We	are	a	Trinity	made	up	of	the	Superconscious,	conscious	and
subconscious	minds.	Part	of	our	lesson	is	to	become	as	integrated	as	GOD	is	in
His	Triune	nature.	This	is	our	first	clue	into	the	Personality	of	GOD.
The	second	clue	into	the	Nature	of	the	Personality	of	GOD	is	to	understand
GOD’s	seven-fold	nature.	GOD’s	Body	is	made	up	of	Seven	Cosmic
Dimensions,	with	each	Dimension
	made	up	of	Seven	subplanes	or
subdimensions	in	each	of	these	Cosmic	Dimensions.	These	Dimensions	are
called	the	Cosmic	Physical,	Cosmic	Astral,	Cosmic	Mental,	Cosmic	Buddhic,
Cosmic	Atmic,	Cosmic	Monadic,	and	Cosmic	Logoic.	The	Cosmic	Physical
Plane	is	made	up	of	seven	subplanes	by	the	same	names,	but	are	the	subplanes	of
the	Cosmic	Physical	Plane.
This,	however,	explains	the	nature	and
	structure	of	GOD’s	Body	but	does	not
explain	GOD’s	Personality.	GOD’s	Personality	is	divined	into	seven	parts	as
well.	These	are	the	great	and	Holy	Rays	of	GOD.	GOD’s	Personality	is	divided
into	Power,	Love/Wisdom/Active	Intelligence,	Harmony	and	Beauty/	New	Age
Science/	Devotion/	Freedom/	Transmutation/	Alchemy	and	Divine	Structure.
GOD’s	Personality	is	the	Perfect	Balanced	and	Integrated	Synthesis
	of	these
Seven	Attributes.	This	understanding	is	a	Divine	and	Sanctified	Gift	and	Map
from	GOD	and	the	Masters	to	help	us	understand	the	proper	way	to	balance	and
integrate	our	own	personalities	and	psychological	selves.
GOD’s	Personality	is	first	made	up	of	Power.	This	is	the	Power	to	be	the	First
Cause	and	Creator	of	the	Infinite	Universe.	It	is	the	Power	to	completely	cause
His	reality.
	It	is	also	the	Power	and	Will	of	GOD,	rather	than	the	will	of	the
negative	ego,	lower	self,	fear	based,	separative	mind.	So	my	Beloved	Readers,
GOD	owns	His	Power,	and	is	the	Embodiment	of	the	Will	of	GOD	and	not	the
will	of	the	negative	ego	fear-based	thought	system.	This	is	the	First	Great	Ray	of
GOD	and	Creation.
The	second	aspect	of	GOD’s	Personality	is	Love/Wisdom.	GOD	is
Unconditionally
	Loving	at	all	times	towards	self	and	His	Creation	and	manifests
and	demonstrates	this	Unconditional	Love	with	great	Psychological	Wisdom.
This	is	the	Second	Great	Ray	of	GOD	and	Creation.
The	Third	aspect	of	GOD’s	Personality	is	Active	Intelligence.	This	again	is	a
form	of	Wisdom,	but	it	is	not	Wisdom	of	the	Heart,	or	Wisdom	in	a
Psychological	Sense,	as	a	different	kind	of	Wisdom,	that	is
	“Wisdom	to	put
GOD’s	Consciousness	into	Action.”	Without	this	Third	Aspect	of	GOD’s
Personality,	nothing	would	ever	get	done	in	GOD’s	Plan.	We	would	have
Personality/Power	and	Love	/Wisdom;	however,	without	this	third	aspect	of
GOD’s	Personality,	the	Power	and	Love	would	never	manifest	on	the	Material
Plane	of	GOD’s	reality.	This	is	the	Third	Great	Ray	of	GOD	and	Creation!
The	Fourth	Aspect
	of	GOD’s	Personality	is	Harmony	and	Beauty.	GOD	is	not
only	Powerful,	Loving,	Psychologically	Wise/Wise	in	Action	in	Material
Creation	but	GOD	is	Harmonious	and	completely	attuned	to	Beauty	in	every
aspect	of	Creation,	in	the	way	GOD	manifests	his	reality	on	the	Material	Plane
of	Creation.	This	is	the	Fourth	Great	Ray	of	GOD	and	Creation.
The	Fifth	aspect	of	GOD’s	Personality	is	New	Age
	Science.	GOD	is	not	only
Power,	Unconditional	Love/Psychologically	wise,	Wise	in	Action,	Attuned	to
Harmony	and	Beauty,	but	GOD	is	very	Scientific	in	how	He	has	Created	the
Infinite	Universe.	Everything	in	GOD’s	Universe	is	governed	by	Laws	and	is
very	much	in	Divine	Order.	It	is	possible	to	understand	and	Master	these	Laws
and	hence	understand	the	Nature	of	GOD	on	His	various	levels.	This	is	why,
	in
truth,	Religion	and	Science	blend	perfectly	together	if	properly	understood.	This
is	the	Fifth	Great	Ray	of	GOD	and	Creation.
The	Sixth	Aspect	of	GOD’s	Personality	is	Devotion.	God	is	not	only	All
Powerful,	All	Loving,	All	Wise,	All	Wise	in	action	on	the	Material	plane,
Attuned	to	Harmony	and	Beauty,	Totally	Scientific;	but	is	also	filled	with
Devotion	and	Love	for	His	Sons	and	Daughters
	of	GOD	and	His	entire	Creation.
GOD	is	the	perfect	balance	of	Masculine	and	Feminine,	for	GOD	is	totally
scientific	yet	filled	with	Love	and	Devotion	for	His	Sons	and	Daughters	and	all
Sentient	Beings.	This	is	the	Sixth	Great	Ray	of	GOD	and	Creation.
The	Seventh	aspect	of	GOD’s	Personality	is	Freedom,	Transmutation,
Alchemy,	Ceremonial	Order	and	Magic.	GOD	is	not	only	Powerful,
Unconditionally
	Loving,	Psychologically	Wise,	Wise	in	Action,	Attuned	to
Harmony	and	Beauty,	Scientific,	Filled	with	Devotion,	He	is	also	the
Embodiment	of	Freedom	and	is	Divinely	Structured	in	the	process	to	achieve
this	Freedom.	GOD	is	skilled	in	the	process	of	how	to	Transmute	and	Transform
energy	from	Fear	into	Love.	From	lower	self	into	Higher	Self,	from	Separation
into	Oneness,	from	negative	ego	into
	Christ/Buddha/	God	consciousness.	This
Seventh	Aspect	of	GOD’s	Personality	is	very	skilled	at	setting	up	Structures	and
Systems	to	help	His	Creation	achieve	Freedom.	Freedom	from	what?	Freedom
from	glamour,	illusion,	maya,	and	negative	ego	thinking.As	Sai	Baba	has	said,
“The	mind	creates	bondage	and	the	mind	creates	liberation.”	GOD	is	Total
Freedom	from	limitation	and	from	the	negative	ego	fear
	based	thought	system.
GOD	knows	how	to	set	up	structures	to	help	lead	His	Creation	back	to	Freedom.
There	is	now	one	last	aspect	to	GOD’s	Personality	and	that	is	GOD’s
Personality	is	not	just	the	Embodiment	of	these	Seven	Great	Attributes,	but	is
also	the	“Perfect	Synthesis,	Balance	and	Integration,”	of	these	Seven	Great	GOD
Qualities	and	Rays.	My	beloved	readers,	listen	very	closely	to
	my	following
words.	We	are	made	in	the	“Image	and	Likeness	of	GOD.”	We	too	are	made	up
of	these	Seven	Great	Rays.	For	the	microcosm	is	like	the	Macrocosm.	“As
within,	So	without.	As	above,	so	below.”	If	we	want	to	fully	Realize	GOD,	then
we	too	must	become	the	perfect	integration	and	balance	of	these	Seven	Great
Rays.	We	must	fully	own	our	personal	power,	and	surrender	to	GOD’s	Will	and
not	the	negative
	ego’s	will.	We	must	learn	to	be	unconditionally	loving	at	all
times	to	self	and	others.	We	must	develop	Active	Intelligence	to	be	wise	inn
learning	how	to	manifest	our	conscious-ness	onto	the	Earthly	plane,	and
manifest	our	Spiritual	Mission	on	Earth	not	just	in	our	minds.	We	must	learn	to
strive	to	be	Harmonious,	and	Attuned	to	Beauty	and	Aesthetics	in	all	that	we	do.
We	must	learn	to	be	very
	Spiritually	Scientific	in	all	that	we	do,	and	learn	to
understand	the	Laws	that	make	up	GOD’s	Infinite	Universe.	We	must	not	only
understand	these	laws,	but	we	must	use	these	Great	Laws	to	help	our	selves	and
others.	We	must	cultivate	Devotion	to	GOD,	to	the	Masters,	to	our	fellow
Brothers	and	Sisters	in	GOD,	and	to	all	GOD’s	Kingdoms	without	giving	up	our
personal	power,	yet	still	retain	the
	total	unconditional	love.	We	must	learn	to	set
up	Divine	Structure	in	our	life	and	in	the	design	of	our	Society	and	world,	which
will	ultimately	lead	to	Freedom	for	all.	We	must	learn	the	process	of	Divine
Alchemy,	Transmutation,	Transformation,	and	Spiritual	Magic	to	change	our
selves	and	our	World	from	just	seeing	ourselves	as	people	to	our	true	reality	as
Sons	and	Daughters	of	GOD	living	in	physical
	bodies.	Lastly,	we	must	learn	to
perfectly	balance	and	integrate	these	Seven	Great	Attributes	of	GOD	within
ourselves	and	develop	each	of	them	to	our	highest	potential.	In	this	way,	we	will
become	the	living	embodiment	of	the	Mighty	I	Am	Presence	on	Earth.	In	this
way,	we	will	become	full-fledged	Ascended	Masters	on	Earth.
In	conclusion,	I	just	wanted	to	point	out	that	we	are	all	aware	of
	the	Three
Fold	Nature	of	GOD,	which	has	also	been	called	the	Three-Fold	Flame	of	GOD.
This	has	been	called	the	Love/Wisdom/Power	of	GOD.	My	beloved	readers,	do
you	not	see	that	this	embodies	these	First	Three	Rays	and	attributes	of	GOD?	It
contains	the	First	Ray	of	Power,	The	Second	Ray	of	Love/Wisdom,	and	the
Third	Ray	of	Wisdom.	Wisdom	here	has	two	meanings.	The	Psychological
Wisdom	of	knowing
	how	to	Unconditionally	Love,	and	the	Wisdom	of	how	to
manifest	GOD’s	Power	and	Unconditional	love	on	the	Material	Plane.	These
Three	Divine	Attributes	are	the	Three	Key	Qualities	that	need	to	be	perfectly
integrated	to	Realize	GOD.	I	bring	this	up	for	many	have	not	noticed	the
relationship	of	the	Three	Fold	Flame	of	GOD	to	the	First	Three	Rays	of	GOD,
and	I	felt	it	was	important	here	to	make	this
	Relationship	and	Tie.	Add	to	the
Three-Fold	Flame	of	GOD,	the	Four	Remaining	Attributes	of	GOD,	and	you
have	the	Seven-Fold	Nature	of	GOD	and	of	your	self	as	an	Incarnation	of	God.
If	you	truly	want	a	Map	of	how	to	Demonstrate	GOD	on	Earth,	My	beloved
readers,	let	this	be	your	Guide	and	Divine	Road	Map	for	how	you	Create,
Manifest,	and	Demonstrate	your	own	Divine	Personality	on	Earth!
8
The	Glory	and	the	Corruption	of	the	Seven
Great	Rays	of	GOD	
	
We	have	already	established	that	the	perfect	integration	and	balance	of	the	Seven
Rays	is	the	Personality	of	GOD.	It	is	essential	to	understand	as	with	all	things
that	the	Seven	Rays	have	a	higher	and	lower	aspect.	This	is	because	the	Rays
although	created	by	GOD,	can	be	misused	and	corrupted	by	the	negative
ego/fear-based/separative
	thought	system.	In	this	chapter	I	would	like	to	go
through	each	of	these	aspects	of	GOD’s	Personality	and	clearly	explain	the	glory
and	the	corruption	that	can	take	place	when	they	are	used	purely	and	when	they
are	corrupted	by	the	negative	ego	thought	system.
The	glory	of	the	First	Ray	is	when	a	person	owns	their	personal	power	100%
in	total	service	of	GOD	and	Unconditional	Love.	It	is
	also	the	glory	of
surrendering	to	GOD’s	Will	and	not	the	ego’s	self-centered,	negatively	selfish
will.	The	corruption	of	the	First	Ray	is	when	a	person	owns	their	personal	power
to	control,	hurt,	and	manipulate	others	for	self-centered,	narcissistic,	selfish	gain;
not	recognizing	their	Brother	and	Sister	or	themselves	as	an	incarnation	of	GOD.
The	Corruption	of	the	First	Ray	is	also	not	surrendering
	to	GOD’s	Will	in	all
things	and	instead	unconsciously	or	consciously	following	the	will	of	the
negative	ego,	lower-self,	and	self-centered	mind.	The	glory	of	the	First	Ray	is	its
ability	to	own	one’s	personal	power	at	all	times,	but	be	able	to	surrender	to
GOD’s	Will	simultaneously.	The	negative	ego/fear-based	thought	system
completely	corrupts	this	understanding	by	having	the	person	either	own
	their
personal	power	and	not	surrender,	or	has	them	surrender	to	GOD’s	Will	and	not
own	their	personal	power.	Both	are	a	corruption	of	the	negative
ego/separative/lower	self	thought	system.	Hitler,	Mussolini,	Stalin	were	classic
examples	of	historical	figures	who	misused	and	misunderstood	the	First	Ray.	In
the	Spiritual	Movement	those	who	are	on	a	trip	of	self-aggrandizement,	being
better	than	everyone
	else	is,	power	trips	over	being	a	perceived	Guru,	and	or
people	who	are	constantly	angry	and	attacking	others	are	classic	examples.
The	glory	of	the	Second	Ray	is	its	ability	to	Unconditionally	Love	self	and
others	at	all	times,	and	the	Psychological	wisdom	it	brings	to	help	one	do	this	in
all	situations	and	with	all	people.	The	corruption	of	the	Second	Ray	is	first	off,
the	negative	ego/fear
	based	thought	systems	distortion	of	having	the	person
manifest	conditional	love	rather	than	Unconditional	Love.	The	negative	ego
thought	system	has	one	love	under	certain	conditions	and	requirements.	The
second	main	danger	and	corruption	is	becoming	overly	flowery,	sentimental,	and
loving,	and	not	having	a	backbone,	so	to	speak.	This	might	stem	from	not	having
enough	of	Rays	One,	Three	and	Five,
	which	are	a	little	more	mental	in	nature,
embodying	power,	intelligence,	and	science.	The	third	corruption	could	be
becoming	overidentified	with	the	teacher	or	guru	role,	and	not	being	able	to	step
out	of	it.	Being	a	know-it-all,	since	the	Second	Ray	is	that	of	education.	In	the
First	Ray	the	danger	would	be	being	too	political,	and	not	speaking	one’s	truth
enough.	In	the	case	of	overidentification
	with	the	Second	Ray	it	would	be
speaking	one’s	truth	too	much,	and	not	knowing	how	to	be	self-controlled,
tactful,	Spiritually	discerning,	and	attuned	to	timing.	I	am	also	reminded	of	a
book	called	
Women	Who	Love	Too	Much
.	This	would	also	be	an	example	of	the
imbalance	of	the	Second	Ray.	A	person	can	become	obsessed,	addicted	and	co-
dependent	in	relationship	to	love,	and	this	is	in	truth	a	negative
	ego	thought
system	distortion	of	the	true	Second	Ray	Unconditional	Love,	GOD	would	have
us	learn.
The	glory	of	the	Third	Ray	is	the	Active	Intelligence	or	Wisdom	to	put	our
God	Consciousness	into	demonstration	and	action	on	and	in	the	Material/Earthly
world,	and	not	just	on	the	Spiritual,	mental	and	emotional	plane.	The	corruption
of	the	Third	Ray	could	be	an	over	intellectual	nature	and
	lack	of	proper
integration	of	one’s	feelings	and	emotions.	It	could	also	be	being	run	by	the
mind,	instead	of	being	the	Master	of	one’s	mind,	and	learning	how	to	quiet	the
mind	when	needed.	It	could	also	be	over	planning	and	over	thinking	about	one’s
mission,	but	never	doing	it.	It	could	also	be	a	preoccupation	and
overidentification	on	making	money	and	business	pursuits	to	the	neglect	of	one’s
Spiritual
	Life,	because	the	Third	Ray	is	associated	with	business.	It	could	also	be
a	corruption	of	negative	ego	business	practices	based	on	negative	ego
competition	instead	of	Spiritual	cooperation.	It	would	be	the	negative	ego
controlling	one’s	business	practices	which	is	to	make	a	buck	at	any	price,	and	it
doesn’t	matter	who	you	hurt	in	the	process.	This	could	be	summed	up,	“So	what
that	you	gain
	the	whole	world	and	lose	your	own	Soul.”
The	glory	of	the	Fourth	Ray	is	the	creation	of	harmony,	unity,	and	oneness	at
all	times	with	self,	relationship	to	others	and	one’s	world.	It	is	also	the	creation
of	the	Arts	in	the	glorification	and	sanctification	of	GOD.	This	could	come	in	the
form	of	beautiful	Spiritual	Paintings,	beautiful	Spiritual	Music,	Spiritual
Architecture,	Spiritual	Poetry,
	Spiritual	Dance,	Spiritual	Opera,	Play,	and
Theatre,	to	name	just	a	few.	It	could	also	be	Spiritual	Movies,	Feng	Shui,	and
Aesthetics	in	daily	living.	The	corruption	of	the	Fourth	Ray	on	a	psychological
level	would	be	the	negative	ego	fear	based	thought	system	creating	disharmony
and	conflict	within	self	because	of	lack	of	proper	integration	and	negative	ego
contamination.	This	Conflict	within
	self	then	would	manifest	in	conflict	with
others,	and	lack	of	harmony	with	others.	The	Spiritual	ideal	of	the	Fourth	Ray
would	be	to	create	love,	harmony,	oneness	and	peace	at	all	times	and	not
disharmony,	conflict,	separation,	attack	and	fear.	On	a	professional	level,	the
corruption	of	the	Fourth	Ray	would	be	the	lower	self,	carnal	self,	and	negative
ego	control	the	creation	and	flow	of	the	Fourth
	Ray.	This	would	manifest	as
maybe	a	great	deal	of	the	rock	music	these	days,	with	very	negative	and	dark
lyrics.	It	could	be	the	creation	of	art	with	images	that	do	not	Spiritually	uplift,
but	do	the	opposite.	Instead	of	Music	of	the	Spheres	and	music	that	Spiritually
inspires,	it	would	be	music	that	appeals	to	the	lower-self	and	carnal-self.	I	do	not
think	that	this	needs	much	explanation	to
	my	readers.	It	would	be	movies	that
appeal	to	violence,	pornography,	and	horror	films;	instead	of	the	use	of	the	film
or	multimedia	for	uplifting	Spiritual	inspiration.	We	all	see	how	many	movies
are	playing	in	movie	theatres	that	we	can’t	even	imagine	that	anyone	would	ever
want	to	go	see.	These	moviemakers	appeal	to	those	individuals	run	by	the	lower
self,	negative	ego,	and	lower	nature.	When	the
	consciousness	of	the	masses	rises
enough	to	a	more	Spiritual/Christ/Buddha	state,	there	will	be	no	one	who	would
even	pay	money	to	see	these	movies.	Any	form	of	art	that	is	created	from,	and
panders	to	the	lower	self	and	lower	nature,	and	does	not	inspire	and	sanctify
GOD	by	its	beauty,	is	a	corruption	of	the	Fourth	Ray	of	GOD.
The	glory	of	the	Fifth	Ray	of	GOD	is	its	focus	on	Spiritual
	New	Age	Science.
On	a	Psychological	level,	it	is	the	use	of	the	mind	in	a	scientific	way;	for	healing
all	aspects	of	a	person	and	our	society.	The	proper	use	of	this	Fifth	Ray	leads	to
cutting-edge	scientific	breakthroughs	in	Medicine,	Psychology,	Law,	Gardening,
Ecology,	Social	Work,	Religion,	Business,	to	just	name	a	few.	In	truth,	the	list	is
endless.	Everything	in	GOD’s	Universe	is	made	up	of
	laws	and	by
understanding	and	mastering	these	laws	we	can	use	them	to	help	other	people
our	world	and	ourselves.	The	corruption	of	the	Fifth	Ray	could	again	be	an	over
intellectual	nature,	that	cuts	off	the	feeling	and	intuitive	nature	if	corrupted	by
the	negative	ego/fear-based	thought	system.	It	could	also	be	a	worship	of	science
and	the	rejection	of	religion	and	Spirituality	thinking	that	everything
	in	life	has
to	be	proven	by	a	scientific	study.	Or	believing	that	nothing	is	real	except	what
can	be	proven	by	scientific	means.	Or	that	nothing	is	real	except	that	which	can
be	sensed	with	one’s	five	physical	senses.	This	is	a	complete	perversion	of
Spiritual	Science.	This	is	the	negative	ego	controlling	science	and	is	not	the
Science	of	GOD.	Another	corruption	might	be	the	imbalanced	view
	that	Science
and	Religion	or	Spirituality	do	not	blend	and	integrate	perfectly	together.
Contrary	to	popular	opinion,	GOD	is	totally	scientific	and	understandable,	if	one
will	also	allow	oneself	to	use	ones	intuitive	mind	and	not	just	their	logical	mind.
Another	corruption	of	the	Fifth	Ray	is	a	focus	to	much	on	what	I	would	call	the
concrete	mind,	and	not	allowing	oneself	to	tap	into	the	abstract
	mind,	the	Higher
Mind,	and	the	Intuitive	right	brain	mind.	When	the	Fifth	Ray	is	properly
understood	and	utilized,	enormous	scientific	ideas	and	inspiration	will	come	also
not	only	from	logical	thinking,	which	is	fantastic	when	used	properly,	but	also
from	telepathic	Sources	of	Knowledge	on	the	inner	plane.	Cures	for	Aids,
Cancer,	and	all	the	ills	of	our	Society	can	come.	There	is	not	one	field	or
endeavor	of	life	that	the	Fifth	Ray	Scientific	mind	can	not	prove	useful.	There	is
in	truth	a	Science	for	everything.	Even	a	Science	for	how	to	run	an	effective
business,	office	or	home.	The	danger	and	corruption	of	the	Fifth	Ray	can	come
in	being	overly	scientific	in	an	intellectual	dry	sense	and	living	too	much	in	the
mental	body	and	scientific	focus	and	not	smelling	the	roses,	enjoying	and
experiencing
	life,	and	not	just	thinking	about	it.	Every	Ray	has	this	danger
within	its	focus	and	lens;	it	is	not	just	the	Fifth	Ray.	Each	Ray	of	GOD	can	be	a
blinder	in	a	sense,	if	not	balanced	with	the	other	Rays.	The	corruption	of	the
Fifth	Ray	in	a	professional	sense	is	Scientists	doing	animal	experiments	with	no
consideration	or	feeling	for	the	animals	they	are	experimenting	upon.	This	is	one
example.
	Another	example	might	be	the	focus	on	only	third	dimensional
traditional	methods	as	in	Western	medicine,	and	the	inability	to	open	up	to	the
vast	Spiritual	Technologies	that	are	not	so	invasive	and	poisonous	to	the	physical
body.	In	Psychology	it	is	a	science	only	focused	on	traditional	Psychology,	that
does	not	even	recognize	or	believe	in	GOD	or	the	reality	of	the	Soul.	With	no
judgement
	intended,	these	people	call	themselves	Scientists	and	they	are	seeing
life	through	one	seventh	of	reality	and	calling	it	science.	It	is	a	science	based	on
seeing	life	through	blinders.	True	Spiritual	Science	sees	life	through	a	Full
Spectrum	Prism	lens	utilizing	all	one’s	senses,	not	just	the	physical	ones.	Those
are	five	of	about	fifty	or	one	hundred	we	actually	possess.	For	more	information
on	this
	read	my	books	
The	Complete	Ascension	Manual
,	
Integrated	Ascension
and	the	
Golden	Book	of	Melchizedek
.	There	are	many	more	examples	I	could
give	of	the	corruption	of	science	on	a	professional	level;	however,	I	think	I	have
made	my	point	here.	You,	my	beloved	readers,	can	extrapolate	how	this	process
carries	over	to	all	fields	of	study.	I	would	also	highly	recommend	that	you	read
my	book	Manual
	for	Planetary	Leadership	for	a	great	deal	of	this	book	is	an	in-
depth	explanation	of	just	this	topic,	and	how	this	process	has	infiltrated	all	fields
and	aspects	of	our	Society	and	Civilization.	It	is	quite	fascinating	reading	if	you
would	like	to	see	how	this	process	carries	on	in	other	areas	of	Earth	life	as	well!
The	glory	of	the	Sixth	Ray	is	Devotion.	This	is	embodied	in	the	Master	Jesus’
commandment	to	“Love	the	Lord	thy	GOD,	with	all	your	heart	and	soul	and
mind	and	might,	and	to	Love	your	neighbor	as	you	Love	yourself.”	The	glory	of
the	Sixth	Ray	is	that	it	brings	an	enthusiastic	unconditional	love	and	Spiritual
passion	to	one’s	relationship	to	GOD,	the	Masters,	to	family,	friends,	people,
and	life	itself.	It	is	essential	in	life	to	fully	embrace	the	emotional	body,	and	have
total	Spiritual	passion,	enthusiasm,	and	joy.	The	Sixth	Ray	brings	this	total
devotion	and	idealism.	The	glory	of	the	Sixth	Ray	is	that	it	makes	us	strive	also
for	the	highest	within	us,	and	pursue	excellence	at	all	times.	The	corruption	of
the	Sixth	Ray	is	becoming	overly	emotional	and	letting	one’s	emotions	run	away
with	you	and	becoming	victimized	by	them.	It	is	also	giving	your	personal
power
	away	to	GOD,	the	Masters,	a	Guru,	and	other	people.	Another	corruption
and	glamour	of	the	Sixth	Ray	is	putting	Masters,	Spiritual	Teachers,	and	other
people	on	pedestals.	Another	corruption	of	the	negative	ego	fear	based	thought
system	that	distorts	the	pure	Sixth	Ray	is	being	to	idealistic	to	the	point	of	being
a	negative	perfectionist.	One	can	become	so	idealistic	that	they	can	become
almost
	dysfunctional	or	impractical.	The	other	great	danger	and	corruption	of	the
Sixth	Ray	is	lack	of	Spiritual	discernment.	These	are	the	main	things	to	watch
out	for	in	how	the	negative	ego/fear	based	thought	system	can	distort	the	Sixth
Ray	of	Devotion	and	Spiritual	Idealism.	The	corruption	of	the	Sixth	Ray
professionally	is	in	the	Field	of	Religion	where	Ministers	of	all	faiths	are	taken
over	by	faulty
	negative	ego	concepts	and	beliefs	and	the	true	religious	doctrine
becomes	contaminated.	We	have	seen	this	take	place	in	all	the	major	religions
where	their	doctrine	is	preaching	negative	ego	based	concepts	and	theology	that
has	no	relationship	to	what	GOD,	the	Masters	and	Angels	really	believe.	This	is
why	so	many	people	have	left	their	Religion,	which	is	unfortunate,	but	they	had
no	choice.	This
	is	why	more	people	have	been	killed	in	the	name	of	GOD	than
for	any	other	reason	I	believe.	It	is	also	why	different	religions	compete	with
each	other	and	why	most	religions	but	not	all	of	them	state	that	theirs	is	the	only
way	to	GOD,	which	of	course	is	total	illusion.	It	is	also	why	there	are	so	many
false	prophets,	cults,	and	religious	leaders	being	caught	in	scandal,	as	the
negative	ego	and
	corruption	ultimately	becomes	exposed.
The	glory	of	the	Seventh	Ray	is	its	emphasis	on	freedom	and	its	ability	to	set
up	divine	structures	and	systems	within	self	and	society	to	help	lead	towards
even	greater	freedom	within	self	and	within	our	Society.	The	glory	of	the
Seventh	Ray	is	also	the	ability	to	use	Spiritual	magic	in	the	form	of
transmutation	and	alchemy	to	transform	misqualified
	energies	into	the	purity	and
substance	of	GOD.	The	corruption	of	the	Seventh	Ray	can	come	in	many	forms.
It	can	come	from	the	negative	ego/fear	based	minds	misguided	understanding	of
what	true	freedom	is.	Many	people	think	they	are	free,	but,	in	truth,	they	are	not.
As	His	Holiness	the	Lord	Sai	Baba	has	said,	“The	mind	creates	bondage	and	the
mind	creates	liberation.”	Many	people	think	they	are
	free,	but,	in	truth,	they	are
being	very	much	run	by	the	negative	ego,	the	emotional	body,	their	mental	body,
the	inner	child,	lower-self	desire,	and	their	subconscious	mind.	Another	aspect	of
the	corruption	of	the	Seventh	Ray	by	the	negative	ego/separative	thought	system
is	a	misuse	of	structure.	Either	first	not	having	enough,	or	on	the	other	side	of	the
coin	having	too	much,	where	a	certain	amount
	of	spontaneity	and	free	flow	can
not	take	place.	There	is	a	proper	balance	to	find	here.	Another	corruption	and
glamour	is	setting	up	structures	for	the	wrong	purpose	and	goals	which	are	really
of	the	negative	ego	and	not	of	the	Divine	Plan.	Another	corruption	and	glamour
of	the	Seventh	Ray	is	the	use	of	magic	without	Spirituality.	This	is	very
common,	and	is	one	of	the	first	signs	of	a	cult.
	Slick	fast	talking	teachers,	who
have	some	magic	or	alchemical	abilities,	however,	their	motivation,	in	truth,	is
totally	governed	by	the	personality,	negative	ego	and	lower-self.	They	are	more
interested	in	gaining	power,	fame,	money	and	having	sex	with	their	followers,
than	truly	doing	Spiritual	magic	to	be	of	service.	Lightworkers	beware,	for	there
are	millions	of	teachers	out	there	who	fit	into
	this	category.	A	great	many
lightworkers	are	very	naïve	and	Spiritually	undiscerning,	and	are	to	easily
impressed	by	magic	that	is	motivated	by	impure	motivations.	The	freedom	is	not
giving	free	reign	to	one’s	negative	ego,	lower	self,	inner	child,	and	emotional
body.	This	is	not	freedom,	but	being	a	victim.	True	freedom	stems	from	total
self-mastery	of	one’s	energies	in	service	of	GOD,	unconditional
	love,	and	a
balanced,	integrated	ideal.	The	corruption	of	the	Seventh	Ray	in	a	professional
sense	comes	in	the	form	of	the	misuse	of	money.	Money	is,	in	truth,	a	Divine
substance	of	GOD	that	is	meant	to	be	used	as	a	means	of	helping	self	and	others.
The	corruption	of	money	comes	in	many	ways.	It	can	come	in	the	form	of	greed
and	miserliness.	It	can	also	come	in	the	form	of	spending	it	too	freely
	and
wasting	it	on	lower-self,	frivolous	purposes.	The	corruption	can	come	in	not
valuing	money,	using	it	for	a	Spiritual	Purpose	in	life	and	not	saving	it	in	the
appropriate	balance.	It	can	also	come	from	not	giving	it	away	for	needy	purposes
in	a	balanced	appropriate	manner	when	the	time	is	right.	Money	is	the	energy	we
use	to	make	changes	in	the	Physical/Earthly	world.	One	of	the	reasons	the
Earthly/Material	world	doesn’t	change	as	fast	as	it	could	is	that	most
lightworkers	do	not	have	as	much	money	as	they	would	like.	This	is	part	of	the
development	of	the	Seventh	Ray.	The	ability	to	have	prosperity	consciousness
and	not	poverty	consciousness.	To	not	be	afraid	of	money.	To	see	the	making	of
large	amounts	of	money	as	part	of	your	Spiritual	path.	Money	is	not	the	root	of
all	evil,	as
	some	would	suggest.	Money	in	and	of	itself	is	neutral.	The	negative
ego	/fear	based	thought	system	is	the	root	of	all	evil.	It	is	when	the	negative
ego/lower	self/separative	mind	controls	money,	that	problems	occur.	It	is	every
Son	and	Daughters	of	GOD	to	have	as	much	money	as	they	can	imagine.	It	is
part	of	their	lesson	to	learn	how	to	make	money.	The	key	point	here	being,	the
more	money	you	have
	the	more	you	can	serve	others.	If	you	do	not	have	money,
then	you	become	dependent	on	others	to	give	you	money.	There	are	periods	of
time,	of	course,	that	this	is	okay	and	totally	appropriate	in	everyone’s	life.	In	the
long	haul	so	to	speak	however,	the	ideal	would	be	that	each	person	be
responsible	for	themselves	and	be	able	to	make	as	much	money	as	they	can,	for
the	more	you	have	the	more	you
	can	give.	The	great	corruption	of	the	Seventh
Ray	professionally	is	the	enormous	number	of	people	in	our	Society	who	have
money	and	greedily	hold	on	to	it.	They	do	not	help	others	or	society,	and	they
also	use	their	money	to	hurt	others	and	prevent	others	from	gaining.	Be	aware	of
this	my	Beloved	Readers,	that	the	law	of	karma	exists,	and	every	“jot	and	tittle
of	the	law	is	fulfilled.”	Those	that
	misuse	their	money	will	ultimately	lose	their
money.	For	the	law	of	karma	also	extends	over	past	and	future	lives.	Part	of	the
movement	into	this	New	Millennium	and	the	Seventh	Golden	Age	is	the
understanding	that	our	Planet	as	a	whole	is	now	moving	into	a	Seventh	Ray
Cycle	from	a	previous	Sixth	Ray	Cycle.	Part	of	the	energies	of	this	Seventh	Ray
Cycle	is	to	also	now	ground	our	Spirituality	on	Earth.
	For	too	long	our
Spirituality	has	been	floating	around	on	the	Spiritual,	mental,	and	emotional
planes.	In	this	New	Millennium	and	Seventh	Golden	Age	it	is	now	time	to	create
Heaven	on	Earth.	It	is	now	time	to	fully	ground	our	Ascension	in	our	physical
bodies,	into,	and	onto	Earth	life.	It	is	now	time	for	each	person	to	fully	ground
their	Spiritual	mission	on	the	physical	Earthly	plane.	It	is	now
	time	for
lightworkers	to	become	the	Masters	of	money	on	all	levels	and	to	help	use	and
allocate	the	money	in	our	Government	and	economy	to	create	the	utopian
Ascended	Master	Society	that	is	its	destiny	build	in	this	Seventh	Golden	Age.
The	proper	use	of	the	Seventh	Ray	both	personally	and	collectively	holds	a	great
key	to	the	transmutation	and	transformation	that	now	needs	to	occur	along	with
all
	the	other	Rays	as	well.
The	final	glory	of	the	Seven	Rays	of	GOD	which	form	the	true	Personality	of
GOD	which	is	extremely	important	to	understand	is	how	these	Seven	Rays	in
GOD’s	Personality	work	perfectly	together	in	perfect	synthesis	and	integration.
In	a	true	full	fledged	Ascended	Master	this	is	also	the	case	for	the	microcosm	is
like	the	Macrocosm.
The	true	Glory	of	GOD	is	seeing
	how	these	Seven	Rays	work	together	in
perfect	harmony	and	balance	with	self	and	within	Society.	In	truth,	we	have	yet
to	see	this	take	place	within	our	society.	In	my	next	book,	I	am	going	to
endeavor	to	explain	how	this	can	take	place,	and	I	have	been	guided	to	call	this
“The	Divine	Plan	for	the	New	Millennium	and	Seventh	Golden	Age.”	For	our
purposes	here,	suffice	it	to	say	that,	in	truth,	there
	are	not	that	many	even	on	a
personal	level	who	have	learned	to	fully	develop	all	Seven	Rays	and	to	also
integrate	and	balance	them	in	daily	living.	This	is	one	of	the	great	signs	of	a	true
full-fledged	Spiritual	Master	on	Earth.	For	this	is	the	Personality	of	GOD.	More
and	more,	however,	are	beginning	to	realize	this	ideal.	Many	in	the	Spiritual
Movement	are	focusing	on	the	Spiritual	or	Heavenly
	Level,	and	gaining
initiations	and	building	their	light	quotient	and	light	bodies,	as	well	as
communicating	and	working	in	the	Celestial	Realms,	and	this	is	good.	However,
my	beloved	readers,	if	the	Seven	Great	Rays	are	not	balanced	properly	on	the
Psychological	Level,	true	God	Realization	will	not	have	taken	place,	no	matter
what	your	level	of	initiation	is.	True	God	Realization	must	be	done
	on	the
Spiritual,	Psychological	and	Physical/Earthly	level.	All	three	levels	must	be
realized,	not	just	the	Spiritual	Level.	If	the	Seven	Great	Rays	are	not	developed
and	balanced	within	self	and	the	lower	aspects,	and/or	corruption	of	these	Rays
are	not	transcended,	then	enormous	corruption	of	the	Spiritual	work	people	are
doing	will	take	place.	There	are	many	who	will	not	like	to	hear	this,	however,
	if
you	are	truly	a	true	lover	of	GOD	then	listen	very	closely	to	what	I	have	to	say.
If	the	Psycho-logical	Level	of	God	Consciousness	is	not	developed	properly,	and
there	is	negative	ego/fear	based	distortion	and	corruption	of	these	Rays,	then	this
will	color	and	affect	all	Channeling,	Spiritual	Teaching,	Clairvoyant	work,	your
Spiritual	Vision,	and	all	your	Relationships.	For	as	I	have	said
	many	times	in	my
writings,	the	single	most	important	relationship	in	your	life	is	your	relationship
to	your	self.	If	you	are	not	right	with	self,	this	will	skew	all	other	relationships
including	your	relationship	to	GOD,	the	Masters,	and	the	Angels.	This	is
because	your	thoughts	create	your	reality.	You	can	not	have	faulty	thinking
within	self,	and	within	your	own	personality	and	psychology	and	expect
	this	not
to	affect	all	the	Spiritual	Channeling,	Teaching	and	Healing	work	you	are	doing.
Your	relationship	to	your	self,	your	relationship	to	your	personality,	your
relationship	to	your	psychology,	your	relationship	to	your	own	subconscious
mind	affects	everything.	It	is	the	foundation	of	your	Spiritual	House.	How	can
the	first	floor	of	one’s	house	be	corrupt	and	the	second	floor	be	working
	fine.
The	second	floor	works	through	the	first	floor.	It	is	not	separate	from	the	first
floor.	It	flows	through	the	first	floor.	All	Channeling,	Spiritual	Teaching	and
Spiritual	Vision	flows	through	ones	subconscious	mind,	psychology,	belief
system,	interpretations,	perceptions,	philosophy,	and	Spiritual	Psychology.	You
cannot	separate	them.	My	beloved	readers,	this	is	why	it	is	essential	to	learn
	to
balance	these	Seven	Great	Rays	within	your	own	personality	and	psychology.
This	is	a	weak	spot	among	a	great	many	lightworkers.	These	Seven	Great	Rays
of	GOD	serve	as	a	“Lens.”	It	is	also	incredibly	easy	to	get	stuck	in	the	lens	of
power,	or	love,	or	wisdom,	or	action,	or	art,	or	science,	or	devotion,	or	freedom,
structure	and	magic.	Even	if	your	Monad	and/or	Soul	is	under	the	influence	of	a
particular
	Ray	as	incarnating	Sons	and	Daughters	of	God	are,	it	is	absolutely
essential	that	you	learn	to	see	from	a	Full	Spectrum	Prism	Consciousness
through	all	Seven	Rays	in	a	balanced	and	integrated	manner	and	not	through	just
one	or	a	few.	This	takes	great	psychological	work	and	focus	on	your	part.	We	all
know	people	who	are	too	stuck	in	power,	or	are	too	stuck	in	addicted	love,	or	too
stuck	in
	the	teacher	know-it-all	role,	or	too	stuck	in	art	and	can’t	function	in	life.
We	all	know	people	who	are	too	stuck	in	science	and	the	intellect,	or	in	devotion
and	idealism	to	a	Guru	and	are	blinded.	We	all	know	a	people	who	are	too	stuck
in	structure	or	lack	of	structure,	can’t	deal	with	money,	misuse	magic,	and	do	not
know	what	their	Spiritual	Freedom	is.	These	are	the	same	great	pitfalls	and
	traps
of	the	Spiritual	Path.	These	are	not	all	of	them,	but	some	of	the	main	ones.
Develop	yourself	most	important	in	your	personal	power	and	surrendering	to
GOD’s	Will,	Love/Wisdom,	Active	Intelligence,	Harmony	and	Beauty,	Science,
Devotion	and	Idealism,	Ceremonial	Order	and	Magic.	It	is	essential	we	develop
our	selves	in	these	Seven	Great	Rays	not	only	psychologically	but	also	in	the
professional
	aspects	of	these	Rays.	I	am	not	speaking	here	in	the	sense	of	taking
on	these	professions,	but	being	developed	in	them.	Develop	your	political	side,
the	Spiritual	teacher	side,	your	business	side,	your	artistic	side,	your	scientist
side,	your	Spiritual	leadership	side,	and	your	economic	mastery	side.	Not	only
develop	all	these	aspects,	but	also	learn	to	not	get	stuck	in	each	of	their
“Lenses.”	This
	is	easier	said	than	done,	for	it	takes	great	psychological
introspection	and	vigilance	to	not	allow	oneself	to	fall	into	these	“Lenses.”	This
is	especially	true	because	of	the	fact	that	each	person’s	Monad	and/or	Soul	is
under	the	influence	of	one	of	these	Rays.	I	am	not	saying	here	that	one	should
deny	how	GOD	created	them	and	should	not	fulfill	one’s	Spiritual	Mission	under
that	theme,	so	to
	speak.	However,	be	balanced	and	integrated	in	all	Seven	Rays
while	under	the	influence	of	that	theme.
Most	of	all,	my	beloved	readers,	be	aware	of	the	negative	ego/fear
based/separative/lower-self	thought	system	and	how	it	corrupts	and	creates
glamour,	illusion	and	maya	in	everything	it	touches	if	you	allow	it	into	your
mind.	Only	allow	yourself	to	think	with	your	Spiritual/Christ/Buddha
	mind	and
not	your	negative	ego/fear-based	mind.	Think	with	your	Love	Mind,	my	beloved
readers,	and	not	your	Fear	Mind.	There	are	only	two	ways	of	thinking	in	the
world	and	everything	stems	from	Love	or	from	fear.	Everything	stems	from	the
negative	ego	thought	system	or	the	Spiritual/Christ/Buddha	thought	system.	It	is
the	negative	ego/fear-based	thought	system	that	creates	the	distortion	and
corruption
	of	the	Seven	Great	Rays.	Ever	be	joyously	vigilant	against	the
negative	ego.	This,	my	beloved	readers,	is	the	“Road	Map”	to	achieve	true	God
Consciousness.	There	is	no	work	more	important	on	your	Spiritual	Path	than
learning	to	properly	master,	develop,	balance	and	integrate	the	Seven	Great	Rays
in	your	psychology	and	personality,	and	to	not	allow	the	negative	ego/fear-based
thought	system
	to	enter	your	consciousness	and	corrupt	your	proper
understanding	of	these	Rays.	Also	to	not	get	stuck	in	the	“lens”	of	any	one	of
these	Rays,	or	this	will	become	a	negative	ego	distortion	as	well.	This	is	the
“Great	Work”	of	the	Spiritual	Path.	Continue	the	work	on	the	Spiritual	plane	you
are	doing	but	do	your	Psychological	and	Personality	Level	homework,	for	it	is
equally	as	important	and,	in	truth,
	even	more	important,	for	the	Psychological
Level	is	your	Spiritual	vision	that	colors	your	perception	of	the	Spiritual	Level.
To	be	a	clear	channel	for	Spirit	you	must	be	a	clear	and	balanced	psychological
channel	as	well.	Once	you	have	mastered	these	do	not	forget	to	also	put	equal
attention	to	doing	your	homework	on	the	Physical/Earthly	Level	as	well;	for
GOD	is	as	much	in	your	physical	body
	and	in	the	Material/Earthly	world	as	he	is
in	the	Heavenly	realms,	mental	realm,	emotional	realm	or	psychic	realm.	There
are	Four	Faces	of	GOD,	Spiritual,	Mental,	Emotional	and	Physical.	To	truly
realize	GOD,	all	four	must	be	mastered	and	equally	honored.	To	not	master,
honor	and	sanctify	the	Material	face	of	GOD	is	to	also	disown	the	Divine
Mother,	the	Earth	Mother,	and	the	Goddess	energies.	For
	the	Goddess	energies
are	also	intimately	connected	to	the	Material	Face	of	GOD.	Our	true	Spiritual
mission	is	to	become	our	Mighty	I	Am	Presence	on	Earth	in	a	very	grounded	and
balanced	manner.	Our	true	Purpose	is	to	manifest	our	Spiritual	mission	on	Earth
and	to	get	involved	with	Earth	life.	Our	true	Spiritual	mission	on	Earth	is	to
transform	our	Civilization	and	Society	into	an	Ascended	Master
	Society	and	to
create	Heaven	on	Earth,	not	to	achieve	liberation	and	leave	the	Earth	as	soon	as
we	can.	We	are	all	the	Light/Love/Power	bearers	for	the	New	Millennium	and
Seventh	Golden	Age.	Let	us	each	now	take	on	the	“Full	Mantle	of	the
Christ/Buddha/God	Consciousness”	in	a	balanced	and	integrated	manner	and	be
about	the	business	of	fully	transforming	our	selves	and	our	world	into	the	true
Glory
	of	GOD!
9
How	to	Clear	the	Negative	Ego	through
Balancing	the	Feminine	and	Masculine	
	
Another	way	of	approaching	the	clearing	of	the	negative	ego	is	through	the	need
to	balance	feminine	and	masculine	energies.	Whenever	these	two	complimentary
aspects	of	Self	get	out	of	balance,	negative	ego	qualities	develop.	As	with	the
archetypes,	rays,	astrological	signs,	houses,	and	planets,	they	each	have
	a
negative	and	positive	expression.	Before	we	can	understand	the	negative
expression,	we	first	must	understand	the	positive	expression	of	the	yin	and	the
yang.
The	balance	of	the	yin	and	yang	is	the	basis	of	Taoism.	When	yin	and	yang	are
in	balance,	we	live	in	the	“Tao.”	Imbalance	and	negative	ego	could	be	looked	at
from	this	frame	of	reference	as	the	same	thing.	The	following	list	shows
	the
positive	yin	and	positive	yang.
Feminine	
and	
Masculine
Loving	and	Powerful
Open	and	Closed
Sensitive	and	Organized
Nurturing	and	Willful
Unfocused	and	Focused
Process-Oriented	and	Goal-Oriented
Listening	and	Talking
Warm	and	Concentrating
Flowing	and	Strong
Feeling	and	Thinking
Fluid	and	Rational
Flexible	and	Disciplined
Pleasing	and	Work
Right	Brain	and	Left	Brain
Every	man	and	every	woman	needs	a	balance	of	both	of	these	energies	within
themselves.	This	is	called	androgyny.	When	this	balance	is	lacking	within
ourselves,	we	usually	seek	it	outside	of	ourselves	in	another.	Hence,	we	have	the
father-daughter	relationships	and	mother-son	relationships,	or	variables	on	this
theme.
One	of	my
	favorite	examples	of	living	in	the	Tao,	is	the	idea	of	surfing	a
wave.	If	you	go	too	fast	when	you	are	body	surfing	a	wave	you	will	get	dumped
by	the	wave.	If	you	go	too	slow	you	will	miss	the	wave.	The	idea	is	to	stay	in	the
Tao.	This	applies	to	every	aspect	of	life.	There	is	a	time	to	talk	and	a	time	to	be
silent.	There	is	a	time	to	be	assertive	and	a	time	to	be	receptive.	There	is	a	time
to	think
	and	a	time	to	feel.	There	is	a	time	to	be	right	brain	and	a	time	to	be	left
brain.
If	you	choose	to	be	yin	when	it	is	time	to	be	yang,	you	are	out	of	balance.	If
you	choose	to	be	yang	when	it	is	time	to	be	yin,	you	are	out	of	balance.	The	key
word	here	is	“appropriateness.”	In	every	situation	and	moment	of	life	there	is	an
appropriate	response	as	guided	by	your	own	soul	and	Mighty	I	Am	Presence.
	If
you	stay	attuned	to	your	Higher	Self	you	will	always	be	guided	properly	in	every
situation.	When	guided	by	the	voice	of	the	negative	ego	you	will	be	guided
inappropriately.	Most	people	don’t	realize	that	the	yin	and	yang	or	masculine
and	feminine	have	a	negative	expression.	This	manifests	when	one	is	“too	yin”
or	“too	yang.”
Negative	Yin
Inferiority	complex/Low	self-esteem	Hurt
	too	easily/Weak	Prone	to	rejection
/Sadness	Depression/Fearful	Victim/Needy	Dependent/Clinging	vine	Too
sentimental/Too	open	Hypersensitivity/Hedonism	Meditating	too	much/Too
flexible	Too	right	brain/Lack	of	self-love
Negative	Yang
Anger/Violence	Rigidity/Too	intellectual	Workaholic/Too	organized	Too	much
first	ray	energy/Talks	too	much	Too	closed	and	shut	down/Too	left	brain
Superiority
	complex/Critical	Impatient/Attacking	Controlling/Manipulative
Argumentative/Intolerant	Intimidation/Aggressive	Hatred/Demanding	Too	harsh
Yin	energies	without	the	proper	balance	of	yang	energies	turn	sour.	Yang
energies	without	the	proper	balance	of	yin	energies	turn	sour.	Imbalance	of	your
feminine	and	masculine	energies	manifests	as	negative	ego	emotions	and
feelings	rather	than	Christ
	emotions	and	feelings.	Imbalance	equals	negative	ego
that	equals	lack	of	Godliness	in	that	moment.	One	can,	in	truth,	never	lose	their
Godliness	for	that	is	beyond	what	can	be	lost.	One	can,	however,	lose	ones
realization	of	their	Godliness	in	any	given	moment	which	is	us	falling	into
glamour,	maya,	and	illusion	like	a	bad	dream.
This	issue	of	balancing	of	the	feminine	and	masculine	obviously
	relates	very
much	to	balancing	ones	four	bodies	(physical,	emotional,	mental	and	spiritual)
and	the	need	to	balance	ones	three	minds	(conscious,	subconscious	and
superconscious).
This	need	for	balancing	the	feminine	and	masculine	could	be	seen	in	Carl
Jung’s	“Theory	of	Types”	when	he	said	there	were	four	types	of	people:
Intuitive,	Feeling,	Thinking	and	Sensation/Function
.
People	tended
	to	lean	towards	one	or	two	types	within	themselves.	This	is	not
a	judgment,	however,	the	ultimate	ideal	is	forever	balance.
In	astrology	and	Chinese	medicine,	they	speak	of	the	need	to	balance	the	four
elements:	
Fire,	Water,	Air,	and	Earth
.
In	nature	we	see	this	balance	again	in	the	four	seasons:	winter,	spring,
summer,	and	fall.
We	see	this	same	need	for	balance	in	the	left
	and	right	brain:
Left	Brain/Right	Brain
Logical/Imagination
Deductive	reasoning/Dreaming
Rational/Intuitive
Verbal/Psychic
Physically	observable/Creative
/Inductive	thinking
/Asking	and	listening
One	side	of	the	brain	is	not	better	than	another.	One	needs	both	sides	to	fully
realize	God,	and	to	clear	away	negative	ego.	The	keys	here	are	striving
	for
balance,	integration	and	moderation	in	all	things	at	all	times.	Another	key	is	to
listen	to	the	voice	of	the	Holy	Spirit	and	your	own	Higher	Self	at	all	times	and
not	the	voice	of	the	negative	ego	and	lower	self.	To	achieve	this	you	must
maintain	mastery	over	your	energies	and	secondly	be	able	to	listen	to	the	still
small	voice	within.
The	masculine	side	provides	the	power	to	master
	your	energies.	The	feminine
side	will	provide	the	ability	to	listen	to	the	intuitive	guidance	that	is	always
forthcoming	in	every	situation.	This	will	also	allow	for	the	blending	of	the	first
ray	and	the	second	ray.	This	is	the	blending	of	the	power	and	the	love	with	the
wisdom.	Power	without	love	is	like	Nazi	Germany.	Love	without	power	is	to
become	emotionally	dysfunctional.
A	woman	likes
	a	man	who	is	strong,	but	sensitive	and	loving.	A	centered	man
wants	a	woman	who	is	loving	and	sensitive,	but	who	can	be	strong	and	powerful.
More	and	more	these	two	sides	of	ourselves,	which	might	be	considered	the
ultimate	archetypes,	are	coming	together.	The	key	to	our	society	changing	is	for
this	merger	and	integration	to	first	occur	within	oneself.	The	ultimate	example	of
this	in	our	universe
	is	the	Lord	Melchizedek,	our	Universal	Logos!
Masculine	and	Feminine	Balance	List
Masculine
/
Feminine:
Caution/Courage
Sun/Moon
Self-Confidence/Humility
Assertive/Receptive
Left	brain/Right	brain
Scientific/Musical
Logical/Intuitive
Fire/Water
Heal/Earth	Able	to	accept	everything/To	be	able	to	differentiate
Thinking/Feeling	Occultist/Mystic
	Psychological/Psychic	Focused/Flowing
Closed/Open	Firm/Loving	Detached/Sensitive	Goal	oriented/Process	oriented
Work/Play	Talking/Listening	Fixed/Flexible	Air/Water	Fire/Earth
Disciplined/Spontaneous	Organized/Fluid	Prayer/Meditation	Willful/Allowing
Deductive/Inductive	Asking/Listening	Mathematical/Artistic	Active/Passive
Yang/Yin	Inner	parent/Inner	child	Impersonal/Personal	Apollian/Dionysian
Structure/Freeflow	Acetic/Hedonistic	Patriarch/Matriarch	Heavenly	father/Earth
mother	Divine	mother/Divine	father	Linear	thought/Imagination
Waking/Dreaming	Horizontal	reality/Vertical	reality	Form/Formless
Doing/Being	 Control/Surrender	 Selfish/Selfless	 Yogi/Aphrodite
Intuition/Sensation	 function	 Contained/Expressive	 Tough/Nurturing
Mother/Father	Serious/Humorous	Priest/Priestess	Adventurer/Homebody
Teacher/Student	Obeying/Ruling	Lightning-like	speed/Circumspection
Caution/Courage	To	possess	nothing/To	command	everything	To	have	no
ties/Loyalty	Contempt	for	death/Regard	for	life
Duality	of	Cerebral	Functions
Left	side	of	body	&	head/Right	side	of	body	&	head	Non-dominant/Dominant
Unconscious/Conscious	Spatial	relations/Verbally	aware	Pictures/Language
Images/Words	Symbolic/Literal
	Metaphorical/Definitive	Intuitive/Logical
Synthesize/Analyze	 Accepting/Discriminating	 Abstract/Concrete
Musical/Mathematical	 Artistic/Scientific	 Simultaneous/Sequential
Wholistic/Linear
Methods	of	Obtaining	Information
Left	Brain–Yang/Right	Brain–Yin
Logical
/
Imagination,	Dreaming,	Inner	Senses	Deductive	Thinking
/
Intuitive,
Psychic	Physically	Observable
/
Creative	Rational
/
Inductive
	thinking
Verbal
/
Asking	&	Listening
Yin	and	Yang
Positive	Yin/Positive	Yang
Loving
/
Personal	 Power	 Compassion/Discipline	 Forgiving/Assertive
Joyous/Discernment	Cooperation/Focused	Self-Love/Self-Mastery	Self-
Worth/Responsible	 Acceptance/Non-attachment	 Humility/Patience
Humble/Faith	Gentle/Decisiveness	Peaceful/Organized	Flexible/Perseverance
Sensitive/Giving	Receptive/Logical	Open/Confident
	Intuitive/Co-creator
Feeling/Non-judgmental
Negative	Yin/Negative	Yang
Hurt/Rigid	 Depression/Neurotic	 Rejected/Anger	 Moody/Violence
Defensive/Uptight	Fearful/Attacking	Insecure/Critical	Worry/Superiority
Lazy/Impatient	Low	Self-Esteem/Hate	Guilt/Revenge	Victim/Intolerant
Needy/Prideful	Self-Pity/Resentful	Loneliness/Jealousy	Shyness/Selfish
Procrastination/Workaholic
10
Spiritual	Tests	
	
One	of	the	most	important	understandings	of	the	entire	Spiritual	Path	is	the
understanding	that	Earth	is	a	Planetary	Mystery	School,	and	that	every	single
thing	that	happens	in	life	is	a	Spiritual	Test.	Planet	Earth	is	a	Spiritual	School	to
teach	Souls	to	become	“Integrated	Ascended	Masters	and/or	God	Realized
Beings”.	Everything	that	happens	in	life	is	a	teaching,
	lesson,	challenge,	and
opportunity	to	grow.	Most	people	do	not	realize,	or	they	forget	that	each	and
every	moment	of	our	lives,	we	are	being	Spiritually	Tested.	Every	thought	we
think	is	a	Spiritual	Test.	As	Edgar	Cayce	said,	“Thoughts	are	things.”	The
Course	in	Miracles	states	in	the	lesson	book,	“There	are	no	neutral	thoughts.”
What	this	means	is	that	every	thought	that	enters	your	mind	from
	within	or
without	is	of	GOD	or	is	of	the	negative	ego.	Every	thought	that	you	think	stems
from	the	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	or	lower-self	consciousness.	Every
thought	you	think	stems	from	oneness	or	separation.	Every	thought	you	think
stems	from	Love	or	fear.	All	day	long,	even	when	we	think,	we	sleep,	and
dream,	thoughts	are	coming	to	us	from	within	and	without.	Every	single	moment
of	life	is
	a	Spiritual	Test	to	think	only	GOD	Thoughts.
The	same	is	true,	my	beloved	readers,	with	every	feeling	and	emotion	you
create.	This	is	a	Spiritual	test.	Your	attitude,	perception,	interpretation,	and	belief
system	cause	your	feelings	and	emotions.	This	is	an	indisputable	fact	and	law	of
the	Universe.	We	each	cause	our	reality	by	how	we	think.	If	we	think	with	our
Melchizedek/Christ/Buddha
	Mind,	we	will	create	only	Spiritualized,	positive
feelings	and	emotions.	If	we	think	with	our	negative	ego/fear	based/lower	self
mind,	we	will	create	negative	feelings	and	emotions.	Every	moment,	even	when
you	are	by	yourself,	is	a	Spiritual	Test	to	see	if	you	can	keep	your	emotional
body	in	a	God	Consciousness	and	positive	state,	at	all	times.
Every	word	you	speak,	every	moment	of	your
	life	is	a	Spiritual	Test.	Are	your
words	coming	from	the	negative	ego	or	are	they	coming	from	the	Heart	of
GOD?	What	is	the	mental	motivation	of	your	words?	Are	they	Sourced	from	the
selfish,	self-centered	negative	ego,	or	were	they	motivated	from	true	God
Consciousness?	What	is	the	feeling	tone	of	every	word?	Is	there	any	attack
energy,	anger,	or	criticism,	or	do	they	carry	the	feeling	tone	of	unconditional
love	and	nonjudgementalness.	Every	moment	of	your	life	that	you	speak	is	a
Spiritual	Test.
My	beloved	readers,	every	action	you	take	no	matter	how	small	or
infinitesimal	is	a	Spiritual	Test.	Is	that	action	coming	from	and	motivated	by
GOD	and	God	Consciousness,	or	by	negative	ego	and	separative/fear-based
consciousness?	Is	that	action	adding	to	your	Spiritual	Path	or	decreasing	it?	Is
that
	action	a	waste	of	time	or	a	good	and	balanced	use	of	your	energy?
My	beloved	readers,	every	use	of	your	energy,	no	matter	how	small	and
infinitesimal	is	a	Spiritual	Test.	Is	your	energy	helping	self	and	others,	or	hurting
self	and	others?	Is	the	use	of	your	energy	adding	to	your	Light	Body	or
decreasing	it?	Are	you	wasting	energy	or	are	you	using	every	particle	of	your
energy	for	a	greater
	Spiritual	purpose,	for	Love,	for	balance	in	a	larger
perspective	and	for	healing	self	and	others?	Every	moment	of	your	life	is	a
Spiritual	Test	to	see	if	your	can	use	your	energy	to	only	serve	GOD	and	not	to
serve	the	negative	ego,	fear,	the	lower-self,	lower-self	desire,	the	carnal	self,
separative	thinking,	and	victim	consciousness.
My	beloved	readers,	in	every	situation	of	life	there
	is	an	appropriate	response
or	an	inappropriate	response.	Every	moment	of	life	is	a	Spiritual	test	to	learn	to
respond	appropriately	from	the	way	GOD	would	have	you	respond.	Who	gives
us	the	guidance	on	how	to	respond?	This	guidance	comes	from	our	Higher	Self,
our	Mighty	I	Am	Presence,	the	Holy	Spirit,	and	our	own
Melchizedek/Christ/Buddha	ideals	that	we	have	taken	on	consciously	and
programmed	into
	our	subconscious	mind.	Every	moment	of	life	is	a	Spiritual	test
to	see	if	we	can	respond	in	a	balanced	manner	instead	of	an	imbalanced	manner.
Every	interaction	with	another	person	is	a	Spiritual	Test	to	see	if	we	can
remain	in	unconditional	love,	forgiveness,	nonjudgementalness,	patience,
service,	oneness,	and	egolessness	at	all	times.	Every	interaction	with	an	animal,
plant,	or	mineral
	is	a	Spiritual	test	to	stay	in	harmony	with	GOD	with	His	three
lower	kingdoms.
Now,	my	beloved	readers,	what	happens	if	we	do	not	always	pass	these
Spiritual	Tests	every	moment?	The	answer	is	nothing	in	the	sense	that
everything	is	forgiven	and	everything	always	remains	in	unconditional	love.
Mistakes	are	positive	not	negative,	and	every	mistake	can	be	turned	into	a
positive	if	you	gain
	the	golden	nugget	of	wisdom	from	that	mistake.	GOD
always	forgives	and	it	is	just	necessary	for	people	to	forgive	themselves.	I	will
add	here	however,	that	every	moment	of	life	is	a	Spiritual	Test	and	Spiritual
Opportunity	to	realize	GOD	or	not	realize	GOD.	When	you	think	a	negative
thought	you	lose	your	realization	of	GOD	on	the	mental	plane	in	that	moment.
When	you	allow	yourself	to	feel	a	negative
	emotion,	you	lose	your	realization	of
GOD	in	that	moment	on	the	emotional	plane.	When	you	behave	inappropriately,
you	lose	your	realization	of	GOD	in	that	moment	on	the	physical	plane.	Now	it
is	important	to	understand	that	it	is	impossible	to	never	make	a	mistake.	It	also
cannot	be	emphasized	more	emphatically	that	mistakes	are	positive	and	part	of
the	learning	process.	So,	the	Spiritual	Path
	for	everyone	is	up	the	mountain	five
steps,	and	down	four,	up	three	down	two,	up	three	down	one.	I	will	say,
however,	the	more	overall	integrated	Spiritual	Mastery	you	gain,	the	fewer
mistakes	you	will	make	and	the	quicker	will	be	your	Spiritual	progress.	The	nice
thing	about	GOD	is	that	He	always	welcomes	His	Sons	and	Daughters	home	like
the	Prodigal	Son,	no	matter	what	they	have	done	in	past	lives,
	or	this	life,	as	long
as	they	are	willing	to	change	their	ways.	One	does	not	have	to	be	perfect	to
evolve.	If	you	truly	want	to	realize	GOD	however,	at	the	highest	level,	then	you
must	be	unbelievably	“joyously	vigilant”	over	what	you	are	causing	and	creating
on	every	level	I	have	mentioned	in	this	chapter.	Every	time	you	allow	yourself	to
slip	and	give	into	the	negative	ego	or	lower	self	there
	is	no	judgement	from
GOD,	however,	you	will	have	lost	your	opportunity	to	realize	GOD	in	that
moment.	You	all	know	how	much	better	it	feels	to	realize	GOD	every	moment
on	all	these	levels.	You	also	know	how	terrible	it	feels	to	be	out	of	harmony	with
GOD	and	out	of	harmony	with	Love.	It	is	also	important	to	understand	that	the
continual	positive	choices	on	your	part	to	continually	realize	GOD	on
	all	levels
will	build	your	Love	quotient,	Light	quotient,	and	Power	quotient.	It	will	also
speed	up	your	Initiation	and	Ascension	Process.	It	will	also	cleanse	your	karma.
Every	right	choice	speeds	up	your	Path	to	total	God	Realization	and	is	creating
and	cementing	good	habits	into	the	subconscious	mind.	It	is	also	helping	the
planet	and	helping	your	Spiritual	Brothers	and	Sisters,	for	all	minds
	are	one.	It
also	helps	your	Brothers	and	Sisters	in	an	outer	sense	by	demonstrating
Melchizedek/Christ/Buddha	consciousness	at	all	times.	If	you	are	truly
responding	appropriately	at	all	times,	then	your	entire	life	will	be	a	selfless	path
of	service	as	well.	You	will	not	need	to	be	selfish	that	often	because	you	are
whole	and	complete	within	self	and	are	one	with	GOD	in	your	realization	in
each
	and	every	moment.	Hence,	every	bit	of	energy	on	every	level	of	your	being
can	go	to	loving	and	serving	others.	Once	God	Realization	is	achieved	on	a
Spiritual,	psychological,	and	physical	Earthly	level,	one’s	only	purpose	to	be	on
Earth	is	to	serve.	In	saying	this,	one	needs	to	stay	balanced	and	integrated	and	to
enjoy	one’s	life.	With	this	context,	one’s	total	joy	in	life	is	to	serve,	because
“true
	pleasure	is	serving	GOD.”	Never	forget	your	Brothers	and	Sisters	are
incarnations	of	God	as	well,	even	if	they	do	not	realize	it.
True	Spiritual	Testing	does	not	take	place	just	when	things	are	going	well.
True	Spiritual	Testing	of	an	individual	takes	place	when	emergencies,	crisis,
stress,	and	attacks	occur.	Anyone	can	pass	Spiritual	Tests	living	in	a	cave	or
never	leaving	your	house.	The
	true	test	of	a	Spiritual	Master	is	to	get	involved
with	Earth	life	and	relationships	with	people	of	all	kinds.	This	is	where	the	true
testing	occurs.	Can	you	stay	out	of	your	negative	ego	and	remain	in	the
Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	when	raising	children?	Can	you	stay	out	of	your
negative	ego	and	in	the	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	in	a	romantic	relationship?
Can	you	stay	out	of	your	negative	ego
	and	in	the	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness
with	family	members,	extended	family,	parents,	and	in-laws?	Can	you	stay	out
of	your	negative	ego	and	in	the	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	with	your	boss,
business	partners,	business	associates,	and/or	employees?	Can	you	stay	out	of
your	negative	ego	and	in	the	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	with	fellow	Spiritual
Leaders,	Spiritual	Teachers,	Lightworkers,	Spiritual
	competitors	for	clients	or
students	in	your	field	or	profession?	Can	you	stay	out	of	your	negative	ego	and
in	the	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	when	people	attack	you,	get	angry	with	you,
or	judge	you	fairly	or	unfairly?	Can	you	stay	out	of	your	negative	ego	and	in	the
Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	if	someone	slanders	you	publicly	or
professionally?	Can	you	stay	out	of	your	negative	ego	and	in	the
	Christ/Buddha
Consciousness	if	someone	steals	a	large	sum	of	money	from	you?	Can	you	stay
out	of	your	negative	ego	and	in	the	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	if	your	spouse
or	relationship	partner	doesn’t	want	to	make	love	and/or	have	sex?	Can	you	stay
out	of	your	negative	ego	and	remain	in	the	Christ/Buddha	consciousness	if	your
spouse	or	relationship	partner	is	in	a	bad	mood	and	emotionally	off-centered
	and
is	taking	it	out	on	you?	Can	you	stay	out	of	your	negative	ego	and	in	the
Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	if	you	or	others	around	you	are	making	tons	of
mistakes	regardless	if	they	are	large	or	small?	Can	you	stay	out	of	your	negative
ego	and	in	the	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	watching	the	news,	watching
opinionated	politicians	and/or	reporters,	or	reading	the	newspaper?	Can	you
remain	in	the
	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	when	physically	sick	or	during
extended	chronic	health	lessons?	Can	you	stay	in	the	Christ/Buddha
Consciousness	when	someone	you	are	close	to	passes	on	to	the	Spirit	world?
Can	you	remain	in	the	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	during	a	traffic	accident	or
when	getting	a	ticket?	Can	you	remain	in	the	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness
during	a	messy	divorce	or	fight	with	your	partner?
	Can	you	remain	in	the
Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	and	out	of	the	negative	ego	when	someone	is
holding	a	grudge	against	you?	Can	you	remain	in	the	Christ/Buddha
Consciousness	and	out	of	your	negative	ego	when	everything	is	taken	away	in
your	life	like	Job	in	the	Bible?	Can	you	retain	this	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness
during	a	natural	disaster	such	as	a	major	earthquake,	hurricane,	tornadoes,
	flood,
or	fire?	Can	you	retain	your	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	and	stay	out	of	your
negative	ego	if	you	lost	all	your	money,	had	a	divorce,	your	physical	health
broke	down,	and	you	lost	your	job?
My	beloved	readers,	these	are	the	true	Spiritual	Tests.	Can	you	live	in	the
“marketplace,”	be	fully	involved	in	Earthly	life	and	relationships	of	all	kinds,
and	keep	your	Spiritual	Mastery	and
	balance?	This	is	the	true	test	of	a	full-
fledged	Ascended	Master	and	God	Realized	being!	It	must	be	understood	that
100	percent	perfection	is	not	required	to	pass	these	tests.	Some	of	these	would	be
extraordinarily	difficult.	Mistakes	are	positive	and	we	do	not	want	to	practice
any	kind	of	negative	ego	perfectionism	that	expects	us	to	be	perfect	at	all	times
and	never	make	mistakes.	This	is	impossible
	and	unrealistic.	The	main	purpose
for	this	exercise	is	to	just	be	clear	as	to	what	the	ideal	is,	and	to	strive	for	it.
Going	through	an	exercise	like	this	can	be	a	preparation	for	maintaining	the
proper	attitude	and	perspective	when	lessons	like	these	come.	This	is	a	blueprint
in	a	sense	for	the	potential	Spiritual	lessons	and	tests	people	on	Earth	often	face.
My	beloved	readers,	I	highly	recommend
	setting	your	attitude	and	perspective
now,	almost	like	programming	your	conscious	and	subconscious	computer,	so
you	will	not	be	knocked	off	balance	when	these	things	do	happen,	and	you	are
mentally	and	emotionally	prepared	to	respond	from	your	Christ/Buddha	mind	to
the	best	of	your	ability.	Again,	perfection	is	not	required.	You	can	actually
achieve	Ascension	by	balancing	only	50	percent	of
	your	karma.	The	key	point
however,	is	the	more	you	can	learn	these	lessons,	the	more	you	can	realize	GOD
psychologically	in	that	moment.	So	Earth	is	a	school	to	practice.	There	is	no
such	thing	as	death	and	we	are	allowed	to	come	back	as	many	times	as	we	need
to	learn	all	these	lessons	and	other	ones	on	the	Spiritual	Path.	My	suggestion
however,	is	to	take	advantage	of	this	incarnation	and	aim	as
	high	as	you	can	on	a
Spiritual,	Psychological,	and	Physical/Earthly	Level	to	realize	GOD	on	all
levels.	By	doing	this	we	not	only	help	ourselves,	but	by	doing	so	we	are	helping
others	as	well.
Now,	my	beloved	readers,	there	is	one	more	series	of	“Spiritual	Tests”	that	are
the	most	severe	of	all,	and	where	most	lightworkers	and	initiates	“miss	the	mark
and	do	not	pass.”	The	Spiritual	Tests
	I	speak	of	here	are	when	a	person	or
lightworker	moves	into	a	position	of	Leadership	and/or	Spiritual	Leadership	over
others.	What	I	am	speaking	of	here	is	when	a	person	has	become	a	Master	of
some	degree	and	has	become	successful	in	an	inner	and	outer	sense.	They	have
lots	of	clients	and	students.	They	may	have	become	very	financially	successful
and	may	have	become	very	famous.	They	may	hold	positions
	Spiritually	or	in
the	world,	of	great	Spiritual	Leadership.	They	may	have	very	large	followings.
They	may	be	in	positions	of	great	worldly	and	Spiritual	power	over	others.	They
may	give	extremely	large	workshops,	seminars,	classes,	and	may	be	on
television,	radio,	be	authors,	and	in	newspapers	and	magazines.	My	beloved
readers,	I	think	you	get	the	picture.	It	is	now,	that	the	true	Spiritual
	Testing
begins.	If	you	or	others	have	made	it	through	the	first	two	lists,	now	the	real
Spiritual	Testing	begins.	Does	the	power	the	person	now	has	go	to	their	head?
How	do	they	treat	others?	How	do	they	treat	those	not	in	their	league?	How	do
they	treat	their	employees?	How	do	they	treat	people	who	call	them	on	the
phone?	How	do	they	deal	with	other	Spiritual	Leaders?	Do	they	let	the	fame	go
to
	their	head?	What	are	their	true	motivations	for	doing	what	they	are	doing?	Do
they	put	GOD	before	money?	Do	they	put	GOD	before	fame?	Do	they	put	GOD
before	power?	Do	they	have	sex	with	all	their	students?	How	do	they	react	when
criticized?	Do	they	practice	what	they	preach	once	they	are	off	the	stage	and	out
of	the	limelight?	How	do	they	react	if	someone	tries	to	take	away	their	position
of	power,
	fame,	or	money?	Are	they	the	exact	same	person	they	were	before
they	were	graced	with	this	power,	fame,	and	wealth?	Are	they	on	a	path	of	true
Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	or	has	self-aggrandizement	taken	over?	Has	their
channel	remained	clear	or	has	it	been	corrupted	by	negative	ego?	Have	they	truly
retained	their	GOD	purity	and	egolessness	or	have	false	Gods	and	symbolic	idol
worship	of	negative
	ego	attributes	taken	over?	How	do	they	treat	their	students
or	disciples?	Is	their	true	motivation	to	fully	empower	their	students	or	is	it
always	to	retain	their	position	of	authority?	Do	they	truly	put	everything	on	“The
Altar	of	GOD?”	Have	they	allowed	their	channel	or	teachings	to	become
clouded	by	personal	selfish	agendas?	Do	they	have	Spiritual	ambition	or
negative	ego	ambition?	Is	the	focus
	of	their	work	about	themselves	or	about
GOD	and	the	Masters?	Do	they	co-create	with	other	Spiritual	Teachers	and
Leaders,	or	are	they	islands	unto	themselves?	Are	their	books,	channelings,	and
teachings	focused	on	telling	you	how	great	they	are,	or	really	on	selfless	service?
Are	their	teachings	continuing	to	be	balanced	on	a	Spiritual,	psychological,	and
physical	Earthly	level,	or	has	the	negative
	ego	begun	to	fragment	and	create	lack
of	balanced	integration	in	the	teachings?	Do	they	continue	to	maintain	Mastery
over	their	mind,	emotions,	behavior,	lower	self	desire,	inner	child,	subconscious
mind,	sexual	energy,	and	energy	in	general	or	have	they	let	down	their	standard,
now	that	they	have	achieved	their	Ascension,	Seven	Levels	of	Initiation	and
have	climbed	to	the	top	of	this	particular
	Planetary	Mountain?
My	beloved	readers,	these	are	the	true	tests	of	the	Spiritual	Path.	Most	people
have	a	hard	time	passing	the	second	list	in	this	chapter.	Many	Spiritual	Leaders
reach	this	third	level	or	list	before	they	have	mastered	the	second	list.	Even	those
who	have	mastered	the	second	list,	in	my	Spiritual	observation,	do	not	pass	the
third	one.	The	Bible	speaks	of	the	Spiritual
	Path	being	“a	straight	and	narrow
path.”	In	my	Spiritual	observation	as	a	Spiritual	Leader,	Spiritual	Teacher,	and
Spiritual	Psychologist,	most	do	not	meet	this	high	mark	and	high	calling.	The
usual	cause	is	that	they	are	more	developed	in	their	Spiritual	Body	than	they	are
in	their	Psychological	Body.	Lack	of	proper	mastery	and	integration	of	the
psychological	level	will	always	ultimately	corrupt
	the	Spiritual	Level.	You
cannot	live	on	the	second	floor	of	a	building	when	the	first	floor	is	falling	apart
or	has	become	corrupted.	My	beloved	readers,	in	all	humbleness	and	with
absolutely	no	judgement	in	my	heart,	I	cannot	tell	you	how	many	Spiritual
Leaders,	Spiritual	Teachers,	Spiritual	Channels,	Spiritual	Scientists,	and
Spiritual	Friends	that	I	have	seen	fall	from	grace	and	become	corrupted.
	It	is
mind-boggling!	It	is	why	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters	have	asked	me	to
focus	so	much	work	on	the	concept	of	“Integrated	Ascension.”	Spiritual	Leaders,
Channels,	Spiritual	Teachers,	and	lightworkers	are	achieving	their	Ascension
and	Seven	Levels	of	Initiation,	but	are	not	integrated.	When	the	true	Spiritual
Tests	come	in	lists	two	and	three	they	are	not	able	to	pass	them.	The	most
amazing
	thing	is	that	even	though	they	are	falling	from	grace,	corruption	of	the
negative	ego	is	happening	on	a	massive	scale,	and	they	are	even	tumbling	down
the	mountain	Spiritually	because	of	this	corruption	of	the	negative	ego,	they	do
not	have	the	slightest	awareness	that	they	have	fallen.	This	is	the	extraordinary
delusionary	nature	of	the	mind	and	the	negative	ego.	They	are	in	a	negative
hypnosis
	and	realize	it	not.	The	main	cause	of	this	is	not	because	they	are	bad
people,	for	there	is	no	such	thing.	They	just	have	not	received	the	proper
psychospiritual	training,	before	moving	into	such	positions	of	Spiritual
Leadership	and	power.	I	have	said	this	repeatedly	and	I	will	say	it	again.	The
world	does	not	need	more	channels.	It	needs	more	trained	Spiritual	Counselors
and	Teachers	who	can
	train	large	numbers	of	people	around	the	world	how	to
master	their	mind,	emotions,	body,	and	behavior,	and	most	of	all	master	the
negative	ego	thought	system	and	replace	it	with	the	Christ/Buddha	thought
system.	If	this	lesson	is	not	learned	all	Spiritual	practices	will	ultimately	become
corrupted.	This	statement	is	not	meant	as	a	judgement	but	just	as	a	simple
statement	of	truth.	The	negative	ego
	has	infiltrated	and	contaminated	religion.	It
also	is	to	a	great	extent	infiltrating	and	contaminating	the	New	Age	Movement.
Lightworkers	must	be	aware	of	this	and	have	great	Spiritual	discernment	within
self	and	in	regards	to	others.
In	conclusion,	be	Spiritually	discerning	as	to	the	Spiritual	Leaders,	Spiritual
Teachers,	Channels,	Authors,	Healers,	and	Spiritual	Scientists	you	work	with.
There	are	good	ones	out	there.	Make	sure	they	are	meeting	the	“High	Calling
and	True	Mark”	of	a	true	Spiritual	Master.	The	lesson	is	not	to	be	judgmental,
but	it	is	to	be	Spiritually	discerning.	This	Spiritual	quality	needs	to	be	much
more	developed	in	lightworkers.
In	final	conclusion,	my	beloved	readers,	strive	for	the	highest	level	you	can	of
“Integrated	Spiritual	Mastery	and	GOD	Purity.”
	It	is	indeed	a	rare	quality	in	this
world.	This	chapter	is	meant	to	give	you	the	“Divine	Blueprint”	and	roadmap	of
the	Spiritual	Tests	you	will	face	and	need	to	pass	to	truly	become	an	“Integrated
God	Realized	Being.”	Be	forewarned	that	the	negative	ego	thought	system	is
incredibly	tricky,	slippery,	and	seductive.	It	is	going	to	take	a	100	percent	effort
on	your	part,	and	you	are	going	to	have
	to	claim	and	cultivate	an	enormous
amount	of	“Joyous	Vigilance	and	True	GOD	Purity”	to	pass	all	of	these	Spiritual
Tests.	Half	the	battle	is	having	the	Blueprint	and	knowing	what	the	Spiritual
Tests	are.	My	Beloved	Readers,	the	rest	is	up	to	you.	Do	not	settle	for	false	Gods
and	idol	worship	of	such	paltry	gifts	such	as	power,	fame,	money,	and	sex.	If
certain	things	come	to	you,	so	be	it,	and	thank
	GOD	for	it,	but	do	not	make	a
false	God	out	of	these	things.	GOD	has	given	you	the	understanding	and	abilities
to	master	and	learn	these	lessons.	All	that	is	required	of	you	is	great	Spiritual
focus	and	dedication.	This	chapter	has	been	written	to	make	you	aware	of	the
Spiritual	Tests	that	are	present	in	your	life	and	that	may	be	coming.	This	chapter
has	also	been	written	to	“Spiritually	Challenge”
	you	in	this	moment,	to	dedicate
your	life	and	every	ounce	of	your	energy	on	every	level	of	your	being	to	become
the	“Highest	and	Most	Pure	Integrated	God	Realized	Being”	you	can,	in	service
of	GOD	on	all	levels,	every	moment	of	your	life!	This,	my	beloved	readers,	is
the	“Noble	Calling	and	Mission	we	have	all	Incarnated	to	Fulfill!”
11
The	Spiritual	Science	of	Blind	Spots,	Mind
Locks	and	Lenses	
	
In	my	humble	opinion,	this	next	chapter	is	an	extremely	cutting	edge
understanding	in	the	field	of	Transpersonal	Psychology,	Soul	Psychology,	and
Spiritual	Psychology.	It	is	something	I	have	not	written	about	before	or	seen	in
any	other	book	I	have	ever	read.	It	is	the	Spiritual	Science	of	blind	spots,	mind
locks,	and	lenses.
	As	you	all	know	we	just	don’t	see	with	out	physical	eyes,	we
see	with	our	mind.	How	can	one	hundred	people	see	any	given	event	take	place
and	every	one	will	have	a	different	version?	How	can	at	a	jury	trial,	twelve
people	hear	the	facts	yet	there	can	be	so	much	conflict	as	to	whether	the	person
is	guilty	or	not?	How	can	half	the	population	think	O.J.	Simpson	was	innocent
and	the	other	half
	believe	he	is	guilty?	How	can	half	the	population	of	any	given
country	belong	to	one	political	party	and	the	other	half	to	another?	How	can
millions	of	people	become	susceptible	to	cults,	when	it	is	so	obvious	to	others
how	corrupt	certain	individuals	and	organizations	are?
My	beloved	readers,	the	Spiritual	Science	of	blind	spots,	mind	blocks	and
lenses	is	a	most	fascinating	psychospiritual
	science.	To	begin	this	discussion	let
us	look	at	the	basic	masculine/feminine	balance.	If	a	person	is	too	feminine	and
too	overidentified	with	their	emotional	body	and	right	brain,	then	they	will
automatically	develop	enormous	numbers	of	blind	spots	in	their	masculine	side.
They	will	have	extremely	poor	Spiritual	discernment.	They	will	likely	be	very
poor	in	business	and	mathematical	areas.	They
	will	likely	be	very	child-like	and
have	blind	spots	in	being	more	adult	and	impersonal.	They	will	also	have	a	great
many	blind	spots	to	the	negative	ego’s	thinking	because	when	the	emotional
body	is	too	in	control	the	negative	ego	automatically	becomes	the	programmer.
On	the	other	side	of	the	coin,	if	someone	is	too	masculine	and	identified	with
the	mind,	they	will	have	blind	spots	to	the
	appreciation	of	heart	energy	and
feeling	energy.	They	will	have	blind	spots	in	romantic	relationship	functioning.
They	will	have	blind	spots	to	their	own	criticalness	and	judgementalness.
If	a	person	is	too	Heavenly	they	will	have	blind	spots	as	to	how	to	function
effectively	on	the	Earthly	plane.	If	a	person	is	too	Earthly	and	too	grounded	they
will	have	blind	spots	to	proper	development
	of	their	Spiritual	life.
The	same	thing	can	happen	in	relationship	to	the	Seven	Rays.	If	a	person	is
more	identified	with	the	First	Ray	of	Power,	then	they	will	have	blind	spots	in
development	of	their	Second	Ray	of	Love/Wisdom.	If	a	person	is	highly
developed	in	the	arts	or	Fourth	Ray,	they	often	have	blind	spots	in	relationship	to
the	Fifth	Ray	of	Spiritual	Science.	If	a	person	is	highly
	developed	in	the	more
“feeling”	rays,	two,	four,	and	six,	which	are	Love/Wisdom,	Harmony,	and
Devotion,	then	they	often	have	blind	spots	in	rays	one,	three,	and	five.	Rays
One,	Three	and	Five	being	Power,	Active	Intelligence,	and	Spiritual	Science.
The	same	is	true	in	a	reverse	sense.
The	same	is	true	in	Carl	Jung’s	theory	of	types.	He	suggested	there	were	four
types	of	people:	intuitive,
	thinking,	feeling,	and	sensation	function.	People	are
often	strong	in	one	or	two	types,	and	weak	in	the	other	two.	If	one	is	intuitive
thinking,	one	tends	to	have	blind	spots	in	their	feeling	and	sensation	function.
Sensation	function	being	the	focus	on	one’s	five	physical	senses.	Some	people
focus	on	this,	others	do	not	think	it	is	important.	The	same	is	true	of	all	these
types.	The	ideal	of	course,
	is	to	integrate	all	four	types	in	a	balanced	manner.	If
one	is	too	thinking	and	logical,	they	will	have	blind	spots	in	understanding	their
own	feeling	nature	and	understanding	the	feeling	nature	of	others.	If	one	is	very
intuitive,	they	often	have	a	hard	time	being	grounded	and	really	working
practically	with	the	Earth.	People	who	are	overidentified	with	their	sensation
function	often	have	a
	hard	time	accessing	their	intuition	and	Higher	Spiritual
nature.
If	you	are	identified	with	the	collective	programming	of	Earth’s	history,	then
you	will	have	a	hard	time	understanding	and	appreciating	the	Goddess	energy.	If
you	are	overidentified	with	the	Goddess,	the	reverse	is	true.
The	same	concept	of	blind	spots	relates	to	astrology.	If	you	have	a	lot	of
“water”	in	your	horoscope,
	you	may	have	blind	spots	dealing	with	“air.”	If	you
have	a	lot	of	“fire,”	you	may	have	blind	spots	with	“earth”	and	vice	versa.
An	unbelievable	key	principle	in	understanding	the	Science	of	blind	spots	is
that	which	you	cannot	see	within	self	you	cannot	see	within	others	either.	If	you
are	not	in	control	of	the	negative	ego	within	yourself,	you	will	not	be	able	to
discern	the	negative	ego
	in	others.	If	the	emotional	body	within	self	runs	you,
you	will	not	be	able	to	see	this	happening	within	others.	The	same	is	true	of	the
mind	and/or	Spirit.	So	from	this	profound	statement	and	understanding,	you	can
see	how	important	it	is	to	develop	one’s	self	Spiritually,	psychologically,	and	in
a	physical	Earthly	sense,	otherwise	you	will	not	be	able	to	see	those	same
undeveloped	aspects	within
	others.	What	most	people	do	is	attract	to	them,	those
people	that	have	the	same	imbalances	they	have.	This	has	a	reinforcing	affect	of
their	imbalanced	psychology	and/or	philosophy.	The	only	people	they	get
feedback	from	are	people	with	the	same	imbalances.
Let	us	now	take	this	discussion	a	little	bit	further,	to	professions.	A	Spiritual
Psychologist	sees	a	great	many	things	others	do	not
	see	because	of	their	training.
An	artist	sees	a	great	many	things	that	others	do	not	see	in	the	realm	of	beauty.	A
psychic	sees	many	things	that	others	do	not	see.	A	channel	sees	many	things	that
others	do	not	see.	A	clairvoyant	sees	many	things	that	others	do	not	see.	An
energy	healer	sees	and	feels	many	things	that	others	do	not	see	or	feel.	A
gardener	sees	a	great	many	things	that	others	do	not
	see.	A	Spiritual	scientist
sees	many	things	that	others	do	not	see.	I	could	go	through	hundreds	of	other
professions,	which	would	add	to	this	list.	The	key	question	now	is	what	does	this
show	us.	Because	of	our	training	and	focus	in	this	life	and	past	lives,	we	see
through	that	which	we	have	been	trained	in,	and	we	have	blind	spots	in	areas	we
have	not	been	trained	in.	This	is	why	it	is	to	our
	benefit	to	strive	to	be	as
integrated	and	balanced	in	all	the	rays,	astrological	signs,	elements,	types,	four
bodies,	numerology,	tarot,	archetypes,	professions,	and	lenses.
The	twelve	major	archetypes	are	an	example.	If	we	are	overidentified	with	one
or	more	archetypes	then	we	will	have	blind	spots	in	the	other	archetypes.	This	is
why	it	is	to	our	benefit	to	be	integrated	in	all	twelve
	major	archetypes.	The	same
is	true	of	the	cards	in	the	tarot	deck.
Now	let’s	take	this	discussion	of	blind	spots	even	further.	To	understand	GOD
Consciousness	it	must	be	understood	that	GOD	sees	live	through	a	full	spectrum
prism	consciousness.	All	of	the	aspects	in	this	chapter	GOD	see	through
simultaneously.	If	we	are	going	to	be	like	GOD,	we	must	do	the	same	in	the
development	of	our
	God	Consciousness.	This	is	why	I	recommend	to	people	to
follow	a	Path	of	Synthesis	and	a	more	eclectic	path.	This	is	why	I	have	written	a
thirty	volume	“Easy-to-Read	Encyclopedia	of	the	Spiritual	Path.”	Every	form	of
psychology,	every	Spiritual	path,	every	Mystery	School,	every	Guru,	every	well-
known	channel	and/or	Spiritual	Teacher,	every	religion,	and	every	well-known
Spiritual	text	is	a	different
	lens	of	GOD.	When	we	identify	with	one	or	study
only	one,	we	have	blind	spots	to	other	forms	of	worship.	GOD	sees	through	all
lenses	not	just	one	or	a	few.	I	have	written	these	books	to	help	my	readers	to
develop	a	more	full	spectrum	prism	consciousness	and	to	help	remove	blind
spots	within	self,	and	hence	in	how	they	see	others	and	their	world.
In	speaking	before	about	professions,	even
	you	may	make	money	in	one
profession,	this	does	not	mean	that	you	cannot	become	a	Master	Spiritual
Psychologist,	Channel,	Healer,	Author,	Intuitive,	Psychic,	Gardener,	Business
Person,	Economist,	Environmentalist,	Spiritual	Teacher,	Political	Expert,
Minister,	Artist,	Spiritual	Scientist,	Counselor,	and	on	and	on.	Most	of	us	have
had	hundreds	of	past	lives	with	different	professions,	and	training
	on	both	the
inner	and	outer	plane,	so	this	is	not	as	impossible	a	task	as	you	might	think.	I
know	at	different	times	in	my	life	that	I	have	focused	my	development	in	all
these	areas	and	more.	Wherever	I	have	an	undeveloped	aspect	in	any	area
mentioned	in	this	chapter,	I	work	on	developing	it	and	this	increases	my	full
spectrum	prism	consciousness	and	removes	more	blind	spots.
Which	country
	you	are	born	into	and	where	you	live	is	another	lens.	GOD	sees
through	the	cultures	of	all	countries.	If	you	have	only	lived	and	studied	one
culture,	you	will	have	blind	spots	to	other	cultures	and	belief	systems.	This	is
why	it	is	a	good	thing	to	travel	and	to	study	other	cultures	and	even	speak	other
languages.
Another	lens	and	blind	spot	is	the	color	of	our	skin	or	ethnic	background.
	We
do	not	realize	how	we	are	programmed	into	seeing	live	through	our	particular
skin	color	and	ethnicity.	This	carries	a	whole	set	of	belief	systems	that	may	or
may	not	be	true.	If	you	are	white	in	skin	color,	try	talking	to	someone	living	in
an	African	body,	really	seeing,	and	experiencing	how	different	their	reality	is.
This	is	why	it	is	a	good	thing	to	expand	one’s	consciousness	and	ethnicities.
One’s	socioeconomic	upbringing	will	also	create	a	lens	and	corresponding
blind	spots	that	will	limit	your	full	God	Consciousness	as	well.	This	is	why	it	is
also	a	good	idea	to	break	out	of	this	lens	and	pattern	within	self,	and	to
communicate	and	commune	with	people	with	different	experiences	in	this
regard.
Now,	there	are	many	more	lenses	that	we	have	been	programmed	to	be	locked
into.	I	call	this	phenomena	with	any	of	the	above	mentioned	issues	or	the	ones	I
am	about	to	mention	“mind	locks.”	A	mind	lock	is	when	we	get	stuck	in	a
certain	aspect,	lens,	or	belief	system	and	don’t	realize	it.	We	are,	hence,	locked
in	and	only	seeing	life	through	a	very	small	number	of	lenses	than	all	the	lenses
GOD	sees	through.
In	truth,	every	belief	system	is	a	lens	and	potential
	mind	lock.	Do	you	identify
with	being	a	Republican,	Democrat,	or	Reform	Party	member?	This	can	be	a
mind	lock	and	limited	lens	that	blinds	you.	Your	emotions	can	be	a	mind	lock
and	your	mind	can	be	a	mind	lock.	The	negative	ego	can	be	a	mind	lock.	Any
given	subpersonality	can	be	a	mind	lock.	Any	given	habit	can	be	a	mind	lock.
Any	given	belief	system	that	you	have	been	given	by	your	parents,	teachers,
ministers,	rabbis,	counselors,	psychologists,	friends,	grandparents,	workshops,
lectures,	past	life	programming,	or	childhood	programming	are	all	singular	lens,
potential	glamour,	illusion,	maya,	blind	spots,	and	potential	mind	locks.
Now	I	realize	that	this	chapter	can	be	a	little	humbling,	for	how	many	people
in	this	world	have	developed	themselves	in	all	these	areas	and	hence	released
themselves	from	these	blind	spots,	mind	locks,	and	limited	lenses	of	seeing	life.
Melchizedek,	the	President	of	our	entire	Universe,	told	me	that	most	people	see
life	through	the	lens	of	a	fly.	He	was	not	being	judgmental,	he	was	just
contrasting	his	full	spectrum	prism	consciousness	of	being	responsible	for	an
entire	Universe,	to	that	of	most	people	on	Earth	who	see	life	from	such	a
fragmented,
	unintegrated,	and	limited	lens	perspective.	This	humbling	process,	I
spoke	of	at	the	beginning	of	this	paragraph,	is	good	and	is	a	healthy	humbleness
and	humility,	which	is	one	of	the	steps	in	achieving	true	God	consciousness.	Our
negative	egos	always	want	to	tell	us	how	together	and	evolved	we	are.	I	am
amazed	in	the	Spiritual	Movement	how	many	people	go	around	claiming	to	have
fully	realized	GOD.
	Not	only	have	they	not	realized	GOD	in	a	Cosmic	sense,
they	have	not	even	realized	GOD	in	a	planetary	sense,	a	psychological	sense,	or
a	physical/earthly	sense	in	becoming	an	integrated	Planetary	Ascended	Master.
Ninety-nine	percent	of	the	time	it	is	their	negative	ego	talking	and	more
glamour,	illusion,	and	maya.	Even	most	of	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters
that	we	are	familiar	with	have	only
	realized	GOD	two	inches	up	a	ten	inch	ruler
in	the	true	infinite	nature	of	GOD.	Hence,	with	no	judgement	intended,	you	see
how	comical	and	delusionary	these	claims	are.
My	beloved	readers,	even	being	Spiritual	can	be	a	mind	lock	and	can
enormously	limit	your	perception	if	you	are	not	properly	integrating	the
psychological	and	physical/earthly	level.	Many	on	the	Spiritual	path	are
overidentified
	with	the	Celestial	Realms	and	are	not	doing	their	psychological
and	physical/earthly	homework.	This	is	a	blind	spot	and	mind	lock	as	well	as	a
limited	lens,	through	which	one	is	seeing	and	experiencing	life	within	self,	and
in	others.
It	is	interesting	to	me	how	a	great	many	people	each	have	a	favorite	book	in
my	Ascension	Book	Series	and	they	are	all	different.	This	is	because	of	the
different
	lenses	people	are	coming	from.	For	example,	some	people	approach	my
work	from	a	psychological	lens.	Some	people	approach	my	work	from	a
Spiritual	or	Ascension	lens.	Others	still,	approach	it	from	a	more	grounded
physical/earthly	lens.
In	conclusion,	my	beloved	readers,	the	key	to	removing	blind	spots,	mind
locks,	and	limited	lenses,	is	to	follow	a	Spiritual	path	in	life,	that	I	call
“Integrated
	Ascension,”	and/or	becoming	an	“Integrated	Melchizedek/
Christ/Buddha.”	This	focus	on	integration,	balance,	and	synthesis	in	all	things
will	allow	you	to	see	from	a	more	full	spectrum	God	prism	consciousness,	and
hence	remove	the	blind	spots,	mind	locks,	and	limited	lens	seeing	that	will	come
from	not	doing	so.	It	is	an	approach	of	being	a	well-rounded	individual.	It	is	an
approach	of	being
	a	Renaissance	Man	or	Woman.	It	is	an	approach	of	being
whole	and	complete	within	self	and	within	the	true	nature	of	GOD.
The	last	thing	I	wish	to	say	to	conclude	this	chapter	is,	that	the	vision	I	have
laid	out	here	to	remove	blind	spots,	mind	locks,	and	limited	lens	seeing	is	a	big
one.	The	number	one	most	important	thing	to	do	to	keep	your	priorities	straight
and	to	make	this	process	work,
	is	to	master	your	mind,	feelings	and	emotions,
subconscious	mind,	inner	child,	lower	self	desire	and	to	most	of	all	learn	to
transcend	negative	ego/fear	based/separative	thinking,	and	learn	instead	to	think
from	your	Melchizedek/	Christ/Buddha	mind.	This	is	essential	for	even	if	you
develop	yourself	in	all	the	areas	I	have	mentioned	in	this	chapter,	the	negative
ego	will	corrupt	the	entire	process
	and	keep	you	blinded	for	it	will	have	you	use
all	that	you	have	gained	for	the	wrong	purpose.	You	will	be	as	blind	as	ever	and
not	realize	it,	for	this	is	the	delusionary	and	hypnotic	nature	of	the	mind.	To
avoid	this	blind	spot,	mind	lock,	and	extreme	limited	lens,	be	joyously	vigilant
against	the	negative	ego	at	all	times.	Never	forget	that	every	moment	of	your	life
in	your	every	thought,
	word,	and	deed,	you	will	be	continually	Spiritually	tested
as	to	if	you	choose	GOD	or	negative	ego	in	that	moment.	My	Beloved	Readers,
work	on	this	lesson	first,	and	then	fill	in	the	rest	in	the	process	of	your	life,	and
then	you	will	be	on	the	right	track.	What	I	have	shared	in	this	chapter	and	the
perspective	I	have	put	it	in,	is	the	“God	Formula”	for	most	quickly	and
efficiently	removing	your	blind
	spots,	mind	locks,	limited	lens	seeing,	and
achieving	God	consciousness	and	a	full	spectrum	prism	consciousness,	in	the
specific	vein	this	chapter	is	focused	upon!
12
How	to	Deal	with	Attacking	and	Critical
Energy	from	Others	
	
Since	most	people	on	Earth	have	not	been	properly	trained	in	how	to	master	their
mind	and	emotions	and	transcend	negative	ego	thinking	and	replace	it	with
Christ/Buddha/Spiritual	thinking,	everyone	on	Earth	will	have	to	deal	with	being
attacked	and	criticized	at	times.	One	might	think	that	great	Spiritual	Leaders
might	not
	have	to	deal	with	this	like	Jesus	or	Sai	Baba;	however,	they	probably
had	to	deal	with	it	even	more	than	most	because	the	more	famous	you	are	the
more	negative	egotistical	people	try	to	bring	such	people	down.	So,	the	first
question	we	must	ask	ourselves	is	why	do	people	attack	and	criticize	others?	The
answer	is	simple,	it	is	because	they	have	not	been	trained	how	to	master	and
control	their	own
	mind,	emotions,	and	negative	ego	programming.	Another
answer	to	this	question	is	that	they	are	run	by	fear.	Fearful	people	attack.
Another	reason	this	happens	is	that	people	are	out	of	control.	This	causes	them
to	get	angry	in	a	vain	attempt	to	get	back	in	control,	however,	this	is	illusion	for
their	angry	response	is	showing	they	are	still	out	of	control.	Another	reason
people	attack	and	criticize
	is	because	they	have	a	lack	of	self-love	and	a	lack	of
self-worth.	They	attack	and	criticize	to	try	to	move	to	the	topside	of	the	negative
ego	instead	of	the	bottom	side	of	the	negative	ego.	What	they	don’t	understand	is
that	they	are	still	trapped	in	the	negative	ego.	For	as	the	Bible	says,	“After	pride
cometh	the	fall.”	The	only	way	to	escape	this	roller	coaster	ride	of	the	negative
ego	from
	self-inflation	to	self-deflation	is	to	transcend	the	whole	system	and	to
see	there	is	another	way	of	thinking,	not	based	on	fear	and	attack	or	low	self-
esteem	and	self-aggrandizement,	that	does	not	play	this	game.	Most	people	on
Earth	are	trapped	in	this	negative	ego	roller	coaster	and	do	not	know	how	to	get
out	of	it.	One	cannot	escape	it	until	one	embraces	Spiritual	Psychology.
Another
	reason	people	attack	and	criticize	is	that	they	are	too	run	by	their
emotional	body.	When	you	allow	your	feelings	and	emotions	to	run	your	life,	the
negative	ego	becomes	the	programmer	of	your	feelings	and	emotions.	Another
reason	why	people	attack	and	criticize	is	that	they	are	jealous.	This	is,	of	course,
the	negative	ego	again.	This	type	of	person	again,	suffers	from	low	self-esteem
and	is	constantly
	competing	and	comparing	themselves	with	others	to	try	to	feel
good	about	themselves.	They	are	trapped	in	that	negative	ego	complex	of	being
better	than	others	are	or	worse	than	others.	These	are	really	two	sides	of	the
same	coin.	This	is	also	called	living	in	hell,	which	is	what	negative	ego	thinking
creates.	There	is	a	way	of	thinking	called	the	Christ/Buddha/Spiritual
Consciousness	that
	will	transcend	this	way	of	thinking,	and	bring	you
unconditional	love,	unconditional	self-love,	unconditional	self-worth,
unchanging	happiness,	and	inner	peace	at	all	times	without	having	to	ever	attack,
judge,	hurt	others,	compare,	compete,	and	be	better	than	or	worse	than	others.
This	is	why	Sai	Baba	has	said,	“God	equals	man	minus	ego.”	To	realize	GOD
and	achieve	unconditional	love	and	inner	peace
	one	has	to	transcend	negative
ego/fear-based/separative/self-centered	thinking.	Now	that	we	understand	why
people	attack	and	judge,	let	us	now	examine	how	to	deal	with	it	when	someone
does	this	in	person,	over	the	phone,	or	in	a	letter.
The	first	thing	I	would	say	to	do	when	you	are	attacked,	judged	or	someone
lash’s	out	at	you	in	anger	is	to	remain	in	your	personal	power,	unconditional
self-love	and	self-worth.	Remain	in	your	protective	bubble	of	protection	and	let
their	negative	energy	slide	off	your	bubble	like	water	off	a	ducks	back.	Another
way	of	saying	this	is	to	let	their	negative	energy	bounce	off	your	bubble	like	a
rubber	pillow.	In	doing	so	your	are	not	letting	it	implant	in	your	subconscious
mind.	You	are	not	letting	them	be	the	computer	programmer	of	your	feelings	and
emotions.	You	are	remaining	a	cause	of	your	feelings	and	emotions	and	not	an
effect.	You	are	also	keeping	your	attunement	to	GOD	and	your	own	Mighty	I
Am	Presence.	You	are	also	hence	responding,	instead	of	reacting.	So,	the	first
key	lesson	is	to	remain	completely	silent	and	say	nothing.	There	is	great	power
in	silence.	I	am	not	talking	about	negative	ego	power,	but	true	Spiritual	Power.	It
takes
	two	to	have	a	war	or	ego	battle	and	you	are	not	engaging	in	on.	By	doing
this	you	have	passed	the	first	series	of	Spiritual	Tests	that	GOD	and	life	have
presented	you.
Now	you	must	understand	that	the	negative	ego	in	you	is	going	to	want	to	lash
back	and	put	them	in	their	place.	Do	not	listen	to	the	negative	ego.	The	negative
ego	will	tell	you	that	this	person	has	put	you	in	a	lower	position
	of	power.	Do
not	listen	to	this	for	this	is	illusion.	For	as	children	say,	“Sticks	and	stones	can
break	your	bones	but	names	can	never	hurt	me.”	You	can	only	be	put	in	a
lowered	position	if	you	are	a	victim	and	let	them	cause	your	feelings	and
emotions	instead	of	you	causing	your	feelings	and	emotions.	The	key	is	to	say
nothing.	This	will	surprise	your	attacker	and	throw	them	for	a	loop	because
	they
are	ready	for	a	fight	and	you	are	remaining	as	still	as	a	Buddha.	Do	not	let	you
emotional	body	become	engaged.	You	want	to	remain	totally	detached,	calm,
rational,	and	objective.
It	is	never	a	good	idea	to	communicate	with	someone	when	they	or	you	are	too
emotionally	charged,	or	are	caught	in	their	or	your	negative	ego.	Contrary	to
popular	opinion	and	even	the	advice	of	some	counselors
	and	psychologists	on	a
personality	level,	it	is	better	not	to	communicate	at	those	times.	Let	they	other
person	speak	and	do	not	say	a	word.	Let	the	other	person	talk	themselves	out	and
do	not	respond	until	they	are	completely	done.	Listen	closely	to	the	points	they
make	even	if	they	are	communicating	in	a	nasty	irresponsible	manner.	If	you	do
choose	to	communication	do	so	in	a	very	calm,	rational,
	unconditionally	loving
manner.	Do	not	catch	the	psychological	disease	of	the	other	person.	Remain	in
your	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness.	Do	not	give	in	to	the	negative	ego,	or	any
anger,	attack,	or	judgmental	energy.	Respond,	do	not	react.	Go	through	each
point	and	share	your	Spiritual	observations	and	Spiritual	discernments	on	each
point.	Remember	above	all	else	that	this	is	a	Spiritual	Test.
	By	how	you	respond
you	will	be	choosing	GOD	or	negative	ego	yourself.	You	are	being	given	a
chance	to	pass	a	great	Spiritual	Test.	Look	how	the	Master	Jesus	responded
when	attacked	and	crucified.	You	are	being	given	a	chance	to	set	a	better
example.	By	responding	in	this	manner,	the	other	person	is	going	to	be	thrown
completely	off	guard.	Ninety-nine	out	of	100	times	other	people	would	respond
emotionally
	and	from	their	negative	ego	and	your	are	not.	On	some	level,	they
know	they	have	done	wrong.	If	you	really	want	to	gain	the	Spiritual	upper	hand,
thank	them	for	their	feedback.	Then	apologize	if	there	is	any	area	where	there
might	have	been	a	grain	of	truth	in	what	they	were	saying.	Their	negative	ego
will	be	completely	flabbergasted	at	your	calm,	rational	Christed	response.	In	a
calm,
	loving	manner	you	can	also	tell	them	that	it	would	have	been	your
preference	that	they	would	have	shared	their	thoughts	and	feeling	in	a	more
calm,	rational	loving	manner.	If	you	disagree	on	some	points	frame	it	as	you
both	have	a	difference	of	perception	and	that	you	should	both	agree	to	disagree
without	breaching	unconditional.	Frame	the	disagreement	as	a	difference	of
looking	at	the	situation	with
	different	lens	and	that	that	you	are	both	right	from
the	lens	you	both	looked	at.	When	the	other	person	soon	realizes	that	you	are
remaining	defenseless,	and	harmless	and	are	not	responding	back	with	angry	and
negative	ego,	their	defenses	will	come	down	as	well	for	they	are	already
beginning	to	feel	great	guilt	for	how	they	reacted.	Use	good	Spiritual
discernment	and	say	what	is	appropriate	and
	no	when	to	talk	and	when	to	be
silent.	Do	not	hand	the	person	a	loaf	of	bread	if	the	are	only	ready	to	eat	crumbs.
Where	necessary	practice	humility	which	is	turning	the	other	cheek.	For,	in
truth,	their	attacks	and	judgements	have	no	effect	on	you.	If	you	are	able	to	do
this,	you	have	passed	a	great	Spiritual	Test.	You	have	“loved	your	enemy”,	as
the	Master	Jesus	taught.	If	the	other	person	is
	at	all	reasonable	they	will	be
greatly	touched	by	your	selfless,	Christed	response	and	they	will	respond	in	kind
and	even	apologize.	Some	people	however	are	extremely	run	by	the	negative	ego
and	will	not.	This	is	not	important	if	the	other	person	learns	their	lessons;	all	that
matters	is	that	you	learn	your	lessons.	For	remember	if	they	do	not	learn	their
lesson	they	will	have	to	reincarnate	to	learn
	their	lesson	with	someone	else	but
not	you	for	you	have	learned	your	lesson.	You	will	have	practiced	unconditional
love	and	forgiveness.	You	will	be	freed	karmically	from	the	lesson	and	will	have
maintained	God	Realization	in	a	most	difficult	Spiritual	Test.	Very	few	can	do	it.
Mostly	because	they	have	not	been	trained	in	Spiritual	psychology	and	how	to
do	it	or	what	even	the	ideal	is.	My	beloved
	Readers	you	must	respond	in	this
manner	if	your	want	to	fully	become	an	Integrated	Ascended	Master,	and	God
Realized	Being	in	the	highest	sense	of	the	term.	What	does	it	do	for	you	that	you
are	a	t	a	high	level	of	initiation	and	light	quotient	if	you	cannot	control	your	own
negative	ego	and	emotional	body.	You	are	in	this	world	to	set	a	better	example.
Do	not	lower	yourself	to	their	level.	This
	is	why	the	best	approach	is	to	remain
silent	until	you	get	your	center	and	balance	back	when	first	attacked.
Now	I	must	say,	however,	sometimes	when	attacked,	and	judged	the	best	thing
is	to	say	nothing.	Or	to	say	something	like	thank	you	for	the	feedback	and	I	am
going	to	take	sometime	to	think	about	what	you	have	said	and	I	will	get	back	to
you	when	I	do	this.	Some	people	are	so	disturbed
	that	saying	nothing	is	the	best
response.	You	are	not	a	victim	and	you	are	not	going	to	let	them	program	your
emotions	so	what	does	it	matter.	Your	silence	is	an	incredibly	powerful
response.	When	you	take	your	space	and	think	about	what	happened,	I	suggest
that	you	get	a	pen	and	paper.	Write	down	the	key	points	they	stated	in	a	list
format	and	see	if	any	of	them	have	any	truth.	Get	totally	clear
	within	self	as	to
what	is	truth	and	what	is	illusion.	Later	you	can	go	back	and	respond	more
intelligently	after	thinking	the	whole	process	through.	Sometimes	an	even	better
way	to	deal	with	the	situation	is	to	not	do	it	in	person,	but	to	do	it	by	letter.	Then
you	can	write	everything	down	on	paper	and	say	exactly	what	you	want	to	say
and	you	are	assured	of	remembering	everything,	you	are	assured
	of	saying	it	in	a
Christ/Buddha	like	manner,	and	you	are	assured	of	not	being	interrupted.	When
writing	such	a	letter,	use	the	same	Christed	principles	and	qualities	I	mentioned
earlier.
Now	there	are	other	times	you	will	be	attacked	in	a	letter	or	by	e-mail	from
people	you	do	not	even	know.	This	happens	more	often	once	you	get	a	little
more	in	the	public	eye.	There	are	an	enormous	number
	of	very	strange,
eccentric,	negative	ego	run,	lost	souls	out	there	who	are	filled	with	low	self-
esteem,	jealousy,	competing	energy	and	judgmental	energy.	They	live	to	attack
and	judge	to	try	and	maintain	the	feeble	self-image	and	self-concept.	They
unconsciously	believe	that	by	attacking	they	will	at	least	stay	on	the	upper	side
of	the	negative	ego.	I	would	say	there	are	about	five	or	ten	percent
	of
lightworkers	fall	into	this	category.	They	are	extremely	disturbed	people	who	are
completely	run	by	the	negative	ego	and	do	not	even	know	what	the	negative	ego
is.	No	matter	what	workshop	they	go	to	they	will	find	fault	and	criticize.	It
would	not	matter	in	the	slightest	if	you	made	a	mistake	or	not,	they	will
manufacture	them	out	of	the	delusion	of	their	owning	negative	ego	thinking.	If
the
	entire	Cosmic	and	Spiritual	Hierarchy	manifested	on	Earth	in	physical	bodies
to	do	a	workshop	they	would	find	fault.	They	same	thing	happens	in	the	world
and	not	just	with	lightworkers.	Anyone	who	is	on	top	will	be	mercilessly
attacked	by	others	to	bring	them	down.	It	happens	to	any	presidential	candidate
by	the	media.	It	happens	to	movie	starts	and	famous	musicians.	Negative	ego
people	instead	of
	being	happy	for	another	persons	success	and	realizing
everyone	is	God,	will	attack	and	criticize	to	try	and	make	themselves	feel	good.
What	a	sorrowful	existence.	Anyone	who	does	workshops,	has	a	Website,	writes
books,	gives	lectures	or	seminars,	or	is	in	the	public	eye	will	run	into	this.
Judging	and	attacking	is	the	only	way	they	know	how	to	make	themselves	feel
good.	It	is	because	they	are	caught
	in	the	negative	ego	complex	and	roller
coaster	and	this	is	the	only	way	they	know	how	to	not	feel	bad	about	themselves
and	feel	worse	than	others.	I	bring	this	up	so	you	do	not	take	such	attacks	and
tirades	personally.	This	is	why	we	must	not	look	to	others	for	our	approval,	self-
worth,	and	self	love,	but	should	give	it	to	ourselves	and	allow	ourselves	to
receive	it	from	GOD	and	the	Masters.	This
	is	nothing	more	than	a	lesson	in
forgiveness,	unconditional	love,	and	nonjudgementalness.	In	truth	one	should
feel	sorry	for	such	people,	and	have	compassion	for	them.	They	are	truly	living
in	a	hell	of	negative	ego	thinking	and	have	not	been	trained	how	to	escape	it.	In
these	types	of	situations,	it	is	better	to	remain	silent	and	not	respond.	These	types
of	people	are	not	open	to	learning	anything
	and	it	is	better	to	not	waste	your	time
and	energy	trying.	The	most	powerful	response	you	can	make	is	silence.	One	of
the	real	keys	to	dealing	with	peoples	attacks	and	judgements	in	life	is	to	develop
the	highest	level	of	clarity,	integrity	and	flawless	character	you	possible	can.	The
reason	I	say	this	is,	that	if	you	do	are	unbelievably	clear	and	flawless	in
everything	you	do,	then	when	people
	do	attack	or	judge	you,	you	will	stand	on
solid	ground,	and	you	will	know	that	you	have	always	done	the	right	thing,	and
pursued	excellence	and	the	highest	Spiritual	ideals	in	everything	you	have	done.
Then	when	you	are	attacked	or	judged	you	can	look	back	at	your	actions	and
know	without	a	doubt	that	you	are	clear	and	in	integrity	and	that	the	other
persons	attacks	are	coming	from	their	own	insecurity,
	jealousy,	low	self	esteem
and	competition.	When	you	are	clear	within	yourself	that	everything	you	do	is	in
integrity	and	coming	from	your	soul	and	Spirit,	then	other	peoples	attacks	and
criticism	will	not	be	able	to	have	any	place	to	plant	within	you	and	will	not	be
able	to	cause	any	self	doubt.
It	is	important	to	be	able	to	receive	constructive	criticism	in	life,	and	it	is	even
important
	to	learn	from	people’s	feedback	even	if	they	express	it	from	their
negative	ego.	Do	not	however	let	disturbed	negative	egotistical	people	who	are
manufacturing	things	to	attack	you	about	have	any	affect	on	you.	Stand	solid	in
your	truth	and	let	their	negativity	slide	off	your	Golden	Bubble	of	Light	like
“water	off	a	ducks	back.”
In	conclusion,	what	I	would	like	to	say	about	this	issue	of
	how	to	deal	with
people’s	attacks	and	judgementalness	is	that,	“an	attack	is	really	a	call	for	love.”
There	are	only	two	emotions	in	life,	and	these	are	Love	and	fear.	People	attack
and	judgement	because	they	live	in	fear.	See	through	the	negative	ego	veil	they
are	manifesting,	and	give	them	the	unconditional	love	they	are	truly	asking	for.
Their	meaningless	attacks	and	criticism	have	no	affect	on
	you	unless	you	let
them.	Stay	above	the	fray.	Remain	in	a	transcendent	state	of	consciousness.	Take
the	High	Road	and	not	the	low	road.	Remain	in	your	Higher	Consciousness.
Maintain	your	Spiritual	and	Psychological	immune	system	and	do	not	catch	their
psychological	disease.	Do	not	lower	yourself	to	their	level.	Let	them	think	they
have	won,	for	in	truth	by	responding	appropriately,	as	GOD	would
	have	you
respond,	who	has	truly	won.	You	who	have	remained	in	a	state	of	God
Realization,	or	the	other	person	who	think	they	won	but	has	truly	won	nothing
more	than	their	negative	ego	and	lost	an	opportunity	to	realize	GOD.	My
beloved	Readers	do	you	see	the	delusion	of	the	negative	ego	thought	system.
When	I	say	you	won	it	is	not	winning	in	an	egotistical	sense,	it	is	winning	in	a
Spiritual	sense.
	Never	forget	your	choice	is	always	do	you	want	to	be	right	or	do
you	want	love?	Do	you	want	Love	and	peace	or	conflict,	attack	and	fear?	In
essence	do	you	want	GOD	or	do	you	want	negative	ego?	Do	you	want	to	pass
your	Spiritual	Test	and	Realize	GOD	in	that	moment,	or	do	you	want	the
momentary	illusionary	satisfaction	of	attacking	back	and	getting	the	upper	hand
on	their	negative	ego	with	your	negative
	ego?	Do	you	want	to	learn	your
Spiritual	Lesson	now	or	do	you	want	to	have	to	reincarnate	again	and	learn	this
lifetime	next	lifetime	and	maybe	have	them	as	your	mother,	father,	sister,	or
brother?	The	choice	is	yours	may	friend.	Your	Salvation	is	up	to	you.	God	has
already	given	you	everything.	They	key	question	is	will	you	give	Salvation	to
yourself	by	choosing	to	respond	from	your	God	Consciousness
	and	not	your
negative	ego	consciousness.	Each	moment	of	your	life	choose	GOD	and	not	the
negative	ego	and	the	Biblical	words	of	the	Master	Jesus	will	be	fulfilled.	“Be	ye
faithful	unto	death	and	I	will	give	thee	a	Crown	of	Life!”
13
Turning	Lemons	into	Lemonade:	A
Millennium	Perspective	
	
One	of	the	absolute	Spiritual	keys	to	effective	self-mastery	and	Self-Realization
is	the	ability	to	turn	lemons	into	lemonade.	It	must	be	understood	that	life	will
never	always	go	according	to	our	preferences.	This	is	why	the	concept	of	having
preferences	rather	than	attachments	is	so	important.	If	one	is	attached	to	having
things	go	the	way	they	want	this	person	is	going	to	have	an	enormous	amount
suffering	in	their	life.	When	we	have	only	super	strong	preferences,	we	are
happy	no	matter	what	happens.	We	still	want	our	preferences	met	but	our
happiness	is	not	based	on	achieving	them.
There	is	another	“Noble	Truth,”	however,	which	I	am	going	to	humorously
add	to	Buddha’s	Four	Noble	Truths	on	the	nature	of	truth
	and	suffering	if	he
doesn’t	mind.	I	now	humorously	add	“The	importance	of	turning	Lemons	into
Lemonade.”	My	beloved	readers,	let	me	now	explain	my	meaning	to	begin	to	lay
the	foundation	for	this	understanding	besides	the	concept	of	preference,	which	is
essential	we	must	also	understand	that	from	GOD’s	perspective	everything	that
happens	is	positive	and	should	be	looked	at	as	a	gift.	The	proper
	attitude	to
everything	in	life	is	“Not	my	will	but	Thine,	thank	you	for	the	lesson!”	No
matter	what	happens	in	life	no	matter	how	horrific	the	example,	this	is	the	proper
attitude.	As	His	Holiness	the	Lord	Sai	Baba	has	said,	“Welcome	adversity.”
From	GOD’s	perspective,	there	are	no	accidents	in	the	universe	and	everything
happens	for	a	reason.	The	reason	is	always	to	Spiritually	teach	a	lesson	that
needs	to	be	learned.	Now	sometimes	the	“negative”	things	that	happen	are
caused	from	personal	karma.	Sometimes	they	are	caused	by	planetary	or	group
karma.	Sometimes	they	are	caused	by	passed	life	karma.	The	truth	is	it	doesn’t
matter	why	it	happened	or	where	it	came	from,	for	if	it	happened,	you	can	be
assured	that	you	needed	that	lesson	for	some	reason	and	the	proper	attitude	is	to
welcome	it,
	accept	it	and	look	at	it	as	a	gift.	From	GOD’s	perspective,
everything	that	happens	in	life	is	a	Spiritual	test.	In	every	situation	in	life,	we
can	respond	from	God	consciousness	or	negative	ego	consciousness.	We	can
respond	from	our	lower	self	or	our	Higher	Self.	We	can	respond	from
unconditional	love	or	from	fear.	We	can	respond	from	separation	or	from
oneness.	We	can	respond	from	our	Melchizedek/
	Christ/Buddha	consciousness
or	from	personality	level	consciousness	that	is	not	connected	to	the	Soul	and
Spirit.	So,	Earth	is	a	school	to	practice	demonstrating	GOD	or	to	practice
demonstrating	being	a	Melchizedek,	the	Christ	and/or	the	Buddha.	The	terms	or
names	we	use	do	not	matter	for	they	are	interchangeable.
Now	the	truth	of	the	matter	is	life	is	constantly	throwing	us	lemons.	The
	key
principle	here	is	will	you	turn	it	into	lemonade	or	will	you	keep	tasting	the	bitter
taste	of	the	lemon.	Your	attitude	and	perspective	govern	all	this.	As	His
Holiness,	the	Lord	Sai	Baba	has	said,	“Your	mind	creates	bondage	or	your	mind
creates	liberation.”	So,	no	matter	what	happens	in	life	and	no	matter	how
catastrophic	the	occurrence,	it	is	each	person’s	responsibility	to	turn	that
experience
	into	lemonade.	We	constantly	see	examples	of	people	doing	this.
They	do	this	as	a	means	to	heal	one	self	and	to	create	meaning.	Victor	Frankl	in
the	concentration	camps	of	Nazi	Germany	created	a	whole	new	form	of	therapy
called	Logo	Therapy.	The	woman	whose	son	was	killed	by	a	drunk	driver
creates	an	organization	to	prevent	this	from	happening,	so	others	do	not	have	to
suffer.	The	person	with	aids
	gives	up	everything	and	dedicates	her	life	to
travelling	the	world	to	raise	consciousness	about	aids.	The	story	of	Job	tells	how
a	man	loses	everything,	and	I	mean	everything	but	ultimately	turns	it	into	a
Spiritual	test	of	his	“Righteousness”	in	believing	in	GOD.	Job’s	statement	in	the
Bible	is	one	of	my	favorite	quotes	where	he	says,	“Naked	I	come	from	my
mothers	womb,	and	naked	shall	I	leave.
	The	Lord	giveth,	and	the	Lord	taketh
away,	blessed	be	the	name	of	the	Lord.”
In	my	own	mind	I	have	called	this	the	Job	initiation,	and	I	have	reminded
myself	of	this	on	many	occasions	when	I	have	been	asked	to	give	up	certain
things.	No	matter	what	happens	in	life	the	key	is	to	“Focus	on	what	you	can	do
instead	of	what	you	can’t	do!”
If	you	lose	your	voice	and	can’t	speak	any	more,
	then	become	a	writer.	If	you
can’t	walk,	then	join	the	Olympics	in	a	wheel	chair	event.	Look	at	the	inspiration
Christopher	Reeves	has	brought	to	himself	and	the	world	after	becoming
paralyzed.	If	you	have	an	illness	and	can	no	longer	go	outside	then	dedicate	your
life	to	developing	your	inner	life.	If	you	are	losing	your	sight	and	can	no	longer
read	than	listen	to	tapes.	If	you	have	digestive	problems
	and	can’t	eat	without
discomfort,	then	learn	to	live	on	light.	No	matter	how	much	is	taken	away	and
no	matter	how	many	things	you	cannot	do,	there	is	always	something	you	can
do.	Focus	yourself	and	your	consciousness	on	that	which	you	can	do!	Your	own
Mighty	I	Am	Presence	and	the	Holy	Spirit	can	always	help	you	to	find	meaning,
another	purpose,	and	another	direction	to	follow	no	matter	what
	happens.	A
person	who	has	an	optimistic	positive	attitude	will	ultimately	remain	so	no
matter	what	happens	in	their	life.	A	person	with	a	negative,	pessimistic	attitude
will	find	a	way	to	feel	unhappy	even	if	outwardly	things	are	going	well.	The
world	is	nothing	more	than	a	projection	screen	for	our	attitudes	and
interpretations.	GOD	would	have	us	be	100%	positive	and	optimistic	no	matter
what	happens
	in	life,	no	matter	how	morbid	the	example.	What	ever	happens	in
life	is	there	to	teach	us	certain	Christed/Buddha	qualities.	The	Master	Jesus
knew	this	for	that	is	why	he	said	on	the	cross	“Forgive	them	Father,	for	they
know	not	what	they	do.”	The	Master	Jesus	saw	this	situation	as	a	Spiritual	test
and	lesson	in	forgiveness,	and	demonstrated	this	understanding	in	a	most
extreme	situation.
No	matter	what	the	situation	of	life,	make	lemonade	out	of	the	lemon	you	have
been	handed.	If	you	lose	a	large	some	of	money	and	someone	rips	you	off,	you
are	being	given	the	wonderful	opportunity	to	not	only	practice	forgiveness,	but
to	not	be	attached	to	money.	Whatever	the	situation	of	life,	you	are	being	given
the	wonderful	opportunity	to	transcend	negative	ego	thinking	and	feeling	and	to
practice
	Christ/Buddha	thinking	and	feeling.
Let’s	say	you	make	a	big	mistake	and	the	whole	world	finds	out	about	it	like
President	Clinton	did.	That	can	be	transformed	into	lemonade	by	practicing	true
humbleness	and	humility.	If	you	have	to	go	to	jail,	look	at	it	as	a	Spiritual
retreat.	Malcolm	X,	while	in	jail,	educated	himself.	If	one	has	to	go	to	jail	use	it
as	a	time	to	totally	focus	on	your
	Spiritual	life	and	getting	yourself
psychologically	and	physically	strong.	Whatever	goes	wrong	in	your	life	no
matter	how	extreme,	use	that	situation	and	become	an	expert	in	it.	Dedicate	your
life	to	helping	others,	so	they	never	have	to	go	through	what	you	just	went
through.	There	is	no	situation	of	life	where	GOD,	your	own	Mighty	I	Am
Presence,	the	Holy	Spirit,	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters
	and	your	own
positive	creative	Spiritual	consciousness	cannot	turn	lemons	into	lemonade!	We
have	all	heard	the	expression	that	“This	was	a	blessing	in	disguise.”	This
understanding	stems	from	what	I	am	writing	about	in	this	chapter.	The	truth	is
everything,	and	I	mean	everything	that	has	ever	happened	in	this	world,	is
happening	or	ever	will	happen,	is	a	blessing	in	disguise.	If	it	happened,	it	means
our	Soul	needed	that	lesson.	There	is	no	such	thing	as	good	luck	or	bad	luck	in
this	world;	this	is	total	illusion.	Luck	does	not	exist	in	GOD’s	reality.	The
concept	of	luck	is	an	illusionary	fabrication	of	the	negative	ego	thought	system.
Everything	in	GOD’s	Universe	operates	out	of	laws	on	a	Spiritual,	mental,
emotional,	etheric	and	physical	level,	and	if	something	happened	then	there	is	a
cause.
	This	is	the	immutable	law	of	karma,	or	cause	and	effect.	We	cannot
always	control	what	comes	into	our	life	on	an	outer	level,	however,	we	can
100%	control	our	attitude,	interpretation,	and	perspective	of	what	happens	to	us.
I	remember	Elizabeth	Kubler	Ross	said	that	it	was	the	atrocities	of	Nazi
Germany	that	inspired	her	to	dedicate	her	life	to	being	a	better	person.	It	is	not
what	happens	to
	you,	it	is	how	you	use	what	happens	to	you.
My	beloved	readers,	in	the	ultimate	sense	there	is	no	such	thing	as	death	for
anyone,	there	is	just	translation	from	dimension	to	dimension,	and	the	wearing	of
different	bodies.	So,	in	truth,	as	
A	Course	in	Miracles	
states:	all	perception	is	a
dream.	The	purpose	of	Earth	life	is	that	it	is	an	earthly	school	to	practice	living
and	demonstrating
	GOD’s	dream	rather	than	the	negative	ego’s	dream.	It	is	to
live	the	loving	happy	dream	rather	than	the	fearful,	attacking,	angry	dream	of	the
negative	ego.	If	there	is	no	such	thing	as	death,	then	what	is	the	worst	that	can
happen?	Is	losing	all	material	thing	that	important?	My	beloved	readers,	it	all
comes	back	to	Lord	Buddha’s	Four	Noble	Truths	dealing	with	attachment.	If	you
are	attached	to	people
	and	things,	you	will	surely	suffer.	If	everything	in	life	is	a
super	strong	preference	and	you	go	after	your	preferences	with	all	your	heart	and
soul	and	mind	and	might,	many	of	them	will	manifest.	Those	that	don’t,	or	go
exactly	the	opposite	will	not	affect	your	happiness	because	they	are	preferences,
which	means	you	will	be	happy	either	way.	Happiness	and	inner	peace	hence,
becomes	a	state
	of	mind	rather	than	anything	outside	of	self.	I	like	Paramahansa
Yogananda’s	saying,	“God	is	my	stocks	and	bonds	and	financial	security.”	So,
the	key	is	to	look	at	everything	that	happens	in	life	no	matter	what	it	is	as	a
Spiritual	test.	So	no	matter	how	bad	the	lemons	are	that	you	are	given,	you	can
thank	GOD	and	bless	this	experience,	for	it	has	given	you	the	opportunity	to
transcend	your	negative
	ego	and	practice	Melchizedek/Christ/Buddha
Consciousness.	Even	if	everything	is	taken	away	on	every	level,	then	my
beloved	readers,	all	that	is	left	is	GOD,	and	you	can	say:	“Naked	I	come	from
my	mothers	womb,	and	naked	shall	I	leave.	The	Lord	giveth	and	the	Lord	taketh
away.	Blessed	be	the	name	of	the	Lord!”
You	can	bathe	in	passing	the	Job	initiation	and	retaining	your	happiness	and
inner
	peace	even	though	everything	has	been	taken	away.	It	is	then	you	can	rise
again	like	the	Phoenix,	and	give	birth	to	a	new	creation,	by	focussing	on	what
you	can	do	instead	of	what	you	can’t	do.	You	find	double	meaning	by	then
becoming	an	expert	in	the	lemons	you	have	been	handed,	and	you	dedicate	your
life	and	your	Spiritual	Path,	to	helping	other	people	not	to	experience	the	lemons
that	you	had
	to	go	through.	By	selflessly	giving	in	this	manner	you	have
practiced	Spiritual	and	psychological	alchemy	and	turned	a	negative	experience
into	psychological	and	Spiritual	Gold!	You	have	healed	your	self,	and	helped	to
heal	the	suffering	of	others,	through	the	wisdom	you	have	gained,	and	your	own
positive,	optimistic,	creative	Spiritual	attitude.	So	let	it	be	written.
14
Seeing	Life	through	the	Eyes	of	Love	
	
The	title	of	this	chapter	sounds	a	little	like	a	cliché;	however,	I	tell	you	my
friends,	it	holds	an	enormous	“Divine	Truth”	within	it.	Everyone	is	searching	for
Love.	Everyone	wants	Love.	An	enormous	number	of	people	are	searching	for
romantic	love.	Almost	all	people	need	more	self	love,	but	do	not	realize	it.
People	are	always	trying	to	find
	more	love	in	friendships	as	well	as	family,	and
with	their	children	or	parents.	All	Spiritually	minded	people	are	always	trying	to
generate	love	and	devotion	to	GOD,	and	the	Masters,	as	well	as	wanting	to
receive	it	as	well.	Love,	in	truth,	makes	the	world	go	around.	The	entire	infinite
Universe	is	just	a	“Play	of	Love	of	GOD”!
Why	then	are	so	many	people	lacking	in	love?	Most	people	on
	Earth	are
lacking	in	self-love.	Fifty	percent	of	all	marriages	end	in	divorce.	Those	who	are
married	are	not	necessarily	experiencing	a	very	high	level	of	love	in	their
marriage	or	relationship.	Most	people	have	difficulties	often	in	experiencing
love	parents,	children	and	certain	extended	family	members.	Many	people	do	not
feel	the	love	for	GOD	or	the	Love	from	GOD	they	would	like	to	feel.	Most
people
	on	this	planet	do	not	live	in	a	state	of	Unconditional	Love	for	everyone
and	everything.	If	“Love	makes	the	world	go	round,”	how	come	so	many	people
are	not	experiencing	it	to	their	full	potential?
The	answer	to	this	question	is	they	do	not	see	life	through	the	“Eyes	of	Love.”
What	does	this	really	mean?	Love	has	nothing	to	do	with	physical	looks,	and
nothing	to	do	with	how	much	money	you
	have,	and	has	nothing	to	do	with	your
material	possessions	ands	anything	outside	of	yourself.	It	also	has	nothing	to
with	being	in	or	out	of	a	family,	marriage	or	relationship.	There	are	plenty	of
people	who	have	all	these	things	and	are	surrounded	by	tons	of	friends	and
people	but	do	not	really	have	love.
There	is	only	one	way	to	have	love	within	yourself,	in	all	your	relationships,
and
	even	with	GOD	and	the	Masters,	and	that	is	to	see	life	through	your
Melchizedek/Christ/Buddha/Spiritual	Consciousness	and	Mind.	This	is	because
our	thoughts	create	our	reality	and	our	thoughts	create	our	feelings	and
emotions.	If	we	do	not	learn	to	think	with	our	Melchizedek/Christ/Buddha
Consciousness	and	Mind	then	we	cannot	maintain	Love.
God	Consciousness	is	Love	Consciousness.	A	person
	who	has	trained
themselves	to	think	with	their	God	Mind,	hence	creates	only	God	feelings	and
emotions	and	God	actions.	No	matter	what	happens	in	life	all	they	see	is	Love.
The	stranger	on	the	street	is	not	a	stranger,	but	is	seen	as	an	incarnation	of	GOD.
When	people	attack	a	person	in	this	state	of	consciousness	they	see	it	as	a	call
for	love,	because	they	realize	that	person	is	fearful.	When
	a	person	sees	through
the	“Eyes	of	God	or	Love,”	they	are	“Love	finders”	not	fault	finders!
The	Eyes	of	Love	are	so	filled	with	self-love	and	love	for	and	from	GOD,	they
want	love	from	others	but	do	not	need	it.	It	is	a	preference	not	an	attachment.
They	look	at	every	situation	of	life	as	an	opportunity	to	practice	demonstrating
Love.	When	a	criminal	steals	something	from	them,	they	look
	at	that	as	an
opportunity	given	to	them	to	forgive.	When	someone	criticizes	them,	they	look
at	that	as	an	opportunity	to	transcend	duality	and	remain	unaffected	by	undo
praise	or	criticism.	When	you	see	life	through	the	“Eyes	of	Love,”	all	attacks	and
criticisms	slide	off	your	Golden	bubble	of	protection	like	water	off	a	duck’s
back!
Those	who	see	life	through	the	“Eyes	of	Love,”	see	every
	situation	of	life	as	a
Spiritual	Test	to	practice	Love	and	Oneness.	The	more	the	extreme	the	lesson
and	Spiritual	Test,	the	more	the	need	for	Love.	The	entire	purpose	of	life	is	seen
every	moment	to	see	if	they	can	remain	in	unconditional	love	at	all	times.
When	you	see	life	through	the	“Eyes	of	Love,”	all	one	wants	to	do	is	selflessly
and	egolessly	give	and	serve	others,	for	one	feels	so
	filled	with	self	love	and	love
for	and	from	GOD	and	the	Masters.	When	negative	things	happen,	those	with
“Eyes	of	Love,”	do	not	look	at	them	as	negative	buts	as	lessons	and	happening
for	a	reason.	The	reason	being,	to	give	and	receive	more	love.	The	“Eyes	of
Love,”	main	purpose	for	living	is	to	be	an	Incarnation	of	Love	on	Earth,	but	also
understands	that	this	cannot	be	done	with	out	Owning	ones
	personal	power	fully
and	having	great	wisdom.	In	other	words	to	see	through	the	“Eyes	of	Love,”	one
must	balance	ones	three	fold	flame,	and	the	Seven	Rays	of	GOD.
To	see	through	the	Eyes	of	Love,	one	recognizes	the	need	for	total	Self-
Mastery	over	one’s	mind,	feelings,	emotions,	physical	body	and	energies.
The	number	on	Spiritual	practice	of	one	that	sees	through	the	“Eyes	of	Love”
is	to	always	interpret	life	and	all	situations	from	the	Melchizedek/Christ/Buddha
mind	and	not	the	negative	ego/fearbased/separative/lower-self	mind.	So	to
experience	a	reality	of	only	Love	in	ones	life	one	must	always	be	vigilant	to	not
allow	Godless	and	loveless	thoughts	into	ones	mind.	The	“Eyes	of	Love,”	hence
is	a	“State	of	Consciousness,”	that	is	so	God	and	Love	Centered,	that	no	matter
what
	happens	in	life	the	person	chooses	Love	and	not	fear,	criticism,	attack	or
anger.So	as	you	can	see	and	as	you	all	know,	“Seeing	through	the	“Eyes	of
Love,”	is	no	cliché.	It	is	the	highest	Spiritual	Practice	a	person	can	aspire	to.	So
what	that	you	gain	the	whole	world,	and	even	a	great	many	Spiritual	Initiations,
but	do	not	know	how	to	remain	in	Love.	Love	is	GOD	and	GOD	is	love.	The
opposite	of
	Love	is	fear,	these	are	the	only	two	emotions,	and	all	others	stem
from	these.	To	truly	see	through	the	“Eyes	of	Love,”	one	must	transcend	fear
and	fear-based	thinking.	One	who	sees	through	the	“Eyes	of	Love,”	also
practices	remaining	in	“Oneness	Consciousness”	as	well.	For	Oneness	is	the	first
cousin	of	Love.	They	go	together.	For	separation	is	not	a	part	of	GOD’s	reality.
Every	thought	is	hence
	examined	by	the	Master	of	the	“Eyes	of	Love,”	to	see	if
it	will	create	Unconditional	Love	and	Oneness	or	fear,	conditional	love	and
separation	from	self,	others,	and	life.	The	Master	of	the	“Eyes	of	Love”
experiences	only	Love	in	their	life	because	they	only	think	“Love	Thoughts.”
Love	Thoughts	only	create	Love	feelings	and	emotions.	Love	thoughts,	feelings
and	emotions,	create	a	love-filled	physical
	body,	which	is	much	healthier	and
more	energized.	This	all	creates	Love	energy	in	ones	aura	and	energy	fields.
This	attracts	and	magnetizes	more	love	to	you,	which	creates	more	opportunities
to	love	even	more.
The	Master	of	the	“Eyes	of	Love”	is	also	extremely	optimistic	and	never
pessimistic.	This	State	of	consciousness	and	Vision	will	see	Love	and	positivity
in	every	situation	no	matter
	what	example	is	given.	This	is	the	case	because	this
is	how	GOD	sees	life	and	we	are	made	in	His	image	and	likeness.	The	Spiritual
path	in	truth	is	very	simple.	If	you	want	to	be	with	GOD	in	Heaven,	then	act	like
GOD	on	Earth!	GOD	is	the	perfect	balance	of	the	Three-Fold	Flame	Love,
Wisdom	and	Power	and	the	Seven	Rays	and	is	integrated	and	balanced	in	all
things.	The	essence	of	this	is	Unconditional
	Love.
The	great	lesson	we	learn	here	is	that	to	truly	become	a	Master	of	seeing	life
through	the	“Eyes	of	Love”	takes	great	Mastery,	focus,	concentration,	and
commitment.	It	also	takes	great	introspection,	joyous	vigilance,	psychological
and	Spiritual	work,	for	it	is	easy	to	slip	back	into	the	“eyes	of	fear,	separation,
anger,	attachment,	criticalness,	materialism,	power	hungry,	fame	hungry,
	greed,
upset,	unhappiness,	depression,	grudges,	negativity,	faulty	thinking,
misinterpretation,	lower	self	thinking,	and	negative	ego	thinking.	This	can	occur
also	in	the	twinkling	of	an	eye	if	you	do	not	closely	monitor	your	thoughts,
feelings	and	energies	at	all	times.
So	the	achievement	of	the	Mastery	of	the	“Eyes	of	Love,”	is	one	of	the
greatest	achievements	any	person	can	achieve	on
	Earth,	however	it	takes
enormous	dedication	and	commitment	to	“Know	thyself,”	and	keep	absolute
mastery	over	ones	attention,	attunement	and	focus	at	all	times.	It	takes	enormous
psychological	work	on	self	and	self	honesty	to	discern	ones	true	motives,	and
what	is	truly	of	GOD	and	Loving	and	what	is	not,	for	many	are	tricked	and
seduced	by	the	negative	ego	and	fear-based	thinking	and	think	they	are
unconditionally	loving	and	are	not.
So	my	beloved	readers,	strive	at	all	times	to	achieve	this	most	noble	ideal,	and
remember	those	who	are	the	Masters	of	the	“Eyes	of	Love,”	also	know	how	to
forgive	and	love	themselves	when	they	are	unloving,	and	also	have	the	power
and	wisdom	to	learn	from	their	mistakes	and	redouble	their	efforts	each	time	a
mistake	occurs.	Those	with	the	“Eyes	of	Love”
	do	not	expect	never	to	make	a
mistake,	but	they	do	seek	to	“Love	the	Lord	thy	GOD,	with	all	their	heart	and
soul	and	mind	and	might,	and	to	Love	their	neighbor	as	they	Love	themselves”!
15
The	Solution	to	Every	Problem	and	Challenge
on	a	Personal	and	Collective	Level	in	the
World	Today	
	
The	chapter	I	am	about	to	write	may	be	the	single	most	important	chapter	I	have
ever	written	in	my	entire	life.	This	is	a	very	bold	statement	in	that	I	have	written
now	over	25	volumes	in	my	Easy	to	Read	Encyclopedia	of	the	Spiritual	Path.
Yet,	this	chapter	may	be	the	single	most	important
	chapter	of	all	my	books.
What	is	it	that	could	be	the	solution	to	every	personal	and	collective	problem	and
challenge	in	the	world	today?
The	answer	to	this	question	is	the	transcendence	of	negative	ego	thinking,	and
the	reestablishment	of	Christ/Buddha/Spiritual	thinking.	Every	negative	thought,
negative	feeling,	negative	behavior,	health	problem,	or	negative	thing	that
happens	in	the	world
	has	its	cause	because	of	the	negative	ego	in	a	past	life	or
this	life.	There	is	no	such	thing	as	luck,	and	everything	that	happens	in	life	has	a
reason	and	a	cause.	Every	inner	and	outer	problem	in	our	society	has	its	cause	in
the	negative	ego.	It	is	almost	comical	to	watch	the	news,	and	these	often	“know
it	all”	political	commentators,	and	even	politicians	at	times,	speak	of	the	cure	to
all
	the	different	societal	and	social	problems.	They	speak	about	all	these
wonderful	outer	solutions,	however	not	one	of	them	ever	speaks	to	the	true
cause.	The	solutions	they	give	are	often	very	good,	however,	they	are	like	band
aids	that	treat	the	symptoms,	but	not	the	cause.	The	same	is	true	of	Western
medicine,	which	for	the	most	part	treats	the	symptom	and	not	the	cause.	The
same	is	true	of	Traditional
	Psychology.	In	truth,	it	is	true	of	every	aspect	of	our
society.	Having	more	police	officers	solves	crime.	Does	this	really	solve	the
problem?	I	am	not	saying	it	isn’t	a	good	idea,	but	is	not	the	solution	to	the
problem.
If	a	person	has	cancer	in	the	leg,	and	you	cut	off	the	leg,	this	may	be	a	good
idea	from	an	emergency	medical	point	of	view,	however	it	does	not	solve	the
issue	of	what
	caused	the	cancer	in	the	first	place.	The	doctor	may	also	give	a
person	a	drug	to	block	the	symptoms	of	any	given	illness,	but	this	does	not
answer	the	question	as	to	what	caused	the	illness	in	the	first	place.
Our	thoughts	cause	our	reality	and	the	Worlds	problems	and	challenges	are
caused	by	the	collective	thinking	of	mankind	from	past	times	and	in	our	present
time.	For	the	rest	of	this
	chapter,	I	would	like	to	focus	on	a	great	many	outer
problems	in	this	World,	and	share	with	you	and	show	you	how	transcending
negative	ego	thinking	and	establishing	Christ/Buddha/Spiritual	thinking	is	the
panacea	and	cure	all	to	all	the	World’s	problems.	I	would	also	like	to	share	with
you	how	“band	aid”	thinking	maybe	very	useful	at	times,	but	will	not	ultimately
solve	these	problems	and	challenges.
Let	us	begin	with	the	issue	of	child	abuse	or	spousal	abuse.	If	people	were	not
run	by	the	negative	ego	they	would	never	attack,	hurt,	or	be	violent	to	anyone
including	themselves.	The	first	principle	of	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	is	to
give	up	your	attack	thoughts	and	anger,	and	replace	them	with	unconditional
love.	Until	People	are	trained	to	be	right	with	self	and	right	with	GOD,	all
	the
Earthly	laws	in	the	world	are	not	going	to	solve	this	problem.	People	will	not	be
abusive	when	they	learn	how	to	master	their	mind	and	emotions,	and	transcend
negative	ego	thinking	and	replace	it	with	Christ/Buddha	thinking	and	feeling.
Now	lets	look	at	the	problems	with	gangs.	Gangs	are	a	manifestation	of	groups
of	people	who	are	run	by	the	negative	ego.	If	these	adolescents	or	people
	were
not	run	by	the	negative	ego,	they	would	be	forming	Spiritual	groups.
Now	lets	look	at	politics.	Why	do	we	have	gridlock	in	Government,	and	why
does	politics	have	such	a	bad	name?	The	politicians	are	run	by	the	negative	ego
to	a	very	large	extent.	They	have	brilliant	minds,	but	the	minds	are	subservient	to
the	negative	ego.	They	are	more	interested	in	power,	greed,	fame,	holding	their
office,	and	being	good	Republicans	or	Democrats.	Partisan	politics	is	another
name	for	negative	ego.	This	is	the	reason	for	all	the	attack	ads.	If	Buddha	and
Lord	Maitreya	wanted	to	be	Planetary	Logos,	would	they	attack	each	other?
Politics	is	corrupt	because	we	have	negative	ego	politics	and	not	Spiritual
politics.	Politics	is	a	noble	profession	if	demonstrated	from	Christ/Buddha
principles.
Now	lets	look	at	the	media.	The	media	panders	to	glamour,	the	lower	self,
greed,	self-interest,	ratings,	and	a	“gotcha	mentality.”	They	will	do	anything	to
get	good	ratings.	The	regular	media	is	beginning	to	look	like	Tabloid	Journalism.
Would	the	Christ	Consciousness	be	interested	in	glamour?	Would	the	Christ
Consciousness	look	for	dirt	on	people’s	lives	just	for	ratings	or	self-glory?
Would
	the	Christ	Consciousness	attack	and	try	to	“play	gotcha”	to	just	build	up
one’s	ego	or	professional	status?	Would	the	Christ	Consciousness	print	or	put
out	scandalous	stories	that	destroy	peoples	reputations	and	lives	without	making
100%	sure	they	are	true?	Even	if	they	were	true,	would	they	always	do	it
anyway?	Would	the	Christ	Consciousness	print	or	put	our	gossip?	Would	the
Christ	Consciousness
	allow	personal	agendas	to	contaminate	their	stories?
Would	the	Christ	Consciousness	have	so	much	violence	and	lower-self	sexuality
on	television?	All	of	this,	of	course,	stems	from	people	in	the	media	being	run	by
the	negative	ego	within	themselves,	and	being	more	interested	in	making	a	buck,
power,	and	fame,	than	being	in	Spiritual	integrity.
There	is	also	one	other	aspect	that	must	be
	addressed,	however.	If	the	public
were	not	so	run	by	the	negative	ego,	and	lower	self,	they	would	not	pay	for,	or
put	up	with	this.	If	people	would	not	support	such	products,	then	it	would	also
not	be	worth	these	companies	bottom	line	to	do	it.	Consumers	have	a	part	to	play
as	well.	I	will	say	however,	the	public	is	a	little	bit	of	a	“captive	audience”	since
this	negative	ego	consciousness	pervades
	all	forms	of	newspapers,	magazines,
television,	radio,	and	movies.
Now	lets	look	at	sports.	If	people	were	into	the	Christ/Buddha	consciousness
and	not	into	the	negative	ego	consciousness,	would	boxing	or	wrestling	be	a	part
of	Earth	life?	In	hockey,	fighting	is	actually	encouraged.	How	about	bullfighting
and	sticking	those	swords	into	the	bulls.	Even	the	violence	in	football	is	a	little
questionable,	when	players	play	from	their	negative	ego	and	not	from	the
Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	and	sportsmanship.
Would	there	be	homeless	people	if	the	consciousness	of	our	society	and
people	were	not	run	by	the	negative	ego.	If	people	were	of	the	Christ
Consciousness	we	would	be	our	brothers	keepers.
If	the	world	were	run	the	Christ	Consciousness	and	not	the	negative	ego
consciousness,
	would	there	be	racism?	Do	you	have	any	idea	what	an	absurd
concept	this	is	to	the	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness.	From	the	Christ/Buddha
Consciousness	all	people	regardless	of	skin	color	are	incarnations	of	GOD.
Would	scientists	allow	animal	abuse,	and	allow	themselves	to	abuse	animals
for	there	own	selfish	interest,	if	they	were	not	run	by	the	negative	ego?	Would	a
Christed	scientist	do	this
	in	the	way	worldly	scientists	do	this?
Would	businessmen	and	women	be	so	competitive	and	cutthroat	in	business?
Would	such	things	as	hostile	takeovers	exist	if	people	were	not	run	by	the
negative	ego?	How	would	Christed	businessmen	and	women	act?	Wouldn’t	they
be	more	loving,	cooperative,	and	oneness	oriented.
Would	people	be	leaving	traditional	religion	in	droves	if	it	were	not	so
	filled
with	negative	ego	doctrine,	and	if	the	Ministers	and	Spiritual	Leaders	were	not
filled	with	self-righteous,	negative	ego	theory	and	faulty	concepts.
Would	our	educational	system	be	completely	devoid	of	Spirituality,	morals
and	ethical	training,	and	hold	such	a	separation	of	Church	and	State	if	the
Ascended	Masters	ran	our	Society?	This	is	because	negative	ego	people	run	our
educational
	system,	and	negative	ego	people	run	our	religions,	so	they	must	be
kept	separate	from	each	other.	If	they	both	weren’t	so	egotistical	in	there
thinking,	it	would	be	possible	to	integrate	education	and	Spirituality,	without
shoving	it	down	peoples	throats	in	a	self-righteous,	opinionated	and	dogmatic
manner	as	fundamentalist	religious	groups	often	do.	There	would	also	not	be	the
competition	between
	religions,	and	the	self-righteous	opinion	among	most
religions	that	their	religion	is	the	best	and	all	others	are	wrong	and	are	run	by	the
devil.
Would	lawyers	have	such	a	bad	name,	if	so	many	of	them	were	not	run	by	the
negative	ego.	Being	a	lawyer	is	a	noble	profession,	as	are	all	professions.	It	is	the
issue	of	whether	negative	ego	thinking	or	Christ/Buddha	thinking	guides	a
profession.
Would	we	abuse	the	Earth	Mother	and	pollute	her	in	the	ways	mankind	has,	if
people	were	not	run	by	the	negative	ego	and	more	concerned	with	greed	and
worshipping	science,	then	sanctifying	the	Four	Faces	of	GOD?	Would	we	use	so
many	pesticides	and	chemicals	in	our	farming	if	people	in	this	industry	were	not
so	run	by	the	negative	ego?	The	Christ	Consciousness	would	naturally	gravitate
towards
	natural	and	organic	forms	of	farming,	and	calling	in	the	etheric	nature
spirits,	devas,	fairies,	and	elementals.
Would	there	be	so	much	junk	food,	sugar,	preservatives,	dead	food,
manufactured	food,	irradiated	food,	and	chemically	sprayed	food,	if	the	industry
was	not	so	run	by	the	negative	ego,	and	if	people	weren’t	so	interested	in	buying
it.
Would	our	prisons	be	based	on	punishment
	instead	of	redemption	and
Spiritual	education,	if	the	prison	systems	were	not	run	by	the	negative	ego	rather
than	the	Christ	consciousness?	Would	the	prisons	be	so	over	crowded,	and
would	prisoners	not	have	to	serve	their	jail	time?	This	all	comes	from	negative
ego	thinking	and	total	mismanagement.	Why	are	so	may	people	in	jail	in	the	first
place?	They	have	not	been	taught	how	to	control	their
	negative	ego.	Does	prison
teach	them	this?	It	should?	So	should	our	school	system.
Would	we	care	for	the	elderly	so	poorly	if	our	society	was	not	run	by	the
negative	ego?	Would	a	Christed	society	not	honor	and	revere	the	elderly.	Would
there	be	so	many	mentally	ill	people	in	institutions	if	they	had	been	trained
properly	how	to	master	the	mind,	emotions	and	negative	ego	by	parents,	school
teachers,	counselors,	ministers,	and	rabbis.	The	problem	is	most	of	them	have
never	even	heard	of	the	difference	between	negative	ego	thinking	and	Spiritual
thinking.	This	is	even	a	foreign	concept	to	Psychologists,	Marriage	Counselors,
Social	Workers,	and	Psychiatrists.	Do	you	realize	that	in	Colleges	and
Universities,	this	understanding	is	not	even	taught	anywhere.	I	know	this	for	a
fact	for	I
	have	a	Masters	and	Ph.D.	in	Psychology.	My	beloved	readers,	in	many
ways	this	world	is	still	living	in	the	Dark	Ages.
This	issue	also	applies	to	the	Health	Care	System.	In	a	Christed	Society	would
we	ever	allow	people	not	to	get	proper	health	care	just	because	they	did	not	have
money.	The	reason	that	HMO’s	don’t	often	work	is	because	of	the	greedy
bureaucrats,	who	are	more	interested	in
	making	money	then	giving	people	the
proper	health	care	they	deserve	and	need.
My	beloved	readers,	would	there	be	wars	between	countries	if	the	leaders	of
these	countries	were	not	run	by	their	negative	egos.	Could	you	see	El	Morya,
Saint	Germain,	Sananda,	Serapis	Bey,	Kuthumi,	and	Paul	the	Venetian	having	a
war	between	their	inner	plane	Ashrams	for	power	and	control?	Do	you	see	how
absurd
	this	is	from	a	Christed	perspective?
This	issue	also	pervades	the	production	of	worldly	energy.	Do	you	really	think
that	alternative	nonpolluting	sources	of	energy	would	not	have	been	invented
and	put	into	use	if	it	were	not	for	the	“Power	Elite,”	and	the	greedy	electric,
power,	and	oil	companies.	Our	new	inventions	are	either	destroyed,	or	bought	up
by	these	industries	and	buried,	so	they
	can	make	their	greedy	profit.
Do	you	think	the	truth	about	Extraterrestrials	would	be	hidden	from	the	people
of	the	world	for	so	long,	if	negative	ego	run	politicians	and	corrupt	leaders	were
not	run	by	the	negative	ego?	Do	you	think	the	Spiritual	Leaders	of	this	World	in
the	form	of	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters	want	this	information	hidden	and
denied	by	the	corrupted	government	officials
	that	are	in	charge	of	this	area	of
control.	If	we	had	Christed	Leaders	who	were	of	the	Christ/Buddha
Consciousness	this	would	not	happen.
Do	you	think	we	would	allow	Nuclear	Testing	on	the	Earth	Mother	or	in	space
if	our	leaders	were	of	the	Christ	Consciousness?
Would	adolescents	and	our	young	people	be	taking	so	many	drugs	if	their
lives	were	not	so	run	by	the	negative	ego	and	lower
	self?	In	a	Christed	school
system	kids	would	be	taught	Spirituality,	meditation,	the	purpose	of	life,
Spiritual	psychology,	how	to	be	happy,	and	how	to	achieve	inner	peace.	Do	you
think	they	would	need	to	take	recreational	drugs	if	they	truly	understood	life
from	the	eyes	of	the	Christ	and	Buddha?
Would	there	be	so	much	pornography	and	preoccupation	with	sex	and
physical	beauty	if	people
	were	not	run	by	the	negative	ego,	which	by	definition
is	overidentified	with	matter.	People	are	preoccupied	with	sex	because	they	are
devoid	of	the	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness,	which	is	the	one	thing	that	is
infinitely	more	appealing	when	truly	understood.	The	negative	ego	by	definition
is	the	lower	self	and	leads	to	a	low	life.	The	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	is
guided	by	the	Higher	Self	and	leads
	to	a	Higher	Life.	This	would	also	stop
sexual	harassment,	for	it	is	the	negative	ego	that	does	not	know	the	proper
boundaries	in	this	regard.
Would	people	get	involved	in	so	many	cults,	if	their	own	vision	were	not	so
obscured	by	the	negative	ego.	Would	there	be	so	many	cult	leaders,	false
prophets,	negative	ego-run	gurus,	and	Spiritual	teachers	if	these	people	were	not
run	by	the	negative
	ego?
Would	gay	people,	or	any	other	people	for	that	matter,	be	discriminated
against?	Would	any	type	of	prejudice	exist?
Would	there	be	so	many	divorces	if	people	were	not	so	run	by	the	negative
ego,	and	not	so	wrong	with	self,	and	hence	not	right	with	GOD.	People	often
blame	their	partners,	but,	in	truth,	if	both	parties	were	not	often	run	by	the
negative	ego	and	allowing	it	to	program
	their	mind	and	emotions,	divorce	would
often	not	have	to	occur.	This	is	not	always	the	case,	but	is	sometimes	the	case.
Would	there	be	so	much	crime	if	people	were	not	run	by	the	negative	ego.	If
all	these	people	were	trained	in	the	Christ	Consciousness	and	Buddha
Consciousness,	do	you	think	they	would	commit	crimes?	It	is	not	punishment
that	will	stop	crime	or	prison,	it	is	Spiritual	education.
Do	you	think	people	would	choose	a	profession	of	prostitution	or	people
would	go	to	a	prostitute	if	they	were	not	run	by	the	lower	self	and	negative	ego?
Would	a	person	of	the	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	be	interested	in	such	a
thing?
Once	one	moves	out	of	the	negative	ego	consciousness	and	into	the
Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	one	naturally	gravitates	towards	only	eating	good
food,
	thinking	good	thoughts,	being	interested	only	in	positive	Spiritual	feelings
and	emotions,	and	being	only	interested	in	things	of	the	Higher	Self	and	not	the
lower	self.	Once	this	happens,	one	is	not	even	tempted,	or	interested	in	these
other	things.	Would	one	really	want	to	go	to	a	scary	movie,	or	eat	foods	that	are
filled	with	chemicals	and	preservatives?	Would	one	really	like	to	go	to	a	violent
movie	or	focus	one’s	energies	in	low	life	endeavors?	Once	this	shift	is	made	all
this	stuff	drops	away	and	one	cannot	even	imagine	how	one	was	ever	involved	in
such	thinking,	or	behaviors.	Once	you	make	the	shift,	it	has	no	appeal!
I	do	not	bring	up	these	things	to	criticize	or	judge.	I	bring	up	these	things
because	one	cannot	solve	a	problem	until	one	knows	what	the	problem	is.	What	I
am
	showing	you	here	is	every	worldly	problem	has	its	cause	in	negative	ego
thinking.	Every	solution	has	its	cause	in	Christ/Buddha	thinking.	All	the	band
aid	solutions	can	be	helpful,	but	if	your	really	want	to	get	to	the	root	cause	and
remove	all	problems	once	and	for	all	then	there	must	be	a	“polar	axis	shift	on	the
Earth.”	The	polar	axis	shift	I	am	speaking	of	here	is	not	of	the	axis	shift	of	the
Earth.	It	is	a	polar	axis	shift	of	people’s	minds,	from	negative	ego	to
Christ/Buddha/Spiritual	thinking.	When	this	occurs,	all	the	world’s	problems
will	disappear.	To	do	this	lightworkers	are	going	to	first	have	to	learn	these
lessons	within	self.	The	second	step	is	to	share	this	with	friends,	family,	and
students,	and	bring	this	understanding	into	your	profession	and	given	field	of
study.	If	every
	person	will	do	this	within	their	puzzle	piece	and	service	mission
within	the	Divine	Plan,	the	world	will	begin	to	change	and	transform	at	a	much
quicker	rate,	which	will	transform	the	Earthly	institutions	of	our	World	and
Civilization.	Bringing	light	into	this	World	is	not	enough.	It	is	also	essential	to
change	the	psychological	consciousness	and	thinking	of	the	world’s	people.	It	is
now	time
	to	get	to	the	root	cause	of	all	these	problems	and	challenges	of	people
and	our	civilization,	and	to	stop	trying	to	solve	them	with	band	aid	or
symptomatic	solutions.	It	is	for	this	reason	and	purpose	this	chapter	has	been
written!
16
The	Negative	Ego	and	the	Dangers	of	Lower
Psychism	
	
Another	danger	or	glamour	of	the	spiritual	path	is	the	issue	of	lower	psychism.
Many	people	are	greatly	intrigued	by	psychic	powers.	It	must	be	understood	that
being	psychic	has	absolutely	nothing	to	do	with	being	spiritual.	This	is	hard	for
some	Lightworkers	to	realize.	Being	psychic	has	nothing	do	with	spiritual
development.	It
	has	to	do	with	the	development	of	the	abilities	of	the
subconscious	mind	not	the	super-conscious	mind.
It	is	hard	to	believe,	but	I	remember	one	well	known	psychic	I	went	to	twenty
years	ago,	who	didn’t	even	believe	in	God,	yet	had	all	these	great	psychic
abilities.	Often	those	who	have	psychic	gifts	are	very	run	by	the	subconscious
mind	because	of	their	use	of	its	gifts.	This	becomes	a
	great	blessing	and	great
curse	simultaneously.	Very	often	to	release	themselves	from	this	chronic
victimization	of	the	subconscious	mind	and	astral	body	they	actually	have	to	let
go	of	these	abilities	to	learn	to	spiritualize	their	whole	program.
There	are	a	lot	of	Lightworkers	I	meet	who	would	love	to	have	these	psychic
abilities	but	they	don’t	realize	they	are	much	more	developed	spiritually
	than	the
people	they	are	admiring.	Lower	psychism	is	one	of	the	many	great	traps	of	the
spiritual	path.	Most	Lightworkers	don’t	realize	that	such	spiritual	senses	as
spiritual	discernment,	comprehension,	healing,	divine	vision,	intuition,	idealism,
beatitude,	active	service,	realization,	perfection,	and	all	knowledge	are	much
more	advanced.
Lower	psychism	is	an	astral	level	ability.	To	stay
	stuck	there	as	a	psychic
rather	than	become	a	spiritual	teacher,	is	to	stay	stuck	in	the	astral	plane,	which,
in	truth,	doesn’t	even	exist	for	a	realized	ascended	master.	Lightworkers	should
be	much	more	concerned	with	developing	the	senses	of	the	Higher	Mind,	the
buddhic	senses,	atmic	senses,	monadic	senses	and	logoic	senses,	than	being
enamored	with	the	idea	of	being	astrally	psychic.
There	is	nothing	wrong	with	being	astrally	psychic.	It	is	just	that	this	ability
must	be	integrated	into	an	understanding	of	total	Self-realization	to	be	used
appropriately.	Being	psychic	in	this	way	has	nothing	to	do	with	one’s	ability	to
achieve	ascension	and	to	complete	the	seven	levels	of	initiation.	A	person	who	is
psychically	developed	and	psychologically	and	spiritually	unclear	is	going	to
have	completely	inaccurate	and	contaminated	information	anyway.
I	personally	know	a	great	many	people	who	are	incredibly	psychically
developed	and	who	are	also	some	of	the	most	disturbed	people	I	have	ever	met
this	lifetime.	Do	not	get	caught	in	the	side	road	of	fascination	with	this	aspect	of
life	for	it	will	detour	you	from	your	true	mission.	I	do	not	mean	to	denigrate
people	who	are	psychic
	for	this	is	a	wonderful	ability,	as	long	as	it	is	used	only
in	service	of	the	purposes	of	the	soul	and	monad	in	an	integrated	way	and	not	as
a	glamour	and	trap	of	the	negative	ego	keeping	you	stuck	in	the	fascination	of
lower	psychic	development.
Djwhal	Khul	said	part	of	the	trap	is	becoming	enamored	with	the	psychic
world	and	then	inflated	by	the	negative	ego	in	its	perception	of	importance
	so
that	it	loses	perspective	and	acts	as	a	damaging	system,	often	attracting	astral
entities	and	becoming	a	twilight	master,	so	to	speak.
On	the	other	side	of	the	coin,	you	have	the	person	with	the	brilliant	mind	who
is	not	necessarily	classically	psychic	but	because	of	this	psychological	brilliance
can	function	as	a	type	of	magician,	and	again	twilight	master.	Hitler	was	this
type	of	person.
	I	see	this	in	a	great	many	of	the	leading	people	in	the	field	of
psychology,	who	have	not	come	into	full	merger	with	their	soul.	They	are
masters	at	the	psychological	level	but	not	on	a	spiritual	level.	They	are	using
their	lower	mental	senses	and	higher	mental	senses	in	a	similarly	abusive	manner
as	the	psychics	are.	These	two	cases	could	be	called	the	lower	expression	of	the
mystic,	and	the
	lower	expression	of	the	occultist.
I	have	seen	this	lower	expression	of	the	occultist	in	people	involved	in	NLP,
psychology,	hypnosis,	and	on	the	TV	infomercials	teaching	various	forms	of
success	and	mind	training.	These	are	people	that	are	brilliant,	but	because	the
soul	and	monad	have	not	fully	merged	they	are	serving	two	masters,	both	the
negative	ego	and	the	Spirit.
This	is	usually
	completely	unconscious.	In	both	these	examples	of	the	lower
mystic	and	the	lower	occultist,	the	Dark	Brotherhood	taps	in	and	uses	them
usually	without	their	awareness.	The	true	culprit	is	always	the	negative	ego.
Psychics	often	are	under	great	psychic	attack	in	many	of	these	cases	from	astral
entities	and	from	negative	Extraterrestrials	and	they	can’t	figure	out	why.	They
don’t	realize	they	are
	stuck	in	lower	psychism,	and	don’t	understand	what	true
mastery	of	the	subconscious	mind,	emotional	body,	and	desire	body	really	is.
The	lower	expression	of	the	occultist	is	caught	up	in	the	“power”,	of	being	able
to	manipulate	and	control	power.	Because	soul	merge	and	soul	infusion	has	not
taken	place,	the	“motives”	are	suspect.
Very	often,	Djwhal	Khul	said,	there	is	a	war	going	on	between
	their	lower	self
and	Higher	Self.	This	is	a	war	between	the	individual’s	desire	to	connect	with
the	Higher	Self	and	be	purely	an	instrument	of	Higher	Consciousness	and	the
desire	to	be	clever	in	their	manipulation,	control,	receiving	attention	and
importance	in	the	ruling	and	destiny	of	people,	and	over-identified	with	being
the	one	who	knows.
We	have	all	heard	the	expression	“a	little	knowledge
	is	a	dangerous	thing.”
Here	are	people	having	astral	and	mental	senses,	abilities,	and	gifts	but
spiritually	are	like	children	in	terms	of	their	maturity.	Because	the	negative	ego
is	in	control	in	both	instances,	it	clogs	and	contaminates	the	channel	and	attracts
astral	and	mental	entities	at	best,	to	be	one’s	inner	guides.	Often	times	these
entities	claim	to	be	of	the	higher	dimensions	and
	ascended	nature,	when	they	are
as	confused	or	negatively	manipulative	as	the	people	who	are	attracting	them.
People	can	only	channel	at	the	level	of	their	clarity.	In	some	cases	there	is	an
actual	conscious	pact	made	with	the	Dark	Brotherhood.	This	is	more	common
than	people	realize.
We	have	all	seen	movies	where	the	person	sells	their	soul	to	the	devil.	In	this
case,	it	is	selling	their
	soul	to	the	Dark	Brotherhood,	and	as	a	Dark	Brotherhood
disciple	for	power,	fame,	money,	and	glory	on	a	personality	level.	Most	of	the
time	this	is	taking	place	unconsciously.
Most	people	don’t	realize	that	the	mental	senses	have	a	whole	range	of
powers,	as	do	the	psychic	senses.	The	Ascended	Master	is	most	importantly
developed	in	the	buddhic	senses,	atmic	senses,	monadic	senses,	and	logoic
senses.	Each	plane	of	consciousness	contains	what	might	be	called	super-senses.
The	danger	here	as	can	be	seen	on	the	following	chart	is	people	get	stuck	and
fascinated	with	the	powers	of	these	lower	senses.	This	is	like	people	living	on
the	inner	plane	who	think	the	higher	astral	plane	of	higher	mental	worlds	are	the
most	advanced	in	the	universe	and	are	very	happy	to	stay	there	indefinitely.
	You
can	see	this	in	the	psychic	type	magazines	you	can	buy	in	the	metaphysical	type
bookstore	that	are	filled	with	all	this	lower	psychic	stuff	of	people	putting	hexes
on,	and	other	dark	stuff	that	is	a	blatant	negative	manipulation	of	others.	This	is
living	in	a	psychic	world	not	a	spiritual	world.
In	truth,	the	field	of	psychology	is	the	same	thing.	It	is	a	world	of	personality
level	exploration
	pretty	much	completely	devoid	of	soul	and	spirituality.
Enormous	numbers	of	people	become	trapped	in	this	world	for	long	periods;
usually	by	going	to	counselors	and	psychologists	who	are	trapped	in	this	world
themselves.	They	are	not	bad	people,	just	unconscious	people	who	are	locked	in
a	third	and	fourth	dimensional	state	of	consciousness.
In	the	ideal	state	of	affairs,	one	develops	all
	senses	on	all	levels	which	are	used
then	by	the	Higher	Self	and	Mighty	l	Am	Presence	for	the	purpose	of	spiritual
growth	and	service	of	humanity.	This	issue	of	becoming	caught	up	in	the	astral
senses	and	astral	world	and	in	the	lower	mental	senses	and	the	lower	mental
world	is	an	area	of	study	that	most	people	on	this	planet	are	not	as	aware	of	as	to
their	dangers	and	glamours	as	they	need	to	be.
	The	writing	of	this	chapter	has
been	to	bring	this	area	of	discussion	into	“Greater	Light”!
The	Senses	and	the	Supersenses
ATMIC	PLANE:
Atmic	Senses:
All	knowledge	Perfection	Realization	Active	service	Beatitude
BUDDHIC	PLANE:
Buddhic	Senses:
Idealism	Intuition	Divine	Vision	Healing	Comprehension
CAUSAL	PLANE:
Higher	Mental	Senses:
Spiritual
	Telepathy	Response	to	group	vibration	Spiritual	Discernment
CONCRETE	MENTAL	PLANE:
Lower	Mental	Senses:
Discrimination	Higher	Clairvoyance	Planetary	Psychometry	Higher
Clairaudience
ASTRAL	EMOTIONAL	PLANE:
Astral	Senses:
Emotional	Idealism	Imagination	Clairvoyance	Psychometry	Clairaudience
PHYSICAL	ETHERIC	PLANE:
Physical	Senses:
Smell	Taste
	Sight	Touch,	feeling	Hearing
17
How	to	Clear	the	Negative	Ego	through	the
Ascension	Buddy	System	
	
This	next	tool	for	clearing	the	negative	ego	may	be	one	of	the	most	important	of
all.	We	have	all	heard	the	saying	that	it	is	hard	to	see	the	forest	through	the	trees.
It	is	always	much	easier	to	see	the	faults	in	others	then	it	is	to	see	the	faults	in
ourselves.	No	one	person	is	an	island	unto	themselves.
The
	premiere	principle	of	the	New	Age	is	“group	consciousness.”	A	sure-fire
sign	when	a	lightworker	and	high	level	initiate	is	in	trouble	is	when	they	isolate
themselves	from	other	lightworkers	and	the	entire	spiritual	community	at	large.
It	is	much	easier	to	live	in	a	cave	by	yourself	than	it	is	to	live	in	the	marketplace
and	work	in	fellowship	with	other	lightworkers.	Given	these	facts	I	cannot
recommend
	more	highly	that	if	possible	you	develop	an	ascension	buddy	system
with	your	close	spiritual	friends.	This	is	a	pact	that	you	make	with	each	other	to
work	together	on	your	path	of	ascension	as	a	team.
This	may	involve	meditating	together,	possibly	serving	together	or	working
together.	It	will	involve	sharing,	talking,	studying,	and	gathering	information
together.	Helping	one	another	as	much
	as	you	possibly	can,	almost	like	you	have
tied	your	spiritual	progression	together	as	a	team.	The	gains	of	one	in	this	pact
will	help	the	other	and	vice	versa.	Did	not	Jesus	say,	“Where	two	or	more	are
gathered	in	my	name”?	This	pact	will	accelerate	both	of	your	evolutions,	and
does	not	have	to	be	limited	to	just	two	people.	It	could	be	three	or	a	whole	group
of	people	working	together	for	this
	purpose.	Use	your	intuition.
The	ascension	buddy	system	taken	to	its	highest	level	actually	becomes	a
group	etheric	body	and	a	three-fold	organism	in	one	larger	body	with	each
person	maintaining	their	individual	and	group	identity	simultaneously.	This	step
can	only	be	taken	when	it	is	spiritually	appropriate	and	when	the	ascension
buddy	system	has	been	firmly	established	for	an	extended
	period	of	time.
The	next	question	is	how	does	the	ascension	buddy	system	help	to	clear	the
negative	ego?	The	key	word	here	is	“feedback”!	It	is	hard	for	all	of	us	to	see	our
own	stuff.	It	is	much	easier	to	see	the	faults	in	others	than	it	is	to	see	the	faults	in
ourselves.	The	concept	here	is	to	have	either	ascension	buddies	or	even	just	close
friends	who	know	you	and	spiritual	in	their
	orientation	sit	you	down	and	tell	you
when	you	are	out	of	line.	This	process	has	been	invaluable	for	me.
No	matter	how	clear	any	of	us	on	this	planet	think	we	are,	we	all	“trip	out”	at
times.	We	all	have	our	“blind	spots”	and	our	“character	flaws”.	We	all	have
negative	ego.	There	is	not	a	single	person	on	this	planet,	even	the	Avatars	who
are	completely	clear	of	this.	Sanat	Kumara	and	Vywamus
	said	even	they	still
have	small	remnants	of	negative	ego	to	clear.	If	they	do,	you	better	believe	we
do.
Since	it	is	hard	to	see	our	own	stuff,	the	ascension	buddy	system	and	good
spiritual	friends	can	be	a	lifesaver	in	this	regard.	So	in	your	ascension	buddy
system	make	a	pact	to	give	each	other	feedback	when	you	get	mentally,	and
emotionally	out	of	line	within	Self	or	in	regards	to	other
	people.
The	purpose	of	the	ascension	buddy	system	has	a	psychological	component	as
well	as	spiritual	component.	This	pact	you	make	will	give	each	other	permission
to	give	each	other	feedback	in	a	strong	but	loving	way	without	“ego-sensitivity”
(defensiveness)	from	either	party.
We	need	people	to	give	us	a	swift	loving	kick	in	the	butt	sometimes,	to	give	us
a	wake-up	call.	This	is	nothing
	to	be	defensive	about	but	rather	something	to	be
grateful	for.	Sit	down	with	your	ascension	buddies	or	your	spiritual	friends	and
make	this	pact	and	agreement	to	do	this	for	each	other.
We	have	inner	feedback	functions	that	help	us	with	this	such	as	dreams,
feelings,	intuitions,	ideas,	pain	and	suffering,	synchronicity,	and	just	life.
However,	without	people	to	help	also,	the	pitfalls	of
	glamour,	maya	and	illusion
are	still	too	easy	to	fall	into	no	matter	how	diligent	you	are.	We	all	are
interdependent	on	one	another	and	this	is	a	good	thing	not	a	bad	thing.	The
forming	of	an	ascension	buddy	system	will	also	be	a	wonderful	exercise	in
expanding	one’s	consciousness	and	going	beyond	the	self-centered	nature	of	the
negative	ego	on	all	levels.
The	spiritual	path	as	we	evolve
	is	constantly	moving	us	in	the	direction	of
greater	and	greater	identification	with	the	group	and	moving	farther	and	farther
away	from	self	the	higher	you	go.	This	will	be	a	wonderful	exercise	in	beginning
this	process	now.	See	if	you	can	really	get	out	of	all	competition,	and	self
interest,	and	really	put	your	ascension	buddies	welfare	as	equal	to	your	own,	to
the	point	that	their	suffering	is	your
	suffering	and	their	gain	is	your	gain	and	vice
versa.
The	first	step	is	to	be	God	in	your	self.	The	second	step	is	to	be	able	to	be	God
in	a	relationship	or	a	group.	This	is	why	it	has	also	always	been	stated	that	the
true	test	of	your	spiritual	development	is	to	be	involved	in	a	romantic
relationship	or	marriage.	For	as	we	all	know	this	will	test	one	to	the	nth	degree.
It	is	possible	for
	your	ascension	buddy	to	be	your	partner	or	spouse.	There	may
be	others	who	join	with	you.
What	is	nice	about	the	ascension	buddy	system	is	that	it	is	not	romantic	except
in	the	aforementioned	situation.	It	is	a	group	consciousness	based	upon
friendship,	similarity	of	spiritual	goals	and	purpose,	and	sometimes	professional
and	service	interests.	This	is	a	wonderful	testing-ground	to	develop
	your
character.	We	need	feedback	from	our	friends	to	tell	us	when	we	are	out	of
balance.	The	nature	of	the	beast	is	that	we	don’t	realize	it	and	the	negative	ego
doesn’t	want	to	admit	it.
I	also	want	to	add	here	that	this	doesn’t	always	have	to	be	done	out	loud.	This
can	be	done	telepathically,	through	prayer,	affirmations	or	visualization.	At
times	it	may	be	done	by	example,	a	letter,	a
	note,	a	gift,	a	spiritual	treatment	or	a
gentle	touch.	It	is,	however,	the	ideal	if	the	lines	of	communication	are	open	on	a
verbal	level	and	all	ego	sensitivity	can	be	transcended.	Ego	sensitivity	brings	out
the	tendency	to	get	defensive,	fall	into	rejection	or	hurt	unnecessarily	because	a
character	flaw	of	lack	of	personal	power,	and	lack	of	self	love,	self	worth,
overall	psychological	weakness,
	and	fragility.
The	process	of	clearing	the	negative	ego	is	a	combination	of	self-recognition,
self-awareness,	self	inquiry,	and	being	open	and	courageous	enough	to	allow
oneself	to	receive	feedback	from	ascension	buddies,	spiritual	friends	and	life
itself.	Very	often	God	or	life	is	giving	us	feedback	through	people	we	barely
know	but	the	ego	is	too	defended	and	closed	to	hear	God	speaking
	to	you
through	these	people	and	life’s	lessons.
There	is	one	other	point	that	must	be	considered	here.	In	choosing	your
ascension	buddies	and	spiritual	friends,	choose	well-rounded	and	balanced
people.	I	bring	up	this	point	because	I	have	seen	a	few	Lightworkers	who	have
spiritual	friends	and	ascension	buddies	who	all	share	the	exact	same	set	of	blind
spots.	In	the	case,	I	am	thinking	they
	are	all	over-identified	with	the	emotional
body.	In	this	case,	they	are	all	supporting	each	other’s	imbalance.	I	do	not	mean
this	as	a	judgment,	just	a	point	of	consideration.
This	can	also	happen	in	the	reverse	where	a	particular	group	of	people	bonded
together	may	be	too	mental,	too	heavenly,	or	too	materialistic.	It	can	take	form
in	any	direction	of	imbalance	in	the	four-body	system.
	The	danger	here	is	that
the	entire	group	supports	each	other’s	projection	and	neurosis.	The	ascension
buddy	system	in	essence	is	creating	a	support	system	that	holds	up	a	mirror	in
love.	It	cannot	be	said	any	clearer	or	eloquently	than	this	last	statement.	It	is
essential	to	give	this	feedback	in	a	loving	not	critical	and	non-judgmental	way.	It
is	also	important	to	have	good	discernment	as	to	when
	it	is	good	to	give
feedback	and	when	it	is	better	to	remain	silent.
I	have	seen	some	groups	who	are	like	naive	children	who	feel	a	need	to	be
what	I	might	call	being	“obsessively	honest.”	We	must	be	adult	and	mature
about	this	process	and	not	become	obsessive	about	giving	feedback	either.	In
some	cases,	things	are	best	left	unsaid	or	dealt	with	inwardly.	The	God-realized
being	does	what
	is	“appropriate”	in	any	given	situation,	for	the	best	result	of	all
concerned.
There	may	be	even	a	third	stage	to	this	process	that	might	be	called	“spiritual
community,”	in	a	larger	context.	A	great	many	lightworkers	may	have	not	only
have	an	ascension	buddy	system	and	certain	key	spiritual	friends	but	also	a
larger	spiritual	community	of	involvement.
There	is	also	a	feedback	that
	comes	from	these	rings	of	“spiritual	community”
that	is	important	to	be	open	to.	This	may	come	from	students,	fellow
lightworkers,	and	fellow	spiritual	leadership	people	in	the	field.	This	reminds	me
a	little	bit	of	the	four	jewels	in	the	Buddhist	teachings,	where	they	speak	of	the
Buddha,	the	doctrine,	the	guru,	and	the	spiritual	community.	The	four	jewels	I
speak	of	here	for	clearing	the	negative
	ego	are	self-recognition,	ascension	buddy
system,	spiritual	friends,	and	spiritual	community.
If	our	negative	ego	is	in	the	way	God	will	speak	to	us	through	one	of	these
vehicles,	you	can	count	on	that.	The	problem	here	is	that	many	light-workers
because	of	the	negative	ego	are	in	a	state	of	“denial”	and	non-openness	to
feedback.	The	ideal	is	to	have	a	strong	sense	of	Self	and	to	be	open.
	There	are
cases	where	this	can	work	in	reverse	and	the	lightworker	is	too	open	to	feedback
because	of	lack	of	self	worth,	lack	of	self	love	and	a	lack	of	this	strong	sense	of
self	I	speak	of.	A	balance	is	needed	here.	In	truth,	the	entire	universe	is	just	one
massive	communication	network.	It	is	essential	to	keep	all	these	lines	of
communication	open	within	self	and	to	life	while	still	remaining
	powerful,
centered	and	the	master	of	your	Self	and	life!!!
Another	key	to	this	process	of	clearing	the	negative	ego	for	Lightworkers	is	to
know	in	their	ascension	buddy	system,	among	their	friends,	and	in	their	spiritual
community	that	it	is	“safe”	to	recognize	the	control	the	negative	ego	has	and	one
will	not	be	put	down,	or	judged,	or	criticized.	That	there	will	be	support,
forgiveness,
	and	unconditional	love.	The	denial	occurs	because	people	don’t	feel
safe.	The	true	purpose	of	the	ascension	buddy	system,	good	friends,	and	a
spiritual	community	is	to	create	this	atmosphere	and	safety	that	most	of	us	have
not	had	in	our	upbringing	or	in	society	at	large.
Another	key	to	the	ascension	buddy	system	is	to	utilize	and	take	advantage	of
the	spiritual	gifts	and	abilities	your
	ascension	buddies	have	to	help	each	other.	In
any	given	ascension	buddy	system	or	spiritual	community	for	that	matter,	one
person	may	channel,	another	may	be	an	excellent	spiritual	counselor,	another
clairvoyant,	another	more	telepathic,	another,	a	healer,	another	well	studied	and
an	occultist,	another	a	psychic,	and	on	and	on	and	on.	Do	not	be	afraid	to	ask	for
help	and	to	offer	your	help.
This	is,	in	truth,	the	beauty	of	the	ascension	buddy	system	to	have	all	these
different	abilities	combined	together	in	one	group	consciousness.	One	type	of
ability	is	not	better	than	another.	All	abilities	are	needed	to	have	the	most
advanced	type	of	service	module	and	group	consciousness	brain,	so	to	speak.
Take	advantage	of	the	different	abilities	of	the	people	in	your	spiritual
community
	and	give	yours	freely.	We	are	in	this	world	to	help	one	another.	Each
person	is	a	different	sunbeam	of	God,	so	each	person	brings	their	own	unique,
special	and	divine	perspective,	and	Christ	qualities.	The	underlying	theme	of	the
ascension	buddy	system	is	to	support	one	another	to	become	self-responsible.
The	sharing	of	spiritual	gifts,	be	they	mystic	or	occult	in	nature,	will	ultimately
move	each
	person	in	the	group	in	this	direction.
18
How	to	Clear	Specific	Diseases	from	the
Perspective	of	the	Masters	
	
The	idea	for	this	chapter	came	to	me	one	day	while	driving	my	car.	The	idea	was
to	look	through	the	DSM-III	diagnostic	handbook	and	list	some	of	the	common
psychological	and/or	physical	diseases	and	run	them	by	the	Masters	in	our
meditations	and	get	a	short	little	synopsis	as	to	their	cause	and	cure	from	their
perspective
	rather	than	the	field	of	traditional	psychology,	which	to	say	the	least
is	quite	limited	in	perspective.	I	was	really	looking	for	short	concise	answers	as
to	mental,	emotional,	physical	or	karmic	causation.	A	person	could	write	a	book
about	each	one	of	these	diseases.	Please	don’t	take	this	as	the	be	all	end	all	final
statement.	However,	what	is	shared	here	can	give	one	a	handle	and	golden
	key	to
Self-mastery	and	healing	in	these	areas.	I	began	with	asking	about	multiple
personalities,	which	has	always	been	something	I	have	been	curious	about.
Multiple	Personalities
Multiple	personalities	could	be	entities,	from	a	trauma	caused	hole	in	the	auric
field.	It	could	also	be	separated	subpersonalities	that	have	fragmented	out	of
fear.	Or	both.	It	could	also	be	past	life	aspects
	that	come	through	fragmented,
unintegrated	and	unhealed.	For	example,	a	murder	in	a	past	life	may	bring	up	a
trauma	for	that	individual,	and	cause	them	to	fragment	or	split	off,	into	a
personality	that	is	constantly	replaying	the	murder.	This	may	draw	in	an	entity,
implants,	parasites	(negative	elementals)	which	impinge	upon	the	whole
organism.	This	split	can	occur	on	a	dual	level	or	be	multiple
	(three	or	more).
This	means	a	whole	group	of	injurious	parts	have	now	fragmented	off,	as
portrayed	in	such	movies	as	
Sybil	
and	
The	Three	Faces	of	Eve
;	all	breaking
threads	of	connection	and	all	competing	for	the	dominance	of	the	personality	or
organism.
To	heal,	the	person	must	create	a	stationary	flow	of	the	soul	(Higher	Self)	to
the	personality,	which	functions	as	a	witness	or	observer
	for	the	integration	and
balance	of	all	parts,	in	the	same	way	that	we	need	to	balance	and	integrate	all	our
archetypes,	rays,	and	astrological	aspects.	In	our	case	these	parts	have	not	split
off	or	fragmented	as	in	the	case	of	a	multiple	personality.	We	are	also	hence	not
dealing	with	astral	entities,	implants,	or	parasites	in	this	same	kind	of	split-off
manner.
The	healing	of	a	multiple
	personality	comes	in	the	removal	of	implants,
parasites,	astral	entities,	core	fear,	and	the	integration	then	of	these	personalities
or	archetypes	into	an	integrated	whole.	The	removal	of	the	core	fear,	implants,
parasites	and	astral	entities	along	with	proper	philosophical	understanding	of	the
need	for	integration	and	the	conscious	mind	being	the	unified	director,	will	make
healing	a	lot	easier.
People	who	have	had	this	dysfunction	can	become	quite	integrated	and
functional,	with	the	help	of	a	qualified	therapist.	It	is	usually	very	severe	trauma,
like	extreme	child	abuse,	that	has	triggered	this	whole	process.	However,	just
because	a	person	has	had	extreme	child	abuse	doesn’t	automatically	mean	that
they	will	become	a	multiple	personality.	In	truth,	this	is	quite	rare.
Definitions
	of	Common	Negative	Emotions
This	next	section	was	channeled	by	an	old	spiritual	teacher	of	mine	who	has
since	passed	on	to	the	spiritual	world,	Paul	Solomon.	Paul	was	and	still	is	a
wonderful	spiritual	teacher,	and	many	called	him	the	next	Edgar	Cayce.	The
following	are	definitions	of	some	of	the	attitudes	and	belief	systems	that	cause
some	of	the	well-known	negative	emotions.	I	think	some
	of	them	are	quite
amazing,	and	extremely	accurate.
Anger
:	loss	of	control	over	others	and	attempt	to	regain	it.	(Corollaries	of
anger:	frustration,	irritation,	aggravation,	indignation,	impatience,	annoyance,
etc.)
Fear
:	entertaining	a	fantasy	of	a	danger	that	has	not	occurred.
Hate
:	misplaced	expression	of	love/protection	of	myself	because	of	how	much
a	person’s	opinion	of	me
	means	to	me	when	I	don’t	feel	safe	with	that	person.
Worry	and	Anxiety
:	incapacitating	the	self	to	keep	from	(or	avoid)	preparing
for	a	situation.
Guilt
:	indulging	in	concern	over	a	past	situation	in	order	to	avoid	taking	action
now.
Hurt
:	denial	of	responsibility	for	one’s	own	feelings.	Feeling	another	is	not
doing	what	I	want	he/she	to	do.
Confusion
:	laziness	of	mind
	to	keep	from	dealing	with	a	situation	or	making	a
decision.
Self-pity
:	indulging	in	helplessness	as	a	luxury	(substitute	for	self-love).	
Grief
:
loss	of	control	over	a	source	of	attention	or	love.	
Resentment
:	anger	and	hurt.
Jealousy
:	misidentification	and	feeling	of	inadequacy	and	insecurity	
to	a	known
or	unknown	competitor,	or	fear	of	loss.	
Self-righteousness,	Indignation,
Contempt,	Disdain
:	feeling	superior	in	order	to	feel	like	a	good	person.
Boredom
:	not	taking	responsibility	for	your	own	happiness	or	own
entertainment.	
Loneliness
:	placing	responsibility	for	your	happiness	on	someone
else.	
Rejection
:	unsuccessful	attempt	to	gain	approval.	
Shyness
:	waiting	for
someone	else	to	tell	me	I’m	okay.	
Homesickness
:	loss	of	source	of	attention	and
source	of	self-identity.	
Embarrassment
:	feeling	that	another	will	think	I	am	a
nincompoop.	
Regret
:	feeling	inferior	because	I	feel	I’ve	performed	inadequately.
The	following	information	came	through	in	a	Sunday	morning	
meditation.	This
information	comes	from	the	combined	intelligence	of	Djwhal	Khul,	Lord
Maitreya,	and	Melchizedek	with	Djwhal	Khul	seeming	to	take	the	leadership
role	for	this	particular	chapter.
Migraine	Headaches
“Migraine	headaches	are	unintegrated	material	coming	up	through	the	psyche
where	the	person	has	not	acknowledged	their	soul	connection,	is	therefore
unable	to	assimilate	the	pattern	of	behavior,	and	feels	a	pressure	from	this
blocked	flow	of	energy.	Karmic	themes	from	this	lifetime	and	other	lifetimes
come	into	play	here,	having	to	do	with	pressures	around	the	brain,	temples,	neck
and	shoulders.
	The	proper	integration	of	the	soul	allows	one	to	not	have	to	take
on	a	burden	they	cannot	carry	or	to	avoid	their	own	karma.”	Djwhal	also	said
that	there	could	be	chemical	or	environmental	causes.	There	can	also	be	karmic
causes	from	past	lives.
Migraine	headaches	are	always,	however,	connected	with	psychic	pressure.	He
said	that	there	could	also	be	a	pressure	in	the	head	that	is	created
	with	the	influx
of	high	frequency	spiritual	energies.	The	high	frequency	energies	cause	the	brain
fluids	to	be	detoxed	of	lower	frequencies,	imperfections,	and	impediments,
which	causes	an	expansion	of	the	energy	field	within	the	brain,	and	an	increase
in	the	convolutions	of	the	brain.	This	can	cause	sometimes	quite	a	strong
pressure,	especially	in	the	third	eye	and	temples.	Certain	areas	in	the
	brain	are
often	congealed	or	closed,	especially	around	the	sinus	areas.	The	new	energy
field	has	to	gradually	penetrate	the	old	field.
Djwhal	Khul	said	this	could	be	a	process	that	is	uncomfortable	for	some.	It	is	a
natural	evolutionary	process	and	not	to	be	considered	a	separation	from	the	soul,
as	was	described	in	the	aforementioned	section.	One	can	ask	for	energetic
adjustment	in	the
	field	around	the	head	from	the	Arcturians,	Masters,	or	inner
plane	Healing	Masters	to	help	in	this	regard.
Arthritis
Djwhal	said	it	was	“a	withdrawing	of	the	life	energy	psychically	and
spiritually.	A	withdrawing	of	love.	An	inability	to	channel	out	love	and
warmth.”	This	causes	a	concentration	and	build-up	in	the	joint	area	of	a	deposit
of	psychic	material.	When	there	is	an	outflow
	of	love	and	acceptance	there	is	not
a	rigidity.
Asthma
Djwhal	said,	“It	is	often	a	reaction	to	circumstances	at	birth	or	early	childhood
which	have	to	do	with	suffocation.	This	can	be	psychic	suffocation	in	which
there	is	no	freedom	for	the	individual	to	exist.	There	may	be	a	basic	intolerance
in	the	mother	in	being	able	to	sustain	motherhood.	There	is	an	unconscious
attempt	to	stifle
	the	child,	to	reduce	the	energies	of	the	child,	to	control	the	child.
The	child	hence	has	a	reaction	of	feeling	like	it	is	being	smothered.	This	can	also
be	a	reaction	from	actually	being	smothered	or	drowned	in	a	past	life.	An
inability	to	get	the	breath.
“Not	enough	life	force	is	provided	between	the	fetal	environment	and	the	early
childhood.	This	creates	an	aura	of	sickness	and/or	of
	breath	or	energy.	Asthma
can	be	cured	not	only	by	physical	methods,	but	also	by	doing	a	type	of
regression.	One	goes	back	to	re-experience	one’s	birth,	asking	to	re-experience
the	relationship	with	the	world	through	the	relationship	of	the	Spiritual	Mother
as	opposed	to	suffocating	by	a	personal	earthly	mother.	Forgiveness	is	part	of	the
process	here	also.”
This	also	reminds	me	of	one	of
	the	Edgar	Cayce	readings	where	a	child	had
asthma	and	it	was	caused	by	a	past	life	deep-seated	guilt.	Here	the	condition	was
caused	by	a	lack	of	self-forgiveness	for	a	past	life	mistake.
AIDS
Djwhal	said	here	that	all	the	viruses	such	as	AIDS	and	others	of	similar	genre
are	caused	because	of	the	imbalance	that	is	occurring	at	the	third	dimensional
level	at	this	time.	As	the	new	energies
	are	coming	for	evolution,	there	is	a
resultant	struggle	between	the	old	and	new.	This	might	be	termed	the	Christ	and
Antichrist	energies.	This	also	might	be	termed	energies	of	love	and	hate	or
control.	This	struggle	causes	lower	astral	fourth	dimensional	entities	to	feed	on
this	etheric	conflict.
All	disease	begins	in	the	invisible	dimensions	first,	be	it	etheric,	astral,	or
mental	bodies.
	Along	with	the	astral	entities	are	negative	elementals	that	feed
upon	this	etheric	struggle	also.	There	is	also	much	fear-based	programming
around	viruses.	This	mass	collective	consciousness	fear-based	programming	has
a	very	negative	effect	on	humanity’s	immune	system.	Viruses	begin	first	as
astral,	etheric,	or	even	mental	viruses	and	then	move	into	the	physical.
The	idea	is	to	keep	these
	other	bodies	clear	and	the	physical	will	become
invulnerable	to	disease.	Diet	and	environment	are	important	in	the	sense	of
keeping	physical	toxins	out	of	the	system.	If	the	four-body	system	is	kept
fundamentally	clear	viruses	or	bacteria	cannot	grow.	The	fact	is	there	are	viruses
and	bacteria	everywhere	and	this	is	nothing	we	need	to	be	afraid	of.	Viruses	and
bacteria	has	no	possibility	of	manifesting
	in	a	person	whose	four-body	system	is
balanced	and	who	is	soul	and	monadically	infused.
From	the	perspective	of	the	Masters	AIDS	can	also	function	as	a	catalyst	for
some	to	help	them	leave	the	planet	when	they	need	to	be	placed	elsewhere,
physical	existence	not	being	the	“be	all	an	end	all”	goal	of	existence.	As	I
mentioned	in	my	other	books,	Hanna	Kroeger	has	found	a	cure	for	AIDS	with
her	herbs.	Other	more	New	Age	doctors	are	having	great	results	using	energetic
medicine	and	homepathics	to	build	the	overall	immune	system.
HIV	and	AIDS	is	not	a	guaranteed	death	certificate.	Some	of	the	symptoms
many	people	experience	has	more	to	do	with	their	beliefs	about	AIDS	than	the
actual	disease.	Other	symptoms	have	more	to	do	with	all	the	drugs	they	are
being	given,	which	is	having
	a	damaging	effect	on	their	immune	system.	AIDS
like	everything	in	life	is	not	bad.	It	is	a	lesson	no	different	then	all	lessons	in	life
and	must	be	used	as	a	teacher	and	catalyst	for	spiritual	growth.
Catatonic
In	this	case,	Djwhal	Khul	said	that	a	person	has	created	a	wedge,	or	dark	gray
shelf	between	themselves	and	their	God-Self,	out	of	fear.	The	need	here	is	to	be
completely	unconscious
	of	life,	and	to	respond	out	of	the	most	feeble	life	form.
A	person	who	is	catatonic	is	barely	conscious.	Almost	to	the	point	of	being	brain
dead.	They	have	literally	created	a	palpable	substance	of	separation.	To	reach
someone	who	is	catatonic	takes	extreme	patience,	and	unconditional	love	to
break	through	that	wedge.	It	is	much	like	working	with	a	person	who	has
become	possessed.	It	takes
	a	person	of	great	faith	to	ignite	the	Three-Fold	Flame
of	Love,	Wisdom,	and	Power	within	an	individual	such	as	this,	to	help	them
accept	themselves	and	their	life.
The	catatonic	person	is	so	afraid	they	are	not	even	able	to	function.	This	could
also	be	caused	by	a	previous	life	thread	coming	up	in	the	consciousness	or	from
extreme	abuse	or	experience	in	this	lifetime.	Djwhal	said	this	may
	also	happen
when	a	person	has	been	annihilated	in	a	past	life	in	a	war,	for	example,	the
etheric	body	is	in	extremely	bad	shape,	yet	the	person	chooses	to	reincarnate
immediately	with	no	healing	in	between	lifetimes.
It	is	very	important	for	lightworkers	to	understand	how	damaged	and	tainted
an	etheric	body	can	become.	This	is	a	very	serious	situation,	for	prior	to
ascension	the	physical
	body	works	off	the	etheric	blueprint.	If	the	etheric	body	is
damaged	there	is	very	little	possibility	of	true	healing.	We	have	all	had	very
traumatic	past	lives.	This	is	why	it	is	a	good	idea	for	everyone	to	call	in	the	inner
plane	Healing	Masters	and	the	Etheric	Healing	Team	and	the	Angels
specializing	in	the	etheric	body	to	completely	repair	the	etheric	body	to	make	it
correspond	with	the	true
	monadic	blueprint.
This	is	another	classic	example	of	the	shortcomings	of	traditional	psychology
and	Western	medicine	that	doesn’t	deal	with	this	aspect.	The	catatonic	is	almost
in	the	twilight	zone.	They	are	not	physically	dead	and	yet	not	psychologically
alive.	They	are	in	No	Man’s	Land.	The	catatonic	is	not	that	different	from	a
person	who	is	having	a	life	threatening	illness	and	lapses
	into	a	coma.	Djwhal
Khul	said	in	this	case	it	is	best	for	the	healer	in	charge	to	call	forth	and	help	the
person	connect	with	their	Angels.
I	saw	an	interesting	TV	show	recently	in	which	a	very	young	body	lapsed	into
a	coma	after	being	hit	by	a	car.	No	matter	what	the	doctors	or	family	did	the	boy
would	not	come	out	of	it	until	they	started	to	talk	about	his	pet	dog.	The	love	the
boy	had
	for	his	dog	began	to	cause	a	response.	They	were	eventually	able	to
bring	his	dog	to	the	hospital	and	a	full	recovery	occurred.	The	love	for	and	from
an	animal,	especially	for	children,	can	be	an	enormous	healing	influence.
Narcolepsy
A	narcoleptic	is	someone	who	is	constantly	falling	asleep.	Djwhal	Khul	said
that	it	is	difficult	for	this	person	to	stay	firmly	connected	to	third	dimensional
reality.	This	is	a	type	of	defense	mechanism	of	an	unconscious	nature	to	escape
the	lessons	of	the	third	dimension.	Djwhal	said	that	the	narcoleptic	is	often
escaping	to	the	fourth	dimension	in	a	type	of	dream	state	reality.	Another
possibility	is	someone	who	trances	out	very	easily	as	in	a	case	of	someone	who
is	very	suggestible	to	hypnotic	suggestion	and	is	a	classic	somnambulist.	This
would	be	a	deficiency	in	the	psychic	boundaries	and	ability	to	protect	themselves
psychically	from	suggestion.	Another	possibility	is	that	the	person	is	being
exposed	to	certain	environmental	toxins	and	is	having	an	allergic	reaction	to
these	toxins	and	is	going	unconscious	again	as	a	defense	mechanism.
So,	we	see	here	with	the	narcoleptic	and,	in	truth,	all	forms	of	psychological	or
physical
	disease	that	there	are	mental,	emotional,	physical,	environmental,	and
past	life	karmic	reasons	that	can	be	a	potential	cause.	There	is	not	always	just
one	quick	pat	answer	or	sole	reason.
The	narcoleptic	actually	has	the	potential	to	become	a	good	meditator	and
have	access	to	multi-dimensionality	if	this	process	can	move	to	a	psychic
experience	that	is	controlled	rather	than	uncontrolled.
	The	simplest	answer	here
as	to	the	cause	of	narcolepsy	is	the	“unconscious	avoidance	response.”	Some
people,	when	they	don’t	want	to	do	or	go	someplace,	just	get	sick.	The	ideal	here
is	to	make	the	tough	decisions	in	life	and	consistently	use	all	your	energies	once
a	decision	is	made.
Insomnia
In	the	case	of	an	insomniac,	we	have	the	opposite	situation.	Instead	of	falling
asleep	at
	inappropriate	times	as	in	the	narcoleptic,	here	the	person	can’t	fall
asleep	at	appropriate	times.	Djwhal	said	this	is	often	connected	to	an	inability	to
let	go,	a	fear	of	resting,	or	a	fear	of	surrendering.	It	can	also	be	connected	to	a
haunting	memory	in	the	conscious	or	subconscious.	This	memory	could	be	from
this	life	or	a	past	life.	It	can	also	be	a	fear	of	being	powerless	in	their	life.	This
can	also	be	caused	by	a	type	of	neurosis	where	they	have	so	much	pressure	and
responsibility	in	their	life	they	feel	they	cannot	afford	to	take	time	off	to	sleep.
Fear	is	obviously	connected	here	as	with	probably	every	single	one	of	the
symptoms	mentioned	in	this	chapter.	It	could	be	a	fear	or	fight	or	flight,	where
the	person	feels	they	must	be	on	the	alert,	possibly	from	a	past	life	trauma	that
the	person	is	not	even	aware	of	consciously.
Endocrine	Diseases
This	has	to	do	with	the	major	glands:	pineal,	pituitary,	thyroid,	thymus,
adrenals,	kidneys,	and	gonads.	These	diseases	usually	manifest	as	the	glands
being	underactive	or	overactive.	This	is	connected	usually	with	one	of	the	seven
chakras	being	over	or	under	active	in	function.	This	has	a	direct	affect	on	the
functioning
	of	each	gland.	This	over	or	under	activity	in	the	chakras	can	stem
from	an	imbalanced	philosophy,	or	psychoepistemology.	It	can	develop	from	an
imbalance	in	the	functioning	of	the	three	minds	or	four	bodies.	It	develops	from
a	person’s	unconscious	over-identification	with	one	or	more	of	their	chakras,
which	is	extremely	common.
The	reverse	of	this	is,	of	course,	an	under-identification	with
	one	of	the
chakras.	An	emotional	person	might,	for	example,	over-identify	with	the	solar
plexus	and	heart	and	not	use	the	third	eye.	This	would	tax	the	organs	and	glands
connected	with	the	solar	plexus	and	cause	an	underdevelopment	in	the	pituitary.
Hives
Animosities,	grudges,	or	unkind	thoughts	are	usually	the	psychological	cause.
Polio
In	one	past	life	reading	of	Edgar
	Cayce’s,	a	man	had	polio	that	was	caused	by
jeering	and	mocking	others	in	a	past	life.	In	a	similar	situation,	a	child	had
infantile	paralysis	that	was	caused	by	a	past	life	of	using	drugs	and	hypnosis	to
hurt	others.
Constipation
Constipation	can	have	a	physical	or	dietary	causation,	but	can	also	have	a
psychological	component.	The	constipated	person	is	often	very	fearful,	and
hence
	uptight,	constricted,	and	too	controlled	in	their	psychology.	The	person
with	chronic	diarrhea	is	just	the	reverse.	Their	psychology	instead	of	being	too
yang	is	too	yin.	We	have	all	heard	the	expression	of	having	diarrhea	of	the
mouth.	Without	self-control,	discernment,	and	appropriate	response	present,	our
thoughts	create	our	physical	bodies.	We	are	what	we	eat	as	well	as	what	we
think!
Manic	Depressive
Manic-depressive	behavior	occurs	when	a	person	allows	themselves	to	be	run
by	the	emotional	body,	negative	ego,	and	subconscious	mind	in	a	victim
psychology.	The	ideal	here	is	to	have	personal	power	and	self-mastery	over	the
three-fold	personality	(physical,	emotional,	mental).	When	the	emotional	body
and	subconscious	mind	run	the	conscious	mind,	the	negative	ego	becomes
	the
programmer	of	your	emotional	reality	and	you	are	on	an	emotional	roller
coaster.	The	ideal	is	to	develop	self-mastery	and	see	that	your	thoughts	cause
your	reality	and	to	develop	evenmindedness,	equanimity,	unchanging	joy,	and
inner	peace	at	all	times	regardless	of	what	is	going	on	outside	of	self.
Panic	Attacks
Panic	attacks,	in	its	simplest	understanding,	are	caused	by	the	negative
	ego
being	in	control.	The	essence	of	the	negative	ego	is	fear.	The	person	who	has
panic	attacks	is	constantly	being	victimized	by	the	negative	ego	with	this	fear	at
inappropriate	times	or	challenging	times.	There	is	a	battle	for	the	control	of	the
personality	going	on.	Personal	power	in	service	of	love	must	take	command	here
for	this	to	be	resolved.	It	does	not	matter	if	the	fear	is	from	a
	past	life	or	this	life.
Obsessive	Compulsive
A	person	who	is	obsessive/compulsive	is	being	run	by	a	subpersonality	in	the
subconscious	mind	that	requires	order	and	structure.	The	opposite	of	this	would
be	the	person	who	is,	for	a	lack	of	a	better	word,	a	“slob.”	The	slob	lives	a	life	of
complete	non-order	and	lack	of	cleanliness.	Again	too	yang	or	too	yin.	The	key
here	is	to	not	be
	a	victim	of	one’s	mind.	In	the	obsessive/compulsive	person,	the
mind	is	running	the	person	instead	of	the	person	running	the	mind.	The	lesson
here	is	for	the	conscious	mind	to	not	necessarily	get	rid	of	this	part	but	rather	to
make	choices	as	to	when	to	listen	to	it.
As	soon	as	free	choice	comes	into	play,	the	disturbed	quality	of	this	part
becomes	diffused.	What	we	see	here	from	this	lesson,
	and	all	the	symptoms
described	in	this	chapter,	is	that	they	all	stem	from	“imbalances	in	the	psyche.”
By	this	I	mean	either	being	too	yin	or	too	yang.	Too	heavenly	or	too	earthly.	Not
balanced	in	the	four-body	system.	Not	balanced	in	the	three	minds.	Not	balanced
in	one’s	relationship	of	the	inner	parent	to	the	inner	child.	Imbalanced	in	the
understanding	of	the	need	to	transcend	and	die	to
	the	negative	ego	and	to	only
think	with	one’s	Christ	Mind.	Being	a	victim	instead	of	a	Master.	Not
recognizing	that	one’s	thoughts	are	causing	their	reality.
These	basic	and	simple	principles	when	not	held	as	an	ideal,	manifest	as
symptoms	or	psychological	or	physical	disease.	These	symptoms,	pathologies,
psychological	and	psychic	diseases	are	not	bad,	they	are	just	lessons.	They	are
actually
	gifts	if	looked	at	properly,	teaching	you	obedience	to	God’s	laws.	They
are	signposts	that	an	adjustment	needs	to	be	made	in	your	philosophy,	or
psychoepistemology.	They	are	teachers	showing	a	need	for	greater	balance
within	these	principles.	It	is	these	symptoms	that	are	the	suffering	and	fire	of	life
that	are	relentlessly	pushing	everyone	to	ascension	and	God-realization.
Senility
When	an	elderly	person	becomes	senile,	they	are	in	a	sense	returning	to	a
child-like	state.	This	can	be	caused	by	both	physical	and	psychological	factors.
A	child	is	basically	just	run	by	the	subconscious	mind.	As	one	moves	into
adulthood	the	conscious	mind	takes	charge	and	takes	control.	In	senility	due	to
the	breakdown	of	the	physical	vehicle,	due	to	old	age,	illness,	environmental
poisoning	and/or
	psychological	reasons	such	as	giving	up,	or	loss	of	personal
power	and	self-mastery,	the	person	again	becomes	run	by	the	subconscious
mind.	It	is	a	return	to	a	state	of	being	victimized	by	the	subconscious	mind,
emotional,	mental,	and	physical	vehicles.	This	can	stem	from	an	improper
philosophy,	and	often	a	lack	of	meaning	and	purpose.
Melancholia
Melancholia	is	an	extreme	state	of
	prolonged	sadness	and	depression.	There	is
always	a	victimization	by	the	emotional	body	occurring	here.	An	inability	to	let
go	of	anger	in	one’s	life.	Extreme	attachment	is	always	involved	here.	As
Buddha	said,	“All	suffering	is	caused	by	attachment.”	Victim	consciousness,
lack	of	purpose,	and	self-pity	is	very	prevalent.
Possession
Where	obsession	is	being	victimized	by	a	subpersonality,
	possession	is	being
victimized	by	an	astral	entity.	It	is	always	the	person’s	psychology	and
philosophy	that	allows	this	to	occur	and	attracts	this	in.	Victim	consciousness	is
operating	here.	There	is	no	judgment	in	this	and	it	is	extremely	common.	It	is
important	to	clear	the	unwanted	entity	out	as	soon	as	possible.	Use	the	matrix
removal	program	in	combination	with	going	to	Djwhal	Khul’s
	inner	plane
ashram	and	have	the	Masters	remove	them.
The	only	entities	you	want	hanging	around	you	are	Christed	and	Ascended
Beings	of	the	fifth	dimension	or	higher.	When	a	person	is	run	by	the	negative
ego	they	tend	to	attract	these	lower	astral	entities.	Almost	all	drug	addicts	and
alcoholics	attract	them.	The	lesson	here	is	to	move	from	victim	to	Master,	from
effect	to	cause,	and	you
	will	never	be	bothered	again.	We	all	have	to	deal
occasionally	with	lower	astral	or	dark	force	entities	hanging	around	at	times.
Possession	is	a	more	extreme	case	of	this.
Agoraphobia
Agoraphobia	is	when	the	negative	ego,	being	fear,	is	projected	onto	the	idea	of
it	being	dangerous	to	leave	one’s	house.	As	with	all	phobias,	it	is	all	within	one’s
own	mind.	Your	thoughts	create	your
	reality.	Fear	can	be	projected	onto
everything	or	love	can	be	projected	onto	everything	or	everyone.	There	are	only
two	ways	of	thinking.	This	fear	can	be	built	in	this	life	or	a	past	life.	It	can	be
helpful	here	to	do	a	regression	and	see	where	it	came	from.	This	is	done	in	a
hypnosis	type	situation,	and	often	can	clear	it	up	right	away	by	just	partially	or
completely	experiencing	the	situation
	which	catalyzed.	I	use	the	word	catalyze
here	for	the	true	cause	was	always	your	thinking,	not	any	outside	situation.
Fear	projection	or	phobias	will	always	be	created	and	manifest	until	full
personal	power	and	self-mastery	is	claimed	and	full	command	of	the	negative
ego,	subconscious	mind,	mental	body,	emotional	body,	physical	body,	and	inner
child	are	claimed.	The	fear	and	phobia	is	God’s
	way	of	forcing	you	to	either
become	dysfunctional	or	a	God-realized	Master.	As	
A	Course	In	Miracles	
says,
“There	are	no	neutral	thoughts.”	All	thoughts	are	of	the	negative	ego	or	are	of
the	Christ	Mind.	One	is	being	forced	to	learn	to	think	with	their	Christ	Mind	and
to	extend	only	love	and	never	attack	fear	consciousness.	The	world	is	nothing
more	than	a	mirror	of	your	own	thinking.	The	idea
	here	is	to	learn	to	stop
“projecting	fear”	and	to	learn	to	only	extend	love!
Anemia
In	the	Edgar	Cayce	readings,	a	man	in	this	lifetime	had	anemia	and	it	was
caused	from	a	past	life	where	he	killed	someone.
Leukemia
In	another	Edgar	Cayce	reading,	a	man	had	leukemia	this	lifetime	and	this
came	from	a	past	life	where	he	had	knifed	or	shed	someone	else’s	blood	with
lower-self
	motivation.	In	this	lifetime,	he	was	now	shedding	his	own	blood.As
Edgar	Cayce	said,“Every	jot	and	tittle	of	the	law	is	fulfilled.”	These	last	two	are
not	the	only	causes	but	certainly	are	a	great	motivation	to	not	create	karma	in
this	lifetime.
Liver	Problems
Liver	problems	are	often	connected	to	too	much	negative	anger,	and/or	over-
planning	or	over-thinking.	On	a	physical	level,
	drugs	of	any	and	all	kinds	are
deposited	in	the	liver.
Pancreas	Problems
This	can	stem	from	a	number	of	reasons.	One	is	a	lack	of	sweetness	or	joy	in
life.	On	the	other	side	of	the	coin,	it	can	also	be	caused	by	too	much	focus	on	the
sweetness	or	pleasures	of	life.	One	other	interesting	correlation	of	the	pancreas	is
connected	also	to	the	use	of	the	will.	Too	much	use	of	one’s	will
	or	not	enough
use	of	the	will	can	adversely	effect	the	pancreas.	As	with	the	liver	it	is	connected
to	the	proper	integration	of	the	third	chakra	in	balance	with	the	other	chakras.	On
a	physical	level	too	much	sugar,	starch	and	even	oil	in	one’s	diet	can	cause
pancreas	problems.
Heart	Problems
This	is	obvious:	inability	to	give	love	to	self	or	others.	The	other	side	of	the
coin	is	an
	inability	to	receive	love	from	self,	others	or	God.
Homosexuality
I	am	listing	this	here,	but,	in	truth,	this	is	not	an	imbalance	at	all	from	the
perspective	of	the	Spiritual	Hierarchy.	It	is	a	normal	part	of	God’s	Creation	for	a
certain	percentage	of	the	population,	and	any	attempt	to	change	this	and	look	for
a	psychological,	spiritual	or	karmic	cause	is	faulty	thinking.
Sociopath
This	is	a	very	interesting	psychopathology.	A	sociopath	is	someone	who	has
no	“conscience.”	They	are	completely	run	by	the	negative	ego,	and	they	will	say
and	do	anything	with	no	consideration	of	others.	They	are	often	pathological
liars.	Their	word	means	nothing.	They	are	clearly	disconnected	from	their
Higher	Self	and	oversoul.	It	also	stems	from	a	lack	of	education	of	the	difference
between
	negative	ego	thinking	and	Christ	Thinking.
What	is	scary	is	that	I	know	a	number	of	people	who	are	clearly	on	a	spiritual
path	and	have	New	Age	type	businesses	that	I	would	call	sociopaths.	It	is	mind
boggling	to	me	that	they	can	believe	in	New	Age	stuff,	and	even	in	the	Masters,
yet	be	so	incredibly	run	by	the	negative	ego.	The	sociopath	usually	also	has
enormous	amounts	of	anger	and	is
	almost	trying	to	punish	the	world.	This	can	be
karmic	with	the	etheric	body	being	extremely	damaged	in	a	past	life	and	then
quickly	incarnating	again	before	healing	has	taken	place	on	the	astral	plane.
Usually	a	lot	of	implants	and	psychic	parasites	are	found.
Crib	Deaths
Crib	deaths	have	to	do	with	the	phenomena	of	a	soul	incarnating	into	a
physical	body	at	the	time	of	birth	and	at
	the	last	second	changing	its	mind.	This
can	be	a	spontaneous	occurrence	or	on	occasion	calculated	for	some	karmic
reason	for	the	incarnating	soul	and	for	the	parents.	A	physical	body	cannot	live
without	a	living	soul	to	inhabit	it.
Fear,	Anxiety,	and	Paranoia
These	are	all	derivatives	of	negative	ego,	which	can	be	most	easily	defined	as
fear-based	thinking.	There	are	only	two	emotions,
	fear	and	love.	All	other
emotions	stem	from	these	two.	Perfect	love	casts	out	fear.	There	is	fear-based
thinking	and	love-based	thinking.	Fear	is	projected	attack.	If	you	believe	in
attacking	others	you	will	always	live	in	fear.	Edgar	Cayce	said,	“Why	worry
when	you	can	pray?”	I	would	add	why	worry	when	you	can	pray,	do
affirmations,	visualizations	and	own	your	personal	power.	Being	loving	at
	all
times	to	self	and	others	will	remove	fear.	Giving	up	attack	thoughts	will	remove
fear.	Praying,	affirmations,	and	personal	power	will	remove	fear.	Denial	of	the
negative	ego	and	the	embracing	of	the	Christ	Consciousness	erases	fear.
Paranoia	is	fear	taken	to	a	more	extreme	and	exaggerated	condition.	Fear	here	is
being	projected	onto	everything	and	everyone.
The	world	and	people	are	nothing
	more	than	a	mirror	and	projection	screen	for
your	own	thinking.	The	single	most	important	lesson	of	life	is	to	learn	to	project
onto	this	screen	and	mirror	only	Christ	thoughts	and	not	negative	ego	thoughts.
There	are	about	1%	of	our	thoughts	that	might	be	considered	reality-based	fears
that	can	serve	as	a	protective	function	for	the	physical	vehicle.	Ninety-nine
percent	of	our	fears,	however,
	are	illusionary	and	stem	from	faulty	thinking.
Alcoholism	or	Drug	Addiction
This	is	always	an	escape.	It	is	using	a	drug	to	escape	emotional	and
psychological	problems.	What	the	person	really	needs	is	a	spiritual	teacher	to
help	educate	them	about	the	purpose	of	life	and	how	to	heal	themselves	through
the	kinds	of	things	I	speak	of	in	my	books.	What	exacerbates	this	problem	is
what
	starts	always	because	of	psychological	and	emotional	dysfunction	also
moves	into	a	physical	addiction.	This	is	why	the	person	must	often	get
physically	detoxed	before	true	psychological	healing	can	really	take	place.
Alcoholism	and	drug	addiction	attract	astral	entities,	negative	elementals	and
extraterrestrial	implants,	which	also	need	to	be	cleared	for	a	full	recovery.	Proper
integration	of	all
	three	minds	needs	to	be	achieved,	owning	one’s	full	power	in
God,	personal	power,	and	the	power	of	the	subconscious	mind.
Narcissistic	Personality	Disorder
This	is	another	character	disorder	I	have	often	seen	among	light-workers.
Narcissism	is	an	extreme	case	of	self-centeredness.	It	seems	also	to	be	connected
with	being	run	by	the	inner	child.	A	person	who	is	narcissistic	filters
	everything
through	a	lens	of	“How	does	this	affect	me?”	It	is	an	over-preoccupation	with
the	concerns	of	self.	True	God-realization	is	really	just	the	opposite.	It	is	to	Self-
actualize	self	so	very	little	time	needs	to	be	focused	upon	self	and	one’s	life	can
be	dedicated	to	the	helping	of	others	who	are	less	fortunate	then	you.
I	have	seen	a	great	many	very	high	level	initiates	having	very
	high	levels	of
this	type	of	character	disorder	which	never	ceases	to	amaze	me	given	their
initiation	level.	It	just	continues	to	point	out	the	great	discrepancy	that	can	occur
between	one’s	spiritual	development	and	psychological	development.	The
narcissistic	person	processes	everything	in	life	as	to	how	does	this	affect	me,	and
never	asks	the	question	how	does	this	affect	others.	It	is	similar
	to	how	a	five-
year-old	child	behaves.	The	physical	body	has	grown	and	become	an	adult	but
the	mental	and	emotional	consciousness	is	still	stuck	in	this	self-centered	and
often	very	self-indulgent	stage.
Alzheimer’s	Disease	and	Amnesia
Alzheimers	disease	is	the	person’s	losing	over	time	their	memory	and
cognitive	faculties.	There	has	been	some	interesting	studies	done	that	one
potential
	cause	of	this	may	be	aluminum	poisoning.	Americans	use	aluminum
foil	and	aluminum	pots	and	pans	all	the	time.	I	remember	I	used	to	cook	fish	in
aluminum	foil	two	or	three	times	a	week	and	one	time	I	went	to	my	homeopathic
doctor	who	did	bioenergetic	testing	and	he	said	I	had	aluminum	poisoning
without	my	telling	him	this	fact.
With	many	diseases,	we	must	keep	the	physical	toxicity	factors
	in	mind.	There
can	also	be	obvious	psychological	and	spiritual	diseases	involved.	A	person	with
amnesia	may	just	not	want	to	remember	as	a	type	of	defense	mechanism.	This
could	be	a	past	life	lesson	or	some	kind	of	trauma	to	the	brain.	It	is	a	fascinating
phenomena	how	most	people	who	have	been	sexually	abused	as	children	have
no	memory	of	it.	It	is	usually	in	adulthood	that	these	memories	began
	to	arise
again.	This	is	a	healthy	defense	mechanism	of	the	human	psyche	that	helps
people	to	cope.
Sleep	Walking
Djwhal	Khul	said	that	in	the	case	of	sleep	walking	the	astral	body	and	the
physical	body	merge	together	and	the	person	sleepwalking	is	actually	walking
around	in	their	astral	body.	Because	of	this	merger,	the	physical	body	is	carried
along	for	the	ride.	Usually	the	astral
	body	leaves	at	night	and	travels	on	its	own
plane	of	existence.
I	will	never	forget	the	story	of	one	of	my	clients	about	twelve	years	ago	who
was	a	young	adolescent	and	who	was	doing	a	lot	of	acting	out.	He	came	in	for	a
session	one	day	and	told	me	a	story	of	how	he	was	planning	to	steal	his	parent’s
car	one	night	and	go	visit	his	girlfriend.	He	was	planning	this	out	all	night;
however,
	at	the	last	minute	he	changed	his	mind	before	bed	and	decided	not	to
do	it.	The	only	problem	is	that	all	his	planning	had	programmed	his
subconscious	mind.	While	sleep	walking	later	that	night	he	stole	his	parent’s
keys	and	opened	the	garage	door	and	actually	pushed	the	car	out	into	the	street
without	starting	the	ignition.	He	was	afraid	that	starting	the	ignition	would	wake
his	parents	up.	He	then
	pushed	the	car	about	two	blocks	down	the	street,	got	in	it
to	start	it	up,	and	“woke	up.”	The	person	is	actually	doing	this	on	the	astral	plane
and	doesn’t	realize	that	they	are	bringing	their	physical	body	along	for	the	ride.
Epilepsy
Djwhal	said	that	epilepsy	is	a	short	circuit	within	the	body	and	within	the
nervous	system,	that	creates	a	short	circuit	within	the	brain	pattern.	It
	can	often
be	connected	to	an	overload	of	psychic	and	spiritual	energies.	What	can	happen
here	is	that	there	can	be	a	discrepancy	between	the	readiness	of	the	four-body
system	to	receive	these	energies.	As	a	person	becomes	more	soul	and
monadically	attuned	and	infused	and	the	etheric	body	more	aligned	with	the
Divine	pattern	and	strengthened,	it	is	possible	for	a	healing	to	take	place.
Vywamus	is
	a	good	Master	to	call	on	for	the	healing	and	repair	of	the	electrical
system	along	with	the	Lord	of	Arcturus	and	the	Arcturians.
There	also	are	certain	karmic	causes	of	epilepsy.	In	two	different	Edgar	Cayce
readings,	over-indulging	in	sexuality	in	a	past	life,	and	misusing	psychic	powers
for	an	evil	purpose	in	past	lives	caused	epilepsy.
Dyslexia
Dyslexia	has	to	do	with	certain
	electrical	wiring	in	the	nervous	system	and
etheric	body	being	crossed.	This	condition	is	where	people	displace	letters	and
numbers.	I	have	personally	noticed	that	these	people	are	often	very	gifted
individuals.	Djwhal	said	that	one	possible	cause	was	that	in	a	past	life	the	person
was	more	right	brained	and	in	this	lifetime	they	were	using	the	other	brain	more.
On	a	subconscious	level,	they	have
	not	let	go	of	the	previous	programming
which	at	times	overrides	the	existing	program.	It	is	connected	with	a	third
dimensional	blockage.	The	right	brain	tends	to	block	the	use	of	the	left	side	of
the	brain	at	times.
This	may	also	explain	my	personal	observation	that	these	people	are	often
very	gifted,	because	of	this	right	brain	development	in	past	lives.	The	dyslexic
often	is	connected
	to	a	whole	other	level	of	intelligence.	Unfortunately	in	our
society	they	are	severely	punished	for	not	fitting	into	the	classic	left	brain	norm.
The	Masters	said	dyslexia	is	connected	to	the	right	brain	being	more
predominate,	with	the	left	brain	being	more	difficult	to	access.
The	reverse	of	this	of	course	would	be	the	person	who	is	more	left	brain
predominate	and	has	a	difficult	time
	accessing	the	right	brain.	This	is	less
noticed	in	our	society,	and	this	person	is	considered	normal	and	is	your	classic
scientist	who	is	Godless	and	is	totally	disconnected	to	the	soul	and	Higher	Mind.
Here	we	would	have	the	worship	of	the	intellect	and	no	connection	to	intuition,
imagination,	and	psychic	senses.
The	dyslexic	doesn’t	operate	the	way	they	are	expected	to	in	school.	They
	do
operate	how	they	are	expected	to	operate	in	spiritual	school.	Now	the	ideal,	of
course,	not	that	one	side	of	the	brain	is	better	than	another,	is	that	they	both	must
be	integrated	and	balanced	to	their	mutual	full	potential.	Another	way	of	saying
this	is	the	difficulty	of	left	handed	people	to	function	in	a	right	handed	world.
Stress	can	also	play	a	part	as	to	the	severity	and	occurrence	of	dyslexia.
	The
Masters	added	here	stress	due	to	competitiveness	and	comparing.
Miscarriages
The	Masters	said	that	this	is	usually	a	lesson	for	the	person	who	had	the
miscarriage.	The	cause	can	be	physical,	psychological,	karmic,	or	energetic.	The
incoming	new	baby	doesn’t	incarnate	until	right	around	the	time	of	birth	so	that
is	why	the	lesson	is	more	for	the	mother	and	husband	then	the	new	soul.
	As	with
crib	deaths,	there	is	sometimes	an	antipathy	or	allergic	reaction	between	the
mother	and	soul	on	an	emotional	level	that	could	be	one	cause.
There	are	obviously	medical	reasons	why	this	can	happen.	In	one	case	I	heard
about	at	a	lecture,	a	woman	and	her	family	had	an	electrical	fence	around	their
house.	She	had	over	eleven	miscarriages.	As	soon	as	they	got	rid	of	the	electrical
fence
	she	was	able	to	carry	a	baby	to	full	term.	A	possible	karmic	reason	would
be	a	mother	who	had	abandoned	her	child	in	a	past	life	and	now	the	child	was
abandoning	her	for	spiritual	growth	reasons.
Very	clearly,	a	miscarriage	is	a	catalyst	for	spiritual	growth	if	it	will	be	used
by	the	consciousness	for	this	purpose.	Many	people	in	the	third	dimensional
world	pin	the	whole	purpose	in	life
	on	family	and	kids	and	not	on	God	and	their
spiritual	path.	A	person	like	this	might	be	a	prime	candidate	for	a	miscarriage
because	of	the	attachment	and	over-identification	with	having	a	child.	The	basic
law	of	life	is	that	that	which	one	is	attached	to	is	ultimately	taken	away.	One
must	learn	to	be	involved	in	life	but	not	attached.	One	must	learn	to	have	strong
preferences	but	not	addictions.
Schizophrenia
The	image	I	got	when	asking	about	this	was	a	lightening	bolt	splitting	the
person	and	the	consciousness.	This	split	can	be	caused	from	a	past	life	or	present
life	trauma.	It	can	be	connected	to	an	imbalance	of	the	feminine	and	masculine
sides.	It	can	be	a	loading	down	of	negative	alien	implants	more	on	one	side	of
the	brain	then	another.	This	can	also	be	similar	with	negative
	elementals.
The	circuits	are	eroded	due	to	these	factors.	This	creates	havoc	in	the	nervous
system,	which	leads	to	the	nervous	or	psychotic	breakdowns.	This	is	in	part	due
to	gaps	and	holes	in	the	circuitry	of	the	etheric	and	nervous	system	field,	thus
leading	to	a	very	aberrant	pattern.	In	the	case	of	the	schizophrenic,	you	have
erosion	of	the	psychic	walls.	In	the	case	of	the	multiple
	personality,	you	have	the
build	up	of	the	psychic	walls.
Depression
Depression	is	a	loss	of	personal	power	and	in	essence	a	subconscious	and	even
conscious	giving	up	and	disconnection	from	the	spiritual	warrior	archetype.	The
Masters	said	that	depression	could	also	be	connected	to	a	lack	of	understanding
of	the	normal	cycles	of	life	and	death	within	a	given	lifetime.	Each	initiation
	is	a
kind	of	death	and	rebirth	process	which	people	on	the	emotional	level	are	often
confused	by.	For	example,	at	the	fourth	initiation	the	person	disconnects	from
their	Higher	Self,	who	has	been	their	teacher	for	eternity,	only	to	be	connected	to
a	high	level	teacher	which	is	the	Spirit	or	monad.	This	is	often	disconcerting	to
the	mental	and	emotional	vehicles	if	not	understood.
Some	depressions
	are	also	brought	in	from	other	lifetimes,	which	stemmed
from	decisions	that	were	made	in	these	past	lives	that	were	not	correct.	This
created	a	deep-seated	guilt	that	became	so	heavy	it	led	to	a	depression	of	the
whole	system.	This	can	be	seen	as	dark	cloudy	areas	within	the	aura,	where	a	lot
of	pain	has	built	up	from	past	lives	or	this	life.	This	can	also	be	seen	as	red	areas
in	the	aura,
	where	there	is	irritation,	and	pressure	because	the	person	knows	they
have	to	do	something	to	rectify	some	karmic	lesson	from	their	past.
This	is	often	connected	to	the	manic	depressive	roller	coaster	ride	that	stems
from	over-identification	with	the	emotional	body,	subconscious	mind,	and
negative	ego,	not	yet	having	learned	to	cause	their	emotions	through	the	science
of	attitudinal	healing.
	The	person	in	a	depression	may	try	a	visualization	of	using
a	red	ladder,	which	cultivates	the	first	ray	of	power	to	climb	out	of	the	soup,	so
to	speak.	Often	there	is	an	etheric	wound	connected	to	the	depression	as	well	as
a	negative	imprint	(a	sword	in	the	heart	for	example).
Again,	implants	and	elementals	and	astral	entities	can	be	involved	here.	Again,
we	say	how	limited	traditional
	psychology	is	missing	as	much	as	three-quarters
of	the	pie	in	terms	of	what	is	often	really	going	on.	There	is	the	saying	that
depression	is	anger	turned	inwards.	Anger	and	depression	always	go	together.
Anyone	who	is	chronically	angry	will	also	be	chronically	depressed	during	more
receptive	periods.	The	person	who	is	depressed	does	not	need	negative	anger	but
rather	positive	anger	or	personal	power
	and	spiritual	warrior	energy	to	pull
themselves	out	of	the	pit.	Anger	and	depression	are	two	sides	of	the	negative	ego
coin.	Their	true	antidote	is	personal	power	and	love.
The	harder	the	blows	of	life,	the	stronger	and	more	powerful	you	must
become.	Here	we	have	the	importance	of	the	spiritual	warrior	archetype	and	the
positive	use	of	the	destruction	archetype.	Cayce	called	it	positive
	anger.	It	is	the
cultivation	of	first	ray	energy	at	times	of	crisis	to	not	allow	life	to	beat	one
down.	Surrender	is	a	Christ	quality	as	long	as	it	is	combined	with	personal
power	and	love	simultaneously.	The	person	who	is	manic-depressive	must	learn
evenmindedness,	equanimity,	and	unchanging	inner	peace	and	joy	regardless	of
outside	circumstance.	The	person	who	is	prone	to	depression	finds	happiness
outside	of	self	inserted	of	in	their	“state	of	mind”!
Depression	most	definitely	could	be	anger	turned	inward,	or	a	negative	anger
turned	outward.	Anger	should	not	be	blocked	but	rather	channeled	as	a	source	of
power	towards	love	and	Christ	ideals.	The	etheric	wounds	I	spoke	of	earlier,
such	as	a	sword	or	other	object	still	embedded	in	the	etheric	body,	must	be
removed	for	it	is	creating
	an	added	pressure	to	the	system.	Eventually	hospitals
will	have	teams	of	people	who	can	work	medically,	nutritionally,
psychologically,	psychically,	spiritually,	etherically,	mentally,	and	emotionally
so	a	complete	clearing	and	healing	can	occur.
In	some	ways	it	is	amazing	that	people	ever	heal	in	hospitals;	adding	to	this
the	fact	that	there	is	so	much	negative	energy	embedded	in	the	walls
	and	only
the	physical	level	is	addressed.	Even	that	level	is	not	very	effective	given	the
rejection	of	such	things	as	homeopathics,	herbs,	acupuncture,	nutrition,	radionics
and	so	on.	The	drugs	used	poison	the	liver	and	body	and	create	other	problems,
so	really	it	is	just	for	emergency	functions	that	they	have	any	real	value.	I
personally	never	would	go	to	a	medical	doctor	except	in	this	kind
	of	situation.
Ronald	Beasely,	the	great	spiritual	master	from	England	who	is	no	longer	in
embodiment,	used	to	say	that	hospitals	should	be	burned	down	every	five	years
because	of	the	build	up	of	negative	energy.	It	is	hard	for	a	person	to	heal	in	that
kind	of	atmosphere.	The	level	of	healing	they	are	working	on	is	literally	just	a
sliver	of	the	whole	pie.	Can	you	imagine	how	great	it	will
	be	in	the	future	when
a	person	goes	to	a	hospital	and	has	a	medical	doctor,	spiritual	counselor,	psychic
healer,	nutritionist,	massage	therapist,	wholistic	practitioner,	acupuncturist,
hypnotherapist,	radionics	specialist,	naturopath	or	homeopathist,	social	worker,
family	counselor,	channel,	astrologer,	clairvoyant,	and	healer	all	consulting
together	and	working	together	as	a	team	for	a	complete
	healing?
Psychotic
A	person	who	is	psychotic	is	completely	run	by	the	subconscious	mind	and
negative	ego.	There	is	no	conscious	control.	There	are	always	gaping	holes	in
the	aura,	and	usually	they	are	possessed.	This	can	manifest	into	a	suicidal	or
homicidal	form.	The	psychotic	is	filled	with	negative	elementals	and	alien
implants.	The	psychotic	truly	needs	to	be	hospitalized	to	become
	stabilized	for
the	long	process	of	healing	and	recovery	to	occur.	The	psychotic’s	field	may
actually	be	black.
The	Neurotic
The	neurotic	is	not	as	bad	off	as	the	schizophrenic	or	psychotic.	The	neurotic
is	much	more	common,	and	their	auric	fields	tend	to	be	gray	rather	than	black.
The	neurotic	is	still	functional	in	the	world	where	the	psychotic	and
schizophrenic	are	clearly	not.	In
	the	neurotic	the	circuits	are	often	weak,	mixed,
confused,	gray	or	cloudy,	and	often	filled	with	etheric	mucous.	The	neurotic
often	has	different	kinds	of	obsessive	or	compulsive	behaviors	that	are	all	a
product	of	allowing	the	subconscious	mind	to	control	the	conscious	mind	too
much.	Not	enough	mastery	has	been	achieved	over	the	mental,	emotional,
physical	bodies,	and	negative	ego.
This
	is	also	connected	to	improper	inner	parenting	skills	in	regard	to	the	inner
child.	The	neurotic	has	not	snapped,	had	a	nervous	breakdown,	or	had	a	split	in
their	personality.	It	is	still	in	the	realm	of	minor	dysfunction	not	major
dysfunction.	Sometimes	this	can	be	connected	to	being	unprepared	for	rising	of
the	kundalini.	This	happens	often	among	lightworkers	where	the	spiritual	bodies
are	more
	advanced	then	the	psychological	bodies.	The	energies	rise	and	the
Light	comes	in	with	greater	intensity	and	the	psychological	self	is	not	equipped
to	channel	this	energy	properly	through	the	mental	and	emotional	vehicles.	It
thus	may	manifest	as	fear,	negative	emotions,	uncontrolled	sexuality,	and	lower
self-desire.
This	is	why	it	is	very	important	to	refine	and	develop	all	three	levels
	equally
(physical,	psychological,	and	spiritual).	The	rising	of	the	kundalini	can,	in	truth,
manifest	in	all	the	symptomologies	listed	in	this	chapter	if	the	person	is	not
balanced	in	their	overall	understanding.
Contagious	Diseases
One	of	the	great	illusions	of	Western	medicine	is	the	concept	of	contagious
disease.	There	is	no	such	thing.	There	are	only	people	with	low	resistance.
	This
applies	on	the	physical	as	well	as	the	psychological	level.	The	concept	of
contagious	diseases	was	invented	by	a	person	with	victim	consciousness.	We
each	are	God	and	the	cause	not	the	effect	of	anything	outside	of	ourselves.	This
applies	to	the	negativity	of	others	as	well	as	the	bacteria	or	virus	infections	of
others.	There	is	no	disease	that	is	contagious	if	you	are	in	balance	and,	hence,
have	a	strong	immune	system.	Disease	cannot	grow	in	a	healthy	body
environment.	Even	in	regards	to	AIDS,	not	all	people	who	are	exposed	to	AIDS
get	it.
Cancer
Cancer	basically	has	to	do	with	a	disintegration	of	certain	cells	in	the	body.
This	whole	book	is	really	dealing	with	the	need	for	balance	and	integration	of
one’s	psychoepistemology,	archetypes,	rays,	feminine	and	masculine
	energies,
and	so	on.	When	a	person	is	not	spiritually	psychologically,	and	physically
balanced	and	integrated	this	manifests	within	the	cells	because	of	the	Hermetic
Law,	as	within	so	without,	as	above	so	below.	Prolonged	lack	of	integration	and
balance	spiritually	and	psychologically	will	ultimately	manifest	physically.	Now
there	are	many	reasons	for	cancer.	Some	forms	can	result	from	physical	toxins
such	as	prolonged	exposure	to	pesticides,	or	radiation.	Some	forms	of	cancer	can
come	from	energetic	poisoning	like	electrical	power	lines	or	prolonged	use	of
cellular	phones,	or	police	officers	using	those	radar	guns.	Other	times	it	can
come	from	the	emotional	body	and	prolonged	running	on	negative	emotions	that
eventually	debilitate	certain	cellular	structure.
It	can	result	from	the	mental
	body	and	prolonged	negative	thinking.	It	can
come	from	the	spiritual	body	in	the	sense	of	prolonged	lack	of	integration	and
fusion	with	the	soul	and	Spirit.	Living	in	a	bad	marriage	or	in	a	job	you	dislike
can	take	a	toll	on	the	body.	Improper	nutrition,	or	prolonged	use	of	alcohol	or
drugs.	Anyone	of	these	things	or	a	mixture	of	these	can	be	the	cause.	Sometimes
cancer	is	a	past	life	karmic
	lesson.	The	Masters	said	that	sometimes	the	cancer	is
the	body’s	reaction	to	prolonged	affect	from	alien	implants,	and	negative
elementals.	Tumors	are	often	formed	around	these	areas.	This	again	is	an
example	of	the	shortcomings	of	Western	medicine	who	may	cut	out	the	cancer,
but	since	the	implants	and	elementals	are	still	there	it	just	grows	back	again.
The	Masters	basically	said	that	all
	disease	has	to	do	with	negative	elementals
or	aberrant	thoughtforms.	Disease	is	the	physical	manifestation	of	negative	ego
thinking.	Perfect	health	is	the	manifestation	on	the	physical	level	of	Christ
thinking.	The	negative	thoughts	of	the	negative	ego	grow	in	the	mental	body,
which	creates	a	negative	feeling	in	the	emotional	body,	which	builds	negative
energy	in	the	etheric	body,	which	eventually
	manifests	into	the	physical
structure.
This	is	really	the	“law	of	manifestation,”	working	in	the	wrong	direction.	As
sons	and	daughters	of	God,	we	can’t	help	but	to	manifest	every	moment	of	our
lives.	The	question	is	not	whether	we	can	manifest,	but	rather	what	are	we
manifesting.	It	is	just	as	easy	to	manifest	health	as	sickness;	it	is	just	a	matter	of
choice.	As	
A	Course	In	Miracles	
says,
	“Sickness	is	a	defense	against	the	truth.”
The	truth	is	that	each	one	of	us	is	the	Christ,	Buddha,	the	Eternal	Self	and
perfection	is	our	divine	birthright	if	we	will	just	claim	it.
Cancer	can	also	be	genetically	predisposed.	One	way	to	remedy	this	is	to	ask
the	Masters	to	clear	your	entire	genetic	line,	and	to	know	that	you	do	not	have	to
be	a	victim	of	family	genetics	either.	This	is	a
	choice	also	which	most	people
aren’t	aware	they	have.	One	of	the	best	cancer	preventatives	is	to	ask	the
Arcturians	to	clear	all	cancers	in	the	entire	body	from	the	etheric,	mental,
emotional,	and	physical	fields.
Another	cancer	preventative	from	Edgar	Cayce	is	to	eat	six	almonds	a	day.
Apparently,	almonds	have	some	ingredient	in	them	that	repels	cancer.	Hanna
Kroeger,	the	renowned	herbalist,
	says	that	a	fungus	causes	cancer	and	that	she
has	herbal	remedies	that	will	clear	this	up	in	a	matter	of	weeks.	The	main	thing
is	to	work	on	all	levels	in	a	holistic	and	synergistic	approach
19
The	Psychological	Causes	of	Disease	
by
Djwhal	Khul	
	
To	begin	this	chapter	I	thought	the	best	way	to	start	would	be	to	quote	Djwhal
Khul’s	first	law	of	healing	as	stated	in	the	Alice	Bailey	book	
Esoteric	Healing
:
“All	disease	is	the	result	of	inhibited	soul	life,	and	that	is	true	of	all	forms	in	all
kingdoms.	The	art	of	the	healer	consists	in	releasing	the	soul,	so	that	its	life
	can
flow	through	the	aggregate	of	organisms	which	constitute	any	particular	form.”
All	initiates	of	the	Great	White	Brotherhood	are	healers.	Not	all	initiates	may
work	on	healing	the	physical	body,	however	all	initiates	are	transmitters	of
spiritual	energy.	The	four	bodies	that	need	healing	are	the	physical,	etheric,
astral,	and	mental.
Djwhal	Khul	says	that	90%	of	the	causes	of	physical
	disease	occurs	within	the
etheric	and	astral	body.	This	is	because	most	people	in	the	world	are	still
emotionally	polarized	or	identified.	In	a	million	years	hence,	when	the	human
attention	is	more	focused	collectively	in	the	mind,	then	the	cause	of	disease	will
have	to	be	sought	in	the	mind	realm.
The	first	work	of	any	group	of	healers	is	to	establish	themselves	in	love	and	to
work	towards
	group	unity	and	understanding.	The	two	qualities	of	any	true
healer	are	“magnetism	and	radiation”.	The	healer	must	be	magnetic	to	his	own
soul,	to	those	he	would	help,	and	to	the	energies	needed	to	stimulate	a
transformation	within	the	client.	The	healer	must	then	understand	how	to	radiate
soul	energy,	which	will	stimulate	into	activity	the	soul	of	the	one	to	be	healed.
The	radiation	of	the	mind
	of	the	healer	will	illumine	the	mind	and	will	of	the
patient.	The	healthy	radiation	of	the	astral	and	etheric	body	of	the	healer	will
work	in	a	likewise	fashion	upon	the	patient.
All	disease	is	caused	by	a	lack	of	harmony.	Disease	results	as	a	lack	of
alignment	between	soul	and	form,	and/or	subjective	and	objective	reality.	Lack
of	harmony,	which	we	call	disease,	affects	all	four	kingdoms
	of	nature.	The
outer	environmental	causes	of	disease	are	four-fold,	according	to	Djwhal.	They
are	accidents,	infections,	disease	due	to	malnutrition,	and	heredity.
The	psychological	causes	of	disease	are	also	four-fold.	These	are:
1.			Those	coming	from	the	emotional	and	feeling	nature.
2.			Those	that	have	their	origin	in	the	etheric	body.
3.			Those	based	on	wrong	thought.
4.			Those	complaints	unique	to	disciples	and	initiates.
Much	of	the	failure	of	the	healing	methods	people	use	come	from	the
following	reasons:
1.			Inability	to	locate	what	body	the	trouble	is	stemming	from.
2.			Knowing	where	the	patient	stands	upon	the	ladder	of	evolution.
3.			Inability	to	differentiate	whether	the	disease	is	from	inner	personal
conditions,	inherited
	tendencies,	or	group	karma	of	some	kind.
4.			Inability	on	the	healer’s	part	to	know	if	the	problem	should	be	dealt	with
allopathically,	homeopathically,	through	right	inner	psychological
adjustment,	through	soul	power,	or	through	occult	methods	invoking	the
help	of	a	Master.
Djwhal	says	that	healing	is	brought	about	basically	through	three	ways.
1.			Through	methods	of	traditional
	medicine	and/or	surgery.
2.			Through	the	use	of	psychology.
3.			Through	the	activity	of	the	soul.
It	is	the	astral	body	for	the	majority	of	mankind	that	is	the	outstanding	cause
of	ill	health.	The	reason	is	that	it	has	such	a	potent	affect	on	the	person’s	etheric
body,	which	is	the	energy	body	and	battery	for	the	physical	body.
Basically	we	are	speaking	here	of	uncontrolled
	and	ill-regulated	emotions	such
as	fear,	worry,	irritation,	anger,	criticism,	hatred,	superiority	and	inferiority
complex,	and	so	on.	It	is	the	corollary	of	the	astral	body,	which	is	lower-self
desire,	which	leads	people	to	over-eat	and	drink.	Poor	diet,	hence,	has	its	cause
in	the	astral	body.	Other	diseases	caused	by	the	desire	body	are	the	sexual
diseases	and	over-indulgence	in	sexuality,
	which	has	a	weakening	effect	on	the
etheric	and	physical	vehicles.
The	true	healer	needs	to	be	trained	not	only	in	healing,	but	also	in	psychology,
medical	matters,	and	esoteric	knowledge.	Your	average	medical	doctor	has
absolutely	no	understanding	of	the	etheric	body	or	the	chakras,	let	alone	the	soul.
The	esoteric	healer	needs	to	be	more	aware	of	the	physical	earth	plane
knowledge	that
	the	doctor	has.
Disease	is	most	definitely	a	purification	process	when	looked	at	esoterically.
Traditional	doctors	must	understand	that	disease	may	be	a	gradual	and	slow
process	of	the	soul	withdrawing	from	the	body	to	free	it	for	other	service.	The
overwhelming	desire	to	keep	the	physical	body	alive,	by	most	traditional
medical	doctors,	is	not	always	appropriate.
The	astral	body	is
	the	cause	of	most	disease	because	it	is	the	body	the	bulk	of
humanity	is	centering	their	consciousness	in.	It	is	also	the	most	developed	of	the
bodies	being	the	latest	to	develop	in	collective	mankind.	It	reached	its	high	point
of	development	in	Atlantean	days.	This	is	also	augmented	by	the	energy	coming
from	the	animal	kingdom,	which	is	entirely	astral	in	its	point	of	attainment.
Although	we	are
	in	the	Aryan	root	race,	the	mass	of	humanity	has	not	achieved	a
mental	polarization	and	identification	yet.
The	Three	Major	Diseases
The	three	major	groups	of	diseases,	according	to	Djwhal	Khul,	are
tuberculosis,	the	sexually	transmitted	diseases	(venereal,	syphilis,	AIDS),	and
cancer.	Two	other	diseases	which	Djwhal	says	affects	those	who	are	a	little
above	average	are	heart	diseases
	and	nervous	diseases.	These	five	groups,	and
there	are	various	subdivisions,	are	responsible	for	most	of	the	illness	of
humanity.	The	three	most	important	aspects	of	diagnosis	are	the	psychological,
the	work	of	the	endocrinologist,	and	the	physician.
Mankind	also	inherits	disease	from	four	basic	sources:
1.			From	his	own	past	in	this	life	or	past	lives.
2.			From	the	general
	racial	heritage	of	humanity.
3.			From	the	condition	of	planetary	life.
4.			From	parental	inherited	tendencies.
It	is	when	the	upper	chakras	above	the	diaphragm	are	awakened	that	a	long
series	of	lives	with	heart	and	nervous	system	lessons	occur.	These	have	been
called	diseases	of	the	mystics.
The	sexually	transmitted	diseases,	except	for	AIDS	(man-made	chemical
warfare
	experiment	gone	awry),	are	remnants	from	over-indulgence	in	Lemurian
times	when	man	was	totally	polarized	in	the	physical	vehicle.
Cancer	is	from	the	Atlantean	root	race	and	is	astrally	and	emotionally
connected.	Cancer	is	a	disease	of	inhibition	just	as	syphilitic	diseases	are	over-
expression,	and	overuse.
Tuberculosis	is	a	disease	of	the	Aryan	race,	although	began	in	later	Atlantean
times.	Tuberculosis	is	caused	by	the	shift	of	polarization	from	the	emotional
body	to	the	mental	body,	or	from	Atlantean	consciousness	to	the	Aryan
consciousness.	It	is	a	disease	of	depletion	of	the	emotional	body.
Cancer	came	from	the	shift	of	life	force	from	the	physical	polarization	to	the
emotional	polarization,	or	from	the	Lemurian	consciousness	to	the	Atlantean
consciousness.	As	the
	race	develops	tighter	emotional	control,	Djwhal	says,
cancer	will	begin	to	disappear.
Many	of	the	problems	of	humanity	are	caused	by	the	burial	of	sick,	diseased
bodies	in	the	soil	instead	of	cremating	them.	Djwhal	has	prophesied	that	in	the
New	Age	burial	for	bodies	will	be	outlawed,	and	cremation	will	become	the
norm.
Diseases	of	Worry	and	Irritation
Diseases	of	worry	and	irritation
	have	the	following	effects	on	people:
1.			The	lower	the	vitality	of	the	person,	the	more	susceptible	they	are	to
disease.
2.			The	connection	is	poor	in	certain	directions	or	aspects	of	the	equipment.
3.			The	connection	between	the	etheric	and	physical	body	is	so	loose	that	the
soul	has	very	little	control	over	its	vehicle.
4.			The	fourth	reason	is	the	opposite	of	the
	third.	The	etheric	body	is	too
closely	knit	with	the	personality	and	physical	vehicle.
The	third	cause	of	disease	in	the	etheric	body	is	the	overstimulation	of	the
chakras.	This,	of	course,	has	a	very	deleterious	affect	on	the	glands,	which
effects	the	blood	stream	and	all	the	organs.
Causes	of	Disease	Arising	Out	of	the	Mental	Body
The	first	cause	of	disease	from	the	mental
	body	is	from	“wrong	mental
attitudes.”	The	second	cause	is	mental	fanaticism	and	dominance	of	thought
forms.	The	third	cause	is	frustrated	idealism.
Diseases	of	Disciples
Most	of	these	diseases	arise	from	the	transferring	of	the	solar	plexus	energy
into	the	heart.	This	transfer	causes	stomach,	liver	and	respiratory	problems.
Djwhal	says	that	all	diseases	and	physical	difficulties	are
	caused	by	one	of	the
following	three	conditions:
1.			A	developed	soul	contact	which	produces	a	vitalization	of	all	the	chakras.
This	necessarily	produces	stress	and	strain	on	the	physical	body.
2.			The	attempt	of	the	personality	to	negate	soul	control.	The	stress	on	the
physical	body	here	is	obvious.
3.			A	shift	in	the	life	force	from	personality	to	soul	control,	or	from	lower
	self
to	higher	self,	which	causes	re-adjustment	problems	within	the	physical
vehicle.
Medicine	in	The	Next	Century
Medicine	in	the	next	century	will	focus	on	five	basic	premises:
1.			Preventive	medicine.
2.			Sound	sanitation.
3.			The	supply	of	right	chemical	properties	to	the	physical	body
4.			An	emphasis	on	understanding	the	laws	of	vitality,	vitamins	and
	minerals,
and	sunshine.
5.			The	use	of	the	mind	in	healing	will	be	regarded	above	all	else.
The	Four	Groups	of	Healers
In	the	future	there	will	need	to	be	much	more	synthesis	and	integration
between	the	following	four	groups	of	healers.	These	four,	as	described	by
Djwhal	Khul	in	the	Alice	Bailey	book	
Esoteric	Healing
,are:
1.			Physicians	and	surgeons
2.			Psychologists,
	neurologists,	and	psychiatrists
3.			Mental	healers,	new	thought	workers,	unity	thinkers	and	Christian	Science
practitioners
4.			Trained	disciples	and	initiates	who	work	with	the	souls	of	men
Liberation	and	Freedom
The	ideals	of	liberation	and	freedom	are	integral	to	achieving	perfect	health
for	an	individual	and	humanity	as	a	whole.	Djwhal	says	that	there	have	been	four
great	symbolic	happenings	in	the	past	2000	years	that	have	epitomized	the	theme
of	liberation.	These	are:
1.			The	life	of	Christ,	Himself.
2.			The	signing	of	the	Magna	Carta.
3.			The	emancipation	of	the	slaves.
4.			The	liberation	of	humanity	by	the	United	Nations.
Karma	and	Health
Djwhal	has	delineated	nine	types	of	karma.	These	are:
1.			Elementary
	group	karma	of	the	primitive	man.
2.			Individual	karma	of	the	self-conscious	developing	man.
3.			Karma	related	to	the	life	of	discipleship.
4.			Hierarchical	karma.
5.			Karma	of	retribution.
6.			Karma	of	reward.
7.			National	karma.
8.			Racial	karma.
9.			Educational	karma.
Karma	is	not	an	inevitable	and	inescapable	happening.	It	can	be
	offset,	where
disease	is	concerned,	by	four	lines	of	activity.	These	are:
1.			Determining	the	nature	of	the	cause	and	the	area	of	consciousness	where	it
originated.
2.			Developing	those	qualities	which	are	the	polar	opposite	of	the	effective
cause.
3.			Practicing	“harmlessness.”
4.			Mental	acceptance,	wise	action	along	medical	lines,	the	assistance	of	a
healer	or	healing
	group,	clear	soul	inspired	visualization	as	to	the	outcome.
This	could	mean	perfect	health	and	the	preparation	for	service	on	the	inner
plane.
How	to	Ascertain	Location	of	Congestion
Traditional	medical	testing	is	extremely	limited,	expensive,	and	doesn’t	deal
with	the	subtle	bodies	or	psychological	level,	so	it	is	not	really	useful	in	finding
the	location	of	congestion.	The
	three	methods	Djwhal	has	recommended,	which
will	be	much	more	in	practice	in	the	future,	are:
1.			Clairvoyance
2.			Clear	knowing,	which	is	a	soul	faculty.
3.			Occult	transference	or	occult	empathy,	where	the	healer	registers	the
patient’s	difficulty	in	their	own	body.
Causes	of	certain	types	of	diseases,	arthritis	and	diabetes,	have	their	origin	in
the	astral	body.	Diabetes
	is	the	result	of	wrong	inner	desires,	according	to
Djwhal.	This	can	originate	in	this	life	or	a	past	life.	Syphilis	and	arthritis	are
caused	by	over-indulgence	in	“physical	desire.”	Diseases	such	as	measles,
scarlet	fever,	smallpox,	and	cholera	have	their	cause	in	the	emotional	body.
Fever	is	an	indication	of	trouble	and	is	a	way	of	purifying	and	eliminating
impurities.	It	is	an	indicator,
	not	a	disease	in	itself.	This	is	why,	if	possible,	it	is
best	to	let	the	fever	have	its	way	for	a	time.	It	has	a	definite	therapeutic	value	as
long	as	it	is	not	too	high	temperature	wise,	nor	lasts	too	long.	Over-emotionalism
is	that	astral	correspondence	to	a	fever.	Over-mentalizing	is	the	mental	plane
correspondence	to	a	fever.
Germs
Where	there	is	an	inherent	weakness	in	the	physical
	body,	there	is	a
corresponding	weakness	in	life	force	in	that	area	of	the	etheric	body.	This
congestion	or	area	of	arrested	development	leaves	an	opening	for	germs	to	grow.
Where	the	vitality	is	strong	and	the	soul	and	life	force	is	flowing,	germs	cannot
grow.	I	repeat,	there	is	no	such	thing	as	contagious	disease.	There	are	only
people	with	low	resistance.
Humanity	is	one,	and	all	people,
	whether	they	have	Eastern	or	Western	bodies,
are	prone	to	the	same	diseases	and	symptoms.
Mental	Disease
The	major	causes	of	mental	disease,	according	to	Djwhal,	are:
1.			Disease	of	the	brain
2.			Disorders	of	the	solar	plexus
3.			Astral	domination
4.			Premature	clairvoyance	and	clairaudience
5.			Obsession
6.			Absence	of	mind
7.			Soulessness
The	Future	Schools	of	Healing
The	following	list	of	the	future	schools	of	healing	is	from	the	Alice	Bailey
book	
Esoteric	Healing
:
1.			Psychological	adjustments	and	healing
2.			Magnetic	healing
3.			Allopathic	healing
4.			Homeopathic	healing
5.			Surgical	healing	in	its	modern	forms
6.			Electro-therapeutics
7.			Water	therapy
8.		
	Healing	by	color	and	sound	and	radiation.
9.			Preventative	medicine
10.			Osteopathy	and	chiropractic
11.			Scientific	neurology	and	psychiatry
12.			The	cure	of	obsessions	and	mental	diseases
13.			The	care	of	the	eyes	and	ears
14.			Voice	culture
15.			Mental	and	faith	healing
16.			Soul	alignment	and	contact
The	Rays	and	Disease
The	syphilitic	diseases	are	due	to	a	misuse	of	the	third	ray	energy.
Tuberculosis	is	a	result	of	the	misuse	of	the	second	ray	energy.	Cancer	is	a
misuse	of	the	first	ray	energy.
The	Basic	Requirements	of	Healing
Djwhal	Khul	has	enumerated	ten	basic	prerequisites	for	healing.	They	are	as
follows:
1.			The	recognition	of	the	great	law	of	cause	and	effect.
2.			Correct	diagnosis
	of	the	disease	by	a	competent	doctor	and	spiritual
clairvoyant.
3.			A	belief	in	the	law	of	immediate	karma.	This	means	knowing	whether	it	is
one’s	destiny	to	be	healed	or	make	one’s	transition	to	the	spiritual	plane.
4.			A	recognition	that	healing	of	the	physical	body	might	be	detrimental	from
the	desire	of	the	soul.	In	other	words,	the	soul	might	want	the	physical	body
to	die.
5.			The	active	cooperation	of	the	healer	and	the	patient.
6.			A	complete	acceptance	by	the	patient	of	the	dictates	of	the	soul.
7.			An	effort	on	the	part	of	the	healer	and	patient	to	express	harmlessness.
8.			An	effort	by	the	patient	to	hold	a	spiritual	attitude	instead	of	a	negative
egotistical	attitude.
9.			The	deliberate	elimination	of	qualities,	thoughts,	and
	desires	that	might	be
hindering	the	inflow	of	spiritual	force.
10.			The	capacity	of	the	healer	and	patient	to	integrate	into	the	soul	group.
It	is	of	the	highest	importance	for	people	and/or	patients	to	remember	that
continuance	of	life	in	the	physical	body	is	not	the	highest	possible	goal.
Djwhal	Khul,	in	the	Alice	Bailey	book	called	
Esoteric	Healing
,	has	listed
fifteen	qualities
	required	by	a	healer.	Do	remember	that	all	disciples	on	the	path
are	healers,	for	all	disciples	channel	spiritual	energy.
15	Qualities	Required	by	a	Healer
1.			The	power	to	contact	and	work	as	a	soul.	“The	art	of	the	healer	consists	in
releasing	the	soul.”
2.			The	power	to	command	the	spiritual	will.
3.			The	power	to	establish	telepathic	rapport.	This	has	to	do	with
	the	healer
knowing	the	inner	thoughts	and	desires	of	the	patient	intuitively.
4.			He	must	have	exact	knowledge.	This	quality	has	to	do	with	understanding
the	knowledge	of	how	to	contact	and	invoke	the	soul	and	receive
impressions.	This	is	the	exact	science	of	knowledge	the	healer	must	have.
5.			The	power	to	reverse,	reorient,	and	exalt	the	consciousness	of	the	patient.
The	healer
	must	become	proficient	as	to	“lifting	the	downward	focused	eyes
unto	the	soul.”
6.			The	power	to	direct	soul	energy	to	the	necessary	area.
7.			The	power	to	express	magnetic	purity	and	the	needed	radiance.
8.			Power	to	control	the	activity	of	the	mechanism	of	the	head.	This	has	to	do
with	linking	the	minor	chakra	centers	in	the	head.
9.			Power	of	the	chakras.
10.			Power	to	utilize	both	exoteric	and	esoteric	methods	of	healing.
11.			Power	to	work	magnetically.	This	means	to	be	able	to	magnetically	draw
the	power	of	the	soul	and	spirit	through	oneself	as	a	channel	for	the	healing
of	the	patient.
12.			Power	to	work	with	radiation.	This	is	the	power	to	not	only	receive	soul
energy,	but	to	send	it.
13.			Power	to	practice	at	all	times
	complete	harmlessness.
14.			Power	to	control	the	will	and	work	through	love.
15.			Power	to	eventually	wield	the	law	of	life.	This	ability	comes	when	ones
merger	with	the	spiritual	triad	(spiritual	will,	intuition,	Higher	Mind)	is
achieved.	The	spiritual	triad	merges	with	the	three-fold	personality.	Third
Initiation	is	soul	fusion.	This	would	be	monadic	fusion,	at	fifth	and	sixth
initiations.
The	Healer	and	His	Attunement
The	healer	in	the	New	Age	will	have	the	ability	to	make	the	following	contacts
with	great	ease:
1.			With	his	own	soul.
2.			With	the	soul	of	his	patient.
3.			With	the	particular	type	of	energy	in	the	soul	or	personality	ray	of	the
patient.
4.			With	his	own	chakra	that	is	needed	in	any	given	healing	for	transmitting
spiritual	energy.
5.			With	the	chakra	in	the	patient’s	etheric	body	which	controls	the	area	where
the	disease	is	located.
A	person’s	disease	is	subject	to	three	influences:
1.			A	person’s	past	ancient	errors.
2.			A	person’s	inheritance.
3.			His	sharing	with	all	natural	forms,	which	the	Lord	of	Life	imposes	on	his
body.
The	Healer	and	His	Ability	To	Diagnose
There	are	four	aspects	to	a	healer’s	ability	to	diagnose	a	proper	treatment	for
his	patient.	These	are:
1.			The	healer	must	train	himself	to	know	whether	a	patient	is	mentally	or
emotionally	based.
2.			He	must	be	able	to	ascertain	the	psychological	basis	of	the	problem.
3.			This	will	then	lead	to	his	ability	to	find	the	location	of	the	disease.
4.			This	will	allow
	him	to	know	the	area	affected,	and	the	chakra	in
When	a	patient	is	a	mental	type,	the	approach	must	be	through	a	higher	center,
in	the	crown	chakra.	The	healer	must	learn	the	following	eight	principles	in
relationship	to	himself:
1.			Rapid	alignment	between	the	soul,	mind,	crown	chakra,	and	physical
brain.
2.			The	use	of	the	mind,	illumined	by	the	soul,	in	psychological	diagnosis.
3.			Methods	for	establishing	a	sympathetic	rapport	with	the	patient.
4.			Methods	of	protecting	himself	during	the	transfer	of	energy	brought	about
by	this	rapport.
5.			The	establishing	of	a	right	relationship	with	the	patient.
6.			Physical	diagnosis,	and	the	locating	of	the	area	to	which	relief	must	come,
via	the	controlling	of	the	chakra.
7.			The	art	of	cooperation
	with	the	patient’s	soul	so	the	etheric	body	focuses
all	its	infIowing	energies	in	order	to	bring	relief	to	the	diseased	area.
8.			The	technique	of	withdrawing	his/her	healing	power	when	the	patient	is
stabilized.
The	Third	Eye	and	The	Perfected	Man
In	the	perfected	person	the	following	relationships	can	be	found,	as	described
by	Djwhal	Khul	in	the	Alice	Bailey	book	
Esoteric
	Healing
:
1.			The	eye	of	the	soul–The	agent	of	the	spiritual	triad–Will
2.			The	third	eye–Agent	of	the	soul–Love
3.			The	right	eye–The	distributor	of	Buddhic	energy
4.			The	left	eye–Conveyor	of	pure	manasic	(mind)	energy.
5.			The	ajna	center–Focusing	and	directing	point	for	all	these	energies.
In	the	disciple	who	is	beginning	to	function	as	a	soul,	it	is
	interesting	to	see	the
differences.
1.			Third	eye–Distributor	of	soul	energy.
2.			The	right	eye–Agent	for	astral	energy.
3.			The	left	eye–Agent	for	lower	mental	energy.
4.			The	ajna	center–Focusing	point	of	these	three	energies.
The	Laws	and	Rules	of	Healing
In	this	part	I	am	just	directly	quoting	with	no	explanation,	the	nine	laws,	and
six	rules	of	healing
	according	to	Djwhal	Khul	as	transcribed	by	Alice	Bailey	in
her	book	called	
Esoteric	Healing
.	Some	of	the	laws	are	a	little	esoteric	and	hard
to	understand	at	points,	however	some	of	the	truths	are	so	profound	that	I
thought	it	would	be	worth	the	reader’s	time	to	place	them	in	this	chapter.	For	a
greater	explanation	of	these	laws,	for	those	who	want	to	learn	more,	do	read
Alice	Bailey’s	book.
LAW	I
All	disease	is	the	result	of	inhibited	soul	life.	This	is	true	of	all	forms	in	all
kingdoms.	The	art	of	the	healer	consists	in	releasing	the	soul	so	that	its	life	can
flow	through	the	aggregate	of	organisms,	which	constitute	any	particular	form.
LAW	II
Disease	is	the	product	of	and	subject	to	three	influences:
First,	a	man’s	past,	wherein	he	pays	the	price	of
	ancient	error	(reincarnational
history);
Second,	his	inheritance,	wherein	he	shares	with	all	mankind	those	tainted
streams	of	energy	which	are	of	group	origin	(racial-cultural	history);
Third,	he	shares	with	all	the	natural	forms	that	which	the	Lord	of	Life	imposes
on	His	body.	These	three	influences	are	called	the	“Ancient	Law	of	Evil
Sharing.”	This	must	give	place	some	day	to	that
	new	“Law	of	Ancient
Dominating	Good”which	lies	behind	all	that	God	has	made.	This	law	must	be
brought	into	activity	by	the	spiritual	will	of	man.
Rule	One
Let	the	healer	train	himself	to	know	the	inner	stage	of	thought	or	of	desire	of
the	one	who	seeks	his	help.	He	can	thereby	know	the	source	from	whence	the
trouble	comes.	Let	him	relate	the	cause	and	the	effect	and	know	the	exact
	point
through	relief	must	come.
LAW	III
Disease	is	an	effect	of	the	basic	centralization	of	a	man’s	life	energy.	From	the
plane	whereon	those	energies	are	focused	proceed	those	determining	conditions
which	produce	ill	health.	These	therefore	work	out	as	disease	or	as	freedom	from
disease.
LAW	IV
Disease,	both	physical	and	psychological,	has	its	roots	in	the	good,	the
beautiful
	and	the	true.	It	is	but	a	distorted	reflection	of	Divine	possibilities.	The
thwarted	soul,	seeking	full	expression	of	some	divine	characteristic	or	inner
spiritual	reality,	produces	within	the	substance	of	its	sheaths,	a	point	of	friction.
Upon	this	point,	the	eyes	of	the	personality	are	focused	and	this	leads	to	disease.
The	art	of	the	healer	is	concerned	with	the	lifting	of	the	downward
	focused	eyes
into	the	soul,	the	Healer	within	the	form.	The	spiritual	or	third	eye	then	directs
the	healing	force	and	all	is	well.
Rule	Two
The	healer	must	achieve	magnetic	purity,	through	purity	of	life.	He	must	attain
that	dispelling	radiance	which	shows	itself	in	every	man	when	he	has	linked	the
centers	in	the	head.	When	this	magnetic	field	is	established,	the	radiation	then
goes
	forth.
LAW	V
There	is	naught	but	energy,	for	God	is	Life.	Two	energies	meet	in	man,	but
another	five	are	present	(seven	rays-seven	chakras).	For	each	is	to	be	found	a
central	point	of	contact.	The	conflict	of	these	energies	with	forces	and	of	forces
twixt	themselves,	produce	the	bodily	ills	of	men.	The	conflict	of	the	first	and
second	(the	soul	and	personality)	persists	for	ages	until
	the	mountaintop	is
reached–the	first	great	mountaintop.	The	fight	between	the	forces	produces	all
disease,	all	ills	and	bodily	pain	which	seek	release	in	death.	The	two,	the	five
and	thus	the	seven,	plus	that	which	they	produce,	possess	the	secret.	This	is	the
Fifth	Law	of	Healing	within	the	world	of	form.
Rule	Three
Let	the	healer	concentrate	the	needed	energy	within	the	needed	center.
	Let	the
center	correspond	to	the	center	which	has	need.	Let	the	two	synchronize	and
together	augment	force.	Thus	shall	the	waiting	form	be	balanced	in	its	works.
Thus	shall	the	two	and	the	one,	under	right	direction,	heal.
LAW	VI
When	life	or	energy	flows	unimpeded	and	through	right	direction	to	its
precipitation	(the	related	gland),	then	the	form	responds	and	ill	health
disappears.
Rule	Four
A	careful	diagnosis	of	disease,	based	on	the	ascertained	outer	symptoms,	will
be	simplified	to	this	extent–that	once	the	organ	involved	is	known	and	thus
isolated,	the	center	in	the	etheric	body	which	is	in	closest	relation	to	it	will	be
subjected	to	methods	of	occult	healing	though	the	ordinary,	ameliorative,
medical	or	surgical	methods	and	will	not	be	withheld.
LAW
	VII
Disease	and	death	are	the	results	of	two	active	forces.	One	is	the	will	of	the
soul,	which	says	to	its	instrument,	“I	draw	the	essence	back.”	the	other	is	the
magnetic	power	of	the	planetary	life,	which	says	to	the	life	within	the	atomic
structure,	“The	hour	of	reabsorption	has	arrived.	Return	to	me.”	Thus,	under
cyclic	law,	do	all	forms	act.
Rule	Five
The	healer	must	seek
	to	link	his	soul,	his	heart,	his	brain,	and	his	hands.	Thus
can	his	presence	feed	the	soul	life	of	the	patient.	
This	is	the	work	of	radiation.
The	hands	are	not	needed;	the	soul	displays	its	power.	The	patient’s	soul
responds	through	the	response	of	his	aura	to	the	radiation	of	the	healer’s	aura,
flooded	with	soul	energy.
LAW	VIII
Perfection	calls	imperfection	to	the	surface.	Good
	drives	evil	from	the	form	of
man	in	time	and	space.	The	method	used	by	the	Perfect	One	and	that	employed
by	Good,	is	harmlessness.	This	is	not	lack	of	negativity	but	perfect	poise,	a
completed	point	of	view	and	Divine	understanding.
Rule	Six
The	healer	or	the	healing	group	must	keep	the	will	in	leash.	It	is	not	will	that
must	be	used,	but	love.
LAW	IX
Harken,	O	Disciple,
	to	the	call	which	comes	from	the	Son	to	the	Mother	(soul
to	body),	and	then	obey.	The	Word	goes	forth	that	form	has	served	its	purpose.
The	principle	of	mind	then	organizes	itself	and	then	repeats	that	Word.	The
waiting	form	responds	and	drops	away.	The	soul	stands	free.
Respond,	O	Rising	One,	to	the	call	which	comes	within	the	sphere	of
obligation:	recognize	the	call	emerging	for	Ashram
	or	the	Council	Chambers
(heart	center	or	head	center)	where	waits	the	Lord	of	Life	Himself.	The	Sound
goes	forth.	Both	soul	and	form	together	must	renounce	the	principle	of	life	and
thus	permit	the	Monad	to	stand	free.	The	soul	responds.	The	form	then	shatters
the	connection.	Life	is	now	liberated,	owning	the	quality	of	conscious
knowledge	and	the	fruit	of	all	experience.	These	are	the	gifts	of	soul
	and	form
combined.	This	last	law	is	the	enunciation	of	a	new	law	which	is	substituted	for
the	law	of	Death,	and	which	has	reference	only	to	those	upon	the	latter	stages	of
the	Path	of	Discipleship	and	the	stages	upon	the	Path	of	Initiation.”
Summation
One	more	time	I	wish	to	acknowledge	that	the	information	for	this	chapter	was
garnished	from	the	Alice	Bailey	book	
Esoteric	Healing	
which	I	highly
recommend	for	those	who	would	like	to	take	even	a	deeper	look	at	this	subject.
We	all	owe	a	great	debt	to	Alice	Bailey	for	the	wonderful	telepathic	information
she	was	able	to	bring	forth	from	Djwhal	Khul	on	this	subject!
20
A	Battleplan	as	to	How	to	Deal	with	Chronic
Health	Problems	
	
This	particular	chapter	is	an	extremely	important	chapter	in	this	book.	I	would
venture	to	guess	that	50%	of	all	lightworkers	suffer	from	some	kind	of	chronic
health	lesson.	In	a	person’s	entire	lifetime	on	Earth,	probably	99%	of	all	people
will	have	chronic	health	lessons	at	some	point.	Every	person	on	planet	Earth,
except
	maybe	the	descent	of	an	Avatar	such	as	Sai	Baba	and	Lord	Maitreya,	has
some	weakness	in	the	four-body	system.	I	have	never	met	a	single	person	in	my
entire	life	that	doesn’t,	including	myself.
Some	people	have	a	weakness	in	their	physical	vehicle	in	some	area.	Some
have	a	weakness	in	their	emotional	vehicle.	Some	in	the	mental	vehicle.	Others
in	their	spiritual	vehicle.	And	others	have	a
	weakness	in	their	bank	account.	If
this	weren’t	the	case,	you	probably	would	not	be	incarnated	on	this	planet.
Part	of	the	reason	for	the	physical	health	problems	is	also	a	spiritual	one.
Spiritual	evolution	is	moving	so	quickly	that	certain	health	problems	are
unavoidable	and	are	just	a	byproduct	of	growing	spiritually	so,	in	truth	maybe
consider	it	a	good	sign.	Other	reasons	for	health
	problems	are	all	the
environmental	pollution,	pesticides,	car	exhaust,	water	pollution,	metals
poisoning,	and	the	like.	Another	reason	is	that	this	is	a	very	tough	school	and
keeping	the	mental	body,	emotional	body,	physical	body,	and	spiritual	body	all
balanced	all	the	time	is	no	easy	task.
Add	to	that	the	enormous	amount	of	psychic	negativity	we	all	have	to	deal
with	living	on	this	planet
	and	which	we	see	on	television	and	the	mass	media.
Then	add	to	this	all	the	past	life	karma	that	we	are	processing	that	can	debilitate
the	body	when	wanting	to	move	fast	on	the	spiritual	path.	Add	to	this	the	genetic
weaknesses	we	come	in	with	from	past	lives	and	our	genetic	heritage.	Add	to
this	still	the	fact	that	we	must	process	the	karma	from	our	twelve	soul	extensions
from	our	oversoul	and
	then	must	process	the	144	soul	extensions	from	our
monad	in	terms	of	integrating	and	cleansing	their	karma.	Then	we	have	to	deal
with	the	collective	consciousness	karma.
We	all	live	in	a	gray	cloud	of	astral	debris	that	surrounds	this	planet.	The	same
is	true	of	the	etheric	body,	mental	body,	and	physical	body	of	this	planet.	On	the
physical	level,	this	is	called	smog,	pollution,	gigantic
	holes	in	the	ozone	layer,
and	depletion	of	rain	forests.	The	food	we	buy	from	the	market	is	dead	and
processed.	The	meat	is	filled	with	chemicals.	The	chickens	have	cancer	and
salmonella	bacteria.	Our	food	is	being	nuked	by	radiation	and	the	FDA	has
approved	this.	There	is	a	fast	food	restaurant	on	every	corner.	People	eat	way	too
much	sugar.	The	produce	is	not	energized	because	the	nature	spirits
	do	not
inhabit	the	farms	because	of	the	use	of	pesticides	and	man’s	inability	to	work
with	nature.	Even	the	produce	contains	only	10%	of	the	energy	it	should.
People	then	don’t	clear,	pray,	and	energize	their	food	before	they	eat	it	with
some	kind	of	soma	board,	energy	plate,	or	formal	prayer	procedure.	Although	it
may	look	healthy,	90%	of	the	time	it	will	have	a	negative	spin	on	it	if	you
	tested
it	with	a	pendulum.	That	is	because	of	pesticides,	the	people	who	have	touched	it
in	the	market,	or	because	of	the	red	radar	that	is	pumped	through	it	at	the	grocery
counter.	Added	to	this	is	the	fact	that	most	people	don’t	have	good	habits	of	food
combining	and	overeating,	or	just	laziness	in	regards	to	diet.	In	addition	is	the
enormous	amount	of	stress	we	are	all	under	in	our	modern	day
	society,	with
workaholic	tendencies.	We	also	have	to	deal	with	alien	implants	and	dark	force
attack	at	times.
The	effects	of	occasional	negative	thinking,	worrying,	family	responsibilities,
money	pressures,	negative	imprints,	lack	of	self	love,	and	relationship	problems,
are	more	factors.	All	these	things	cause	a	weakening	of	the	immune	system	over
time.	Then	we	have	accidents	of	innumerable
	kinds	that	take	a	toll	on	the	body,
and	other	traumas	such	as	divorces,	deaths	in	the	family	and	lost	jobs.	We	have
damage	to	the	etheric	body	from	past	lives	that	has	not	been	repaired	which
causes	people	to	be	working	off	an	imperfect	blueprint.	Imbalanced
psychoepistemologies,	which	are	pretty	much	universal	with	everybody,	also
take	a	toll	on	the	physical	body.
We	also	have	to	fight
	off	all	the	negative	suggestions	that	get	into	the
subconscious	mind,	such	as	in	winter	time	the	television	ads	that	say	flu	season
is	here.	One	has	to	remain	constantly	vigilant	to	not	let	the	subconscious	mind	be
programmed	by	all	these	negative	suggestions	of	people,	friends,	coworkers,
family	members	and	mass	media.	People	are	getting	sick	all	the	time	around	us
with	colds,	flu,	bacteria	infections,
	and	viruses.
It	is	true	that	there	is	no	such	thing	as	a	contagious	disease	only	low	resistance,
however	the	problem	is	most	people	have	a	lowered	immune	system	from	all	the
above	mentioned	factors.	If	you	live	in	a	big	city	you	can	add	the	sound
pollution	which	takes	a	toll	much	more	then	you	realize.	Take	for	example	car
alarms.	If	sound	can	heal,	what	does	a	car	alarm	do?	Most	spiritual
	people	are
very	sensitive,	much	more	than	the	average	person,	and	it	can	be	very	difficult
living	in	a	world	such	as	this.
A	lot	of	lightworkers	not	used	to	doing	such	things	as	having	to	make	money
and	be	the	spiritual	warrior	they	have	to	be	to	just	make	it.
People	with	kids	have	an	even	greater	burden.	Then	we	have	modern	day
plagues	such	as	AIDS	and	Epstein	Bar.	The	problem	is
	our	environment	doesn’t
really	support	us	because	so	much	of	it	is	based	on	third	dimensional	not	fifth
dimensional	consciousness.	Given	all	these	factors	it	is	amazing	and	miraculous
that	our	physical	bodies	hold	us	up	as	well	as	they	do.
Another	thing	to	factor	in	here	is	the	higher	one	evolves	the	quicker	your
karma	returns	and	the	more	sensitive	you	become.	Where	as	a	child	or
adolescent
	you	could	eat	a	bag	of	cookies	and	ice	cream	and	feel	fine.	Now	one
cookie	may	foul	you	up	or	make	you	not	feel	right.	Also	the	older	one	gets	the
more	careful	one	must	be.	In	our	busy	society	most	people	don’t	exercise
enough,	get	enough	sunshine	and	fresh	air,	and	don’t	eat	as	well	as	they	should.	I
could	go	on	and	on	and	on.
You	should	congratulate	your	physical	body	and	body	elemental
	for	holding
up	as	well	as	it	has.	God	forbid	you	do	get	sick	and	you	have	to	stay	in	a
hospital.	With	all	the	terrible	energy,	terrible	food,	and	narrow-minded
physicians	it	is	amazing	people	ever	recover.
Another	factor	here	is	that	the	higher	one	evolves	in	the	initiation	process	the
more	planetary	karma	they	begin	processing	through	their	system.	This	is	part	of
the	responsibility	of
	becoming	an	Ascended	Master	and	cannot	be	completely
avoided.	People	in	the	healing	professions	often	take	on	karma	of	their	students
and	patients,	not	only	during	sessions,	but	often	at	night	while	they	sleep.	So
much	goes	on	at	night	on	the	inner	plane	that	people	don’t	recognize.
The	most	important	thing	is	to	not	look	at	disease	or	ill	health	as	a	bad	thing,
for	it	is	not.	It	is	just
	a	teaching	lesson,	challenge,	and	opportunity	to	grow.
Earlier	in	my	life,	I	almost	died	from	a	very	serious	case	of	hepatitis.	In	the	long
run,	as	I	look	back	I	would	never	be	in	the	place	I	am	now	if	I	hadn’t	gotten	so
ill.	Illness	teaches	us	obedience	to	God’s	Laws.	This	experience	completely
changed	my	life	forever.
One	of	the	most	difficult	lessons	in	this	world	is	dealing	with	chronic
	health
lessons.	I	personally	have	great	compassion	for	people	who	deal	with	this	for	I
have	dealt	with	it	myself.	It	is	hard	for	people	who	have	never	dealt	with	chronic
health	lessons	to	understand.	As	I	said	earlier	their	lessons	may	be	on	emotional,
mental,	spiritual	or	financial	levels	which	can	be	as	great	a	hardship	and
sometimes	even	worse.
Lesson	1
The	first	most	important
	lesson	is	that	health	problems	are	not	bad.	They	are
good,	for	they	are	teaching	you	something	you	need	to	learn.	Djwhal	Khul	says
disease	is	a	purification	process.	If	looked	at	properly	it	will	help	you	to	become
stronger.	If	looked	at	properly	it	will	accelerate	your	spiritual	growth.
Lesson	2
When	dealing	with	chronic	health	problems	first	look	at	it	as	a	blessing	in
disguise	and
	a	teacher,	secondly	and	most	importantly	do	not	give	your	power	to
your	physical	body.	This	is	the	great	error	of	faulty	thinking	that	most	people
make.	They	see	their	personal	power	as	being	connected	to	their	physical	vitality
and	wakefulness.	When	they	get	tired	and	run	down	they	connect	their	personal
power	to	this.	A	most	important	thing	in	life	is	to	maintain	your	personal	power
at	all	times
	regardless	of	what	your	physical,	astral,	mental,	or	spiritual	bodies
are	doing.	As	the	Bhagavad-Gita	says,	“Remain	in	evenmindedness	whether	you
have	profit	or	loss,	victory	or	defeat,	sickness	or	health.”
God-consciousness	remains	the	same	regardless	of	the	state	of	health	or	lack
there	of.	I	cannot	emphasize	the	importance	of	this	more.	If	you	do	not	do	this
every	time	your	body	goes
	out,	your	emotional	and	mental	bodies	will	take	a
dive	bomb	with	it.
Lesson	3
Just	because	you	don’t	have	perfect	health	doesn’t	mean	you	can’t	have	a	life.
Many	people	have	cancer	and	live	very	full	and	effective	lives.
Many	people	have	arthritis	or	chronic	pain	and	still	live	full	and	active	lives.
Don’t	be	a	perfectionist.	If	you	wait	to	have	perfect	health	to	live,	you	just
	may
never	live.	Mother	Teresa	has	serious	heart	problems	and	look	at	all	she	does.	I
have	had	digestive	sensitivity	most	of	my	adult	life.	I	have	not	let	it	stop	me.	I
call	this	the	Saint	Francis	Initiation.	Saint	Francis	(Kuthumi	in	a	past	life)	had
enormous	health	lessons	yet	continued	to	serve.	This	concept	and	understanding
has	been,	in	the	past,	very	meaningful	to	me.	I	recognized	through
	this	that	I	was
being	tested	by	God.	If	you	have	health	lessons,	be	like	Saint	Francis	and
proudly	and	with	great	dignity	live	your	life.
I	remember	a	story	Yogananda	told	of	his	great	disciple	Sri	Gyanaata	who	had
20	years	of	chronic	health	problems.	When	she	finally	died	and	he	gave	his
eulogy	for	her	God	spoke	to	Yogananda	and	told	him	He	was	especially	proud	of
Sri	Gyanaata	for	she	served
	him	for	the	last	twenty	years	with	poor	health.
Lesson	4
The	next	lesson	for	those	with	chronic	health	lessons	of	some	kind	is	the	Job
initiation.	I	think	you	all	know	the	story	of	Job,	how	he	was	tested	by	God	and
the	devil	to	test	his	righteousness	in	the	Lord.	The	story	of	Job	is	the	story	of
each	person	on	this	planet	who	has	at	some	point	had	everything	stripped	away.
There	is
	not	a	soul	in	incarnation	that,	in	one	of	their	lives,	if	not	most	of	them,
has	not	gone	through	this	initiation.	Actually,	it	is	part	of	passing	the	fourth
initiation,	which	is	the	renunciation	initiation	and	the	lesson	of	letting	go	of
attachments.	When	the	Job	initiation	hits,	everything	is	lost.	Health	goes,	often
the	marriage	goes,	the	job	goes,	inner	peace	goes,	and	so	on	down	the	line	in	any
combination.	This	is	a	spiritual	test.
Every	person	can	serve	God	when	things	are	going	well.	How	many	people
keep	the	faith	and	righteousness	in	the	Lord	when	everything	goes	wrong?	This
is	the	true	test.	Money,	fame,	fortune,	relationship	health,	and	power	are	idol
worshipping	if	put	before	God.	After	suffering	greatly	Job	finally	realized	this
and	said,“Naked	I	come	from	my	mother’s	womb,
	and	naked	shall	I	go,	The
Lord	giveth	and	the	Lord	taketh	away,	blessed	be	the	name	of	the	Lord.”
If	your	health,	relationship,	fame,	money,	job,	even	life	were	taken	away,
could	you	make	this	statement?	See	the	things	that	happen	in	life,	even	chronic
illness,	as	spiritual	tests	given	to	you	by	God	to	test	your	faith.	This	will	advance
you	spiritually	like	no	other	spiritual	practice	you
	can	practice.	Remember	to
achieve	ascension	you	do	not	have	to	have	perfect	health.	I	myself	have	had	very
serious	chronic	health	problems	for	over	twelve	years	in	regards	to	my	liver	and
pancreas.	Yet	in	this	time	I	have	been	able	to	achieve	and	complete	my
ascension	and	have	been	given	a	major	position	in	the	spiritual	government.
Never	in	a	trillion	years	would	I	have	ever	dreamed	this	would
	be	offered	to	me.
But	I	have	used	my	health	lessons	to	forge	me	like	cosmic	fire	into	developing
super-human	mental,	emotional	and	spiritual	abilities	to	compensate	for	the
digestive	weakness.
Lesson	5
Focus	on	what	you	can	do	instead	of	what	you	can’t	do.	Using	myself	as	an
example	again,	when	I	got	so	sick	from	hepatitis	there	were	a	great	many	things
for	a	very	long	time	I	was	not
	able	to	do.	Instead	of	feeling	sorry	for	myself	and
being	depressed	about	my	loss,	I	tried	to	turn	a	lemon	into	lemonade.	I	gave	up
my	spiritual	counseling	practice,	took	a	sabbatical,	and	focused	on	my	spiritual
growth.
Enormous	growth	occurred	during	this	period	of	spiritual	study	and
meditation.	My	chronic	health	lessons,	although	improved,	still	existed	so	I
decided	to	write	instead
	of	focusing	so	much	on	individual	counseling.	You	are
now	looking	at	a	man	who	has	written	eleven	books	and	has	become	a	world
famous	author.	I	never	planned	to	write	books,	I	did	it	because	physically	it	was
not	good	for	me	to	have	an	individual	counseling	practice.
The	other	adjustment	I	made	was	to	only	do	larger	groups	to	conserve	my
energy.	My	health	lessons	forced	me	to	leave	my	individual
	counseling	and
instead	do	larger	group	work,	which	was	a	blessing	in	disguise.	After	a	while
this	started	taking	a	toll	on	me	also,	so	now	I	do	groups	for	1000	people	maybe
twice	a	year.	I	would	never	have	done	this	in	a	million	years	on	my	own.	I	can
thank	my	health	lessons	for	this.
My	health	lessons	have	taught	me	tremendous	self-discipline	and	self-mastery
for	if	I	got	off	my	diet	I
	would	have	instant	karma.	The	health	lessons	have
taught	me	to	have	absolute	steel	like	strength	and	willpower	on	mental,
emotional,	and	spiritual	levels.	I	had	to	learn	this	or	I	would	have	physically
died.	I	have	allowed	my	physical	health	lessons	to	teach	me	to	become	very
strong	mentally,	emotionally	and	spiritually.
On	an	earthly	level	a	third	dimensional	person	might	look	at	my	process
	the
last	ten	years	and	say	I	didn’t	do	very	well	physically.	From	a	spiritual
perspective	I	was	making	quantum	leaps,	which	the	Masters	ultimately	noticed
to	the	point	of	offering	me	the	job	to	take	over	Djwhal	Khul’s	ashram	and
becoming	the	high	priest	spokesperson	for	the	planet;	ascension	movement,	and
world	famous	through	my	books	and	Wesak	workshops.
I	know	for	a	fact	that	99%	of	the
	world	who	went	through	what	I	went	through
physically	would	have	been	long	dead	or	had	a	nervous	breakdown.	Because	of
the	spiritual	training	that	I	had	before	this	lesson,	I	was	able	over	time	to	turn
this	into	an	asset	rather	than	a	deficit.	My	health	is	much	better	and	stronger	now
that	I	have	completed	my	ascension,	but	there	are	certain	weaknesses	that
remain.	I	have	learned	to	make	adjustments
	and	not	feel	sorry	for	myself	or
judge	this.	This	brings	me	to	the	next	key	lesson	in	dealing	with	chronic	health
lessons.
Lesson	6
The	next	lesson	is	a	super	key	and	one	in	which	many	fall	by	the	wayside.
With	anything	that	happens	in	life,	including	health	lessons,	you	can	either	be
angry,	depressed,	or	move	into	acceptance.	This	is	usually	a	process	for	most
people	and	was	for	myself.
	Anger	and	depression	do	nothing	ultimately	and	the
sooner	you	can	move	to	acceptance	the	better.	The	crazy	thing	about	my	life	is
that	I	have	moved	literally	about	ten	million	times	farther	getting	so	ill
physically	than	I	would	have	if	I	had	never	gotten	sick.	I	know	this	for	an
absolute	fact.
This	lesson	is	connected	with	what	the	Masters	call	the	“blessing	system.”
Whatever	happens	in
	life	no	matter	how	negative,	bless	it.	The	negative	ego	will
tell	you	to	curse	it.	The	Holy	Spirit	will	tell	you	to	bless	it	and	look	at	it	as	a
stepping	stone	to	soul	growth.	Sai	Baba	says	that	whatever	happens	in	life	the
idea	is	to	“welcome	adversity.”	Paul	Solomon	said	that	whatever	happens	in	life
say,	“Not	my	will	but	thine,	thank	you	for	the	lesson.”	We	each	have	our	cross	to
bear.	Mine	has
	been	a	physical	weakness	in	my	digestive	system,	other	people
have	a	million	and	one	other	physical	health	lessons.	Still	others	have	their	weak
spot	in	the	emotional	or	psychological	body.	Others	are	weakest	in	spiritual
development.	Ill	health	does	not	cause	depression	or	anger,	it	is	your	“attitude”
that	does.
Lesson	7
The	next	lesson	has	to	do	with	the	development	of	the	spiritual
	warrior	and	the
first	ray	archetype	and	energies.	People	who	have	chronic	physical	health
lessons	must	be	more	mentally	and	emotionally	powerful	than	the	average
person.	When	one	of	your	bodies	is	weaker	than	another,	then	one’s	personal
power	and	fighting	spirit	must	be	developed	to	awesome	proportions	to	be	able
to	pull	you	up	and	keep	up	that	persevering	spirit.
I	call	this	lesson	the
	“Arjuna	Initiation.”	Arjuna	was	the	disciple	of	Krishna
(Buddha	was	Arjuna	in	a	past	life	and	the	Lord	Maitreya	was	Krishna).	The
battle	was	about	to	begin	and	Arjuna	fell	into	a	depression	losing	his	fighting
spirit.	This	is	what	happens	to	many	with	chronic	health	lessons.	Krishna	then
gave	Arjuna	a	passionate	speech	about	the	nature	of	reality.	At	one	point	Krishna
says	“Get	up	and	give	up	your
	manliness	and	get	up	and	fight.	This	self-pity	is
unbecoming	of	the	great	soul	that	you	are.”	Arjuna	did	get	up	and	fight	and
became	Krishna’s	greatest	disciple.	Krishna	said	fight	for	me	with	love	in	your
heart	and	you	will	incur	no	sin.
Yogananda	said,	“Life	is	a	battlefield.”	Christianity	speaks	of	life	in	the	time
of	the	battle	of	Armageddon.	Contrary	to	popular	opinion	life	is	a	battle.
	It	is	a
battle	between	the	lower	self	and	Higher	Self,	between	illusion	and	Truth.
Between	fear	and	love.	Between	the	negative	ego	and	the	Christ	Consciousness,
Between	the	Great	White	Brotherhood	and	Ascended	Masters,	and	the	Dark
Brotherhood.
The	purpose	of	life	is	to	win	this	war.	So	what	that	you	gain	the	whole	world
but	lose	your	own	soul.	The	battle	is	to	master	Self.	Health	lessons
	will	not	stop
you	from	achieving	your	graduation	from	the	wheel	of	rebirth.	I	know	this	for	a
fact	for	I	am	a	living	example.	The	Masters	have	great	compassion.	They	are
concerned	more	with	attitude	and	things	of	the	spirit!
Lesson	8
The	lesson	dealing	with	chronic	health	lessons	I	call	the	“
Reader’s	Digest
Initiation.”	I	don’t	know	if	you	have	ever	read	the	
Reader’s	Digest
,	but	they
have	these	great	stories	about	people	who	have	overcome	unbelievable
obstacles.	The	stories	are	quite	inspiring.	I	always	wanted	to	be	like	one	of	those
people	and	make	my	life	an	inspiration	to	myself,	others	and	God.	This	chapter
is	really	my	“
Reader’s	Digest	
story.”
Whatever	lessons	your	are	dealing	with	be	it	health	problems,	a	divorce,	a
death,	money	problems,	relationship	problems,
	etc.,	make	up	your	mind	to	pass
the	Reader’s	Digest	Initiation	which	I	have	just	invented.	Make	your	life	a	living
testimony	of	the	triumph	of	the	human	spirit.	We	hear	these	types	of	stories	all
the	time,	such	as	a	man	with	no	legs	walking	across	the	United	States,	or	that
Chinese	student	who	stood	in	front	of	the	tanks	during	the	Tien	Amin	Square
massacre	armed	with	nothing	more	than	his	school
	books.
My	life	is	a	living	testimony	of	the	triumph	of	the	human	spirit	and	the	power
of	the	will	under	unbelievable	adversity.	I	do	not	say	this	to	be	egotistical.	I
personally	am	more	proud	of	what	I	have	overcome	to	get	to	where	l	am,	than
anything	else.	I	do	not	want	to	bore	you	with	the	details	of	my	life,	but	rather	to
just	give	you	the	intuition	and	feeling	and	sense	of	what	I	am
	talking	about.	We
are	all	great	souls,	and	destined	great	things.	Make	your	life	a	living	testimony	of
the	power	of	your	spirit	and	your	will.	Let	nothing	stop	you	from	achieving	your
spiritual	and	material	goals.
Lesson	9
This	next	lesson	for	people	dealing	with	chronic	health	problems	is	to	always
remember	that	health	lessons	are	temporary	in	the	sense	that	once	you	physically
die
	you	will	have	a	perfect	body	again.	This	is	a	temporary	situation	that	may	be
able	to	be	healed	in	this	lifetime	or	maybe	not.	This	does	not	matter.	It	is	okay	to
have	a	preference	for	this	to	be	so,	but	not	an	attachment.	Happiness	is	a	state	of
mind,	not	a	state	of	physical	health.	Do	everything	you	can	to	heal	yourself	on
all	levels	but	until	you	achieve	this	goal	remain	happy	anyway.
Lesson	10
I	call	this	next	lesson	the	“Hanna	Kroeger	Initiation.”	Hanna	Kroeger,	if	you
have	not	heard	of	her,	is	a	90-year-old	lady	who	is	one	of	the	finest	herbalists	on
the	planet.	She	does	all	her	work	with	a	pendulum,	which	allows	her	to
energetically	test	everything.	If	you	have	not	read	her	books,	I	highly
recommend	them.	She	has	cures	for	AIDS,	cancer,	and	every	ailment	known	to
man.
	She	is	a	genius	and	totally	of	the	Christ.	One	of	her	handbooks	that	is
meant	to	be	used	in	conjunction	with	a	pendulum,	tests	the	seven	kinds	of	illness
that	can	manifest	in	the	body.	It	is	quite	comprehensive	and	literally	any	physical
health	problem	you	have	will	fall	under	one	of	these	seven	levels	which	then	has
thousands	of	subsidiary	divisions.
After	ten	years	of	purifying	myself
	through	every	known	remedy	known	to
man	and	eating	a	perfect	diet	for	seven	straight	years,	I	am	in	quite	excellent
health.	I	never	get	sick,	and	the	only	health	lessons	I	have	left	are	a	little
weakness	in	the	third	chakra	area	and	a	little	sensitivity	in	one	lobe	of	my	liver
that	can	be	irritated	by	being	a	workaholic	(which	I	am),	or	improper	diet	(which
I	never	indulge	in).	Other	than	this,	I
	consider	myself	in	literally	perfect	health.
I	found	this	pendulum	handbook	for	diagnosis	of	one’s	health	quite
interesting.	With	a	friend	of	mine,	we	both	went	through	the	whole	procedure
with	our	pendulums.	It	took	about	an	hour.	What	was	fascinating	to	me	after	ten
years	of	digestive	sensitivity	from	the	hepatitis	was	that	I	came	up	absolutely
perfectly	clear	on	every	level	and	was	as
	clean	as	a	whistle	in	terms	of	parasites,
pesticides,	metals,	bacteria	viruses,	and	literally	everything,	except	for	one	thing.
In	one	small	subheading	what	came	up	was	that	I	was	completely	physically
clear,	and	that	any	remaining	health	lessons	or	weakness	“was	for	the	glory	of
God.”	This	was	actually	in	her	book.	I	was	amazed	that	she	actually	even	had
this	in	her	book.	Now	this	story
	occurred	about	four	years	ago	and	my	health	has
actually	improved	greatly	because	of	the	completion	of	my	ascension	and	the
light	quotient	and	advanced	light	technologies	I	am	always	using.	However	I
found	this	little	statement	to	be	quite	meaningful	and	a	confirmation	of
everything	I	believed	in	and	had	been	working	towards	my	whole	life.	I	think
this	little	section	may	apply	to	many	Lightworkers
	who	may	be	reading	this
book.	For	this	reason,	I	am	officially	calling	it	the	“Hanna	Kroeger	Initiation.”
Whatever	lessons	you	are	dealing	with	dedicate	them	to	the	glory	of	God.	So
what	that	there	are	many	things	you	may	not	be	able	do.	The	purpose	of	life	is	to
achieve	your	ascension	and	liberation	and	to	serve.	Even	if	you	are	bedridden,
these	things	can	be	achieved
Lesson	11
The
	next	lesson	is	a	super	key	to	dealing	with	chronic	health	lessons.	This	is	to
call	in	the	inner	plane	Healing	Masters	constantly.	This	will	be	like	a	meditation.
You	will	feel	the	presence	of	the	Masters	with	you	and	this	will	bring	great
comfort	spiritually,	emotionally,	mentally,	and	physically.	The	healing	team	is
literally	a	Godsend	and	has	rescued	me	before	lectures	and	other	major	social
events
	thousands	of	times	when	I	have	been	feeling	physically	or	emotionally
off-balance.
The	second	part	of	this	lesson	is	to	call	in	the	Lord	of	Arcturus	and	the
Arcturians	constantly	if	you	have	physical	health	problems.	The	Arcturians	are
the	number	one	reason	why	my	physical	body	has	returned	to	its	present	state	of
health.	I	realize	that	this	is	a	big	statement,	but	it	is	true.	I	literally
	run	their
energies	constantly.
I	call	for	a	100%	light	quotient	increase	and	then	request	that	they	heal	and
strengthen	my	pancreas	and	liver	and	whatever	else	needs	healing.	Literally,
instantly	I	get	relief.	I	have	tried	every	being	in	the	universe	in	regards	to	my
health	and	by	far	the	Arcturians	are	“the	cat’s	meow.”	I	ask	to	be	connected	to
their	computers	and	to	be	“put	on	line.”	I
	constantly	call	on	them	to	balance	all
my	meridians	after	working	or	writing	all	day.
I	am	in	love	with	the	Arcturians.	The	reason	that	they	are	so	effective	is	that
they	are	using	their	advanced	technologies	and	computers	to	do	their	work.	They
have	said	that	there	is	no	illness	in	the	universe	they	have	ever	come	across	that
they	could	not	help	with.	Plus,	the	spiritual	benefits	are	enormous.
The	third	aspect	to	this	lesson	would	be	to	constantly	go	into	Djwhal	Khul’s
ashram	and	call	in	the	matrix	removal	program	as	discussed	in	the	chapter	on
alien	implants,	elementals	and	astral	entities.	The	matrix	removal	program	will
keep	you	clear	and	should	be	done	every	day	if	needed.	It	feels	wonderful!
Also,	call	on	the	Prana	Wind	clearing	device	from	the	Arcturians	to	keep	your
meridians,	veins,	and	arteries	clear	which	will	keep	your	energy	flowing
properly.	I	am	sharing	with	you	here	all	the	tricks	I	have	come	up	with.
Lesson	12
Sit	in	the	ascension	seats	I	have	listed	in	my	
Beyond	Ascension	
book	and	
The
Complete	Ascension	Manual	
book	as	much	as	possible.	The	ascension	seats	and
all	the	light	invocations	will	have	an	enormous	effect	on	the	physical	and
	etheric
bodies.	What	I	am	suggesting	is	to	be	running	the	higher	frequency	energies	all
day	and	all	night	long.	Ask	before	bed	for	the	Arcturians	to	run	the	energies	all
night	long.	They	have	really	helped	me	to	resurrect	my	physical	and	etheric
bodies	which	had	taken	quite	a	beating	this	lifetime.	Their	technology	is
incredible.	Ask	them	to	work	with	you	on	a	full-time	basis.
Lesson	13
Eat	to	live	instead	of	live	to	eat.	Good	diet	is	important	at	all	times,	but	if	you
have	chronic	health	lessons,	it	is	even	more	important.	If	you	eat	a	good	diet,
disease	will	literally	not	be	able	to	grow.	Be	very	disciplined	in	this	regard	and
cut	out	sugar	if	you	can,	or	as	much	as	possible,	as	of	course	all	drugs.	Get	as
much	fresh	air,	exercise,	and	sunshine	as	you	can.	The	sunshine
	will	energize	the
etheric	body.	Go	for	ascension	walks	every	day	if	you	can	either	calling	in	light
quotient	building	or	one	of	the	various	ascension	seats.
Realizing	your	tremendous	connection	to	the	Ascended	Masters	will	lessen
your	feeling	of	missing	things	that	health	lessons	might	limit	you	from	doing.
All	the	things	I	am	mentioning	here	should	also	be	done	by	people	who	don’t
have
	chronic	health	lessons,	as	they	are	the	ultimate	in	preventative	medicine.
Lesson	14
Make	sure	to	call	in	the	etheric	healing	team	to	repair	your	etheric	body
completely	and	ask	for	the	anchoring	of	your	perfect	monadic	blueprint	body,
which	can	be	done	prior	to	your	ascension.
Lesson	15
Seek	balance	and	moderation	in	all	things.	As	the	Buddha	said,	the	middle
road	is	the
	path	to	Self-realization.
Lesson	16
In	extreme	cases	of	ill	health,	focus	on	salvaging	the	incarnation	and	making
as	much	spiritual	growth	as	possible.	During	the	time	I	was	the	sickest	and
actually	had	hepatitis	I	was	not	trying	to	make	a	life,	I	was	trying	to	just	salvage
my	life.	The	hepatitis	corresponded	with	my	Job	initiation,	so	I	took	this	attitude
which	gave	me	a	lot	of	comfort.
	I	salvaged	my	life	through	focusing	on	spiritual
studies	and	meditation	and	what	at	first	was	salvaging	my	life	soon	became
probably	far	more	advancement	then	most	people	ever	make	in	good	health.
If	ever	I	would	fall	back	in	my	health,	I	would	call	back	this	attitude	which
would	make	me	feel	better.	This	may	sound	strange	to	some,	who	have	not	had
chronic	health	lessons,	however	each	of
	these	tools	and	principles	are	like	little
tricks	to	keep	the	emotional	body	and	mental	body	on	an	even	keel	even	though
the	physical	body	might	be	in	pain	or	having	problems.	The	real	problem	comes
not	when	the	physical	body	has	problems,	but	when	the	emotional	body	takes	a
dive	bomb	also.
Physical	health	problems	are	actually	not	that	bad	if	you	have	inner	peace.
This	chapter	contains
	some	of	the	mental	programming	and	positive	self-talk
you	can	give	yourself	to	keep	yourself	in	an	enthusiastic	and	inspired	state	of
consciousness.
It	is	important	to	understand	that	most	illness	can	be	healed	especially	with	the
advanced	technologies	I	speak	of	in	my	books.	There	are	some	lessons	that	may
not	be	destined	to	heal	and	that	is	okay.	Whatever	your	lessons	make	your	life	an
inspiration,	an	example	for	others,	self	and	God.	I	can’t	help	now	but	think	of
Christopher	Reeve,	who	played	Superman	in	the	movies,	and	had	the	horseback
riding	accident	and	broke	his	neck.	If	you	ever	think	that	you	have	problems,
think	of	something	like	this	and	you	should	count	your	blessings.
Yet,	I	gather	even	Christopher	Reeve	has	a	wonderful	fighting	spirit	that	he
has	cultivated.
	Whatever	lessons	we	have	in	life,	no	matter	what	they	may	be,
are	happening	for	a	reason.	It	is	not	an	accident	or	fluke	of	nature.	Everything	in
God’s	universe	works	in	divine	order.	Whatever	lessons	you	have	are	perfect
and	need	to	be	there	or	they	wouldn’t	be	there.	Use	whatever	your	lessons	are	on
any	level	for	spiritual	growth,	and	to	demonstrate	Godliness.	It	is	my	hope	and
prayer	that	some
	of	the	ideas	and	tools	I	have	presented	here	in	times	of
physical,	emotional,	mental,	or	spiritual	testing	will	be	found	to	be	useful!
Lesson	17
Go	and	see	a	good	homeopathic	doctor	that	specializes	in	using	bioenergetic
types	of	testing	using	vega	type	of	medical	technology	to	help	cleanse	all
residual	toxins	from	the	body	such	as	metals,	chemicals,	parasites,	mercury
fillings,	radiation,
	bacteria,	viruses,	vaccines,	fungus,	environmental	toxins,	to
name	a	few.	Without	homeopathics	or	herbs,	these	toxins	deplete	the	immune
system.
Lesson	18
Try	and	learn	how	to	use	a	pendulum	if	you	can.	Some	people	have	a	knack
for	it	more	than	others.	It	would	be	of	enormous	benefit	If	you	could	learn	how
to	use	one,	testing	all	the	foods	you	eat	as	well	as	supplements.	If	not,	then
	see	a
good	nutritionist	and	if	possible	one	who	is	psychic	in	their	abilities,	or	uses	a
pendulum,	and	does	not	give	advice	from	just	an	intellectual	point	of	view.	Also,
drink	lots	of	fresh	pure	water
Lesson	19
Throughout	the	day,	call	in	light	quotient	building	from	Metatron,	the
Arcturians,	Melchizedek,	and	other	Masters	of	your	choice.	This	along	with	the
ascension	seats	and	Arcturian
	technology,	inner	plane	Healing	Masters	and
Djwhal’s	ashram	will	greatly	energize	your	etheric	and	physical	vehicle.	I	have
never	met	anyone	who	after	following	this	prescription	did	not	feel	a	great
increase	in	physical	health	after	following	this	program.	The	higher	you	go	in
initiations	that	greater	the	stabilization	of	light	quotient	and	the	greater	the
realization	of	the	mayavarupa	body,
	so	never	give	up	hope.	Physical	immortality
and	complete	resurrection	of	the	physical	vehicle	is	the	light	at	the	end	of	the
tunnel	if	you	stay	unceasingly	on	the	mark	and	on	target.
Lesson	20
Call	forth	three	times	a	day	for	a	planetary	and	cosmic	axiatonal	alignment.
This	particular	ascension	technique	is	especially	good	for	physical	health	for	it
balances	all	the	meridians	and	aligns
	them	with	Spirit.	This	is	something	every
person	should	do	as	a	preventive	health	practice	and	it	will	also	serve	to
accelerate	your	spiritual	growth.
Lesson	21
“Sickness	is	a	defense	against	the	truth.”	This	is	a	quote	from	
A	Course	In
Miracles
.	The	truth	is,	we	all	are	the	Christ.	The	Christ,	being	perfect,	can	only
have	perfect	health	and	all	else	is	illusion.	The	negative	ego	is
	in	reality	illusion
so	all	sickness	in	the	ultimate	reality	is	an	illusion.	No	matter	what	your	physical
health	lessons	are	many	times	a	day	affirm	you	are	in	perfect	radiant	health.
Paramahansa	Yogananda	said	that	even	if	you	are	99	years	old	and	on	your
deathbed,	you	should	be	affirming	only	perfect	health.	Affirm	this,	visualize	this,
and	pray	for	this.	Try	not	to	talk	about	health	problems	with
	friends.
The	subconscious	mind	will	manifest	into	your	physical	body	whatever	image
or	thought	you	program	into	it	good	or	bad.	Ignore	appearances	and	keep	your
mind	on	the	Mighty	l	Am	Presence	and	the	perfected	state	at	all	times.	In	truth,
all	that	exists	is	perfection.	Convince	your	subconscious	mind	of	this	regardless
of	the	appearance	of	your	physical	body.	Eventually	the	physical	body
	can’t	help
but	respond	in	kind.	Be	the	computer	programmer	of	your	computer.	Be	God
every	moment	of	your	life	in	every	thought,	word	and	deed.	Think	only	positive
thoughts.	Spiritualize	your	emotions.	Be	vigilant	over	your	mental,	emotional,
physical,	and	etheric	diet.	Pray	to	God	and	the	Masters	constantly,	do	not	let	go
of	the	Angel	of	Healing	until	it	blesses	you	like	Jacob	of	old.
If
	you	practice	all	the	things	mentioned	in	this	book	and	in	this	chapter,	then
there	is	no	way	in	this	universe	you	are	not	going	to	get	better.	Be	loving	at	all
times,	and	dedicate	your	life	to	service	in	whatever	form	is	appropriate	at	this
particular	phase	of	your	life.	Let	go	of	all	self-pity,	and	thank	God	for	all	your
blessings	and	all	your	lessons!
Lesson	22
Remain	grounded,	especially
	if	you	have	chronic	health	lessons.	Bring	heaven
to	Earth.	Some	lightworkers	are	hovering	above	their	physical	bodies	and	are	not
really	in	them,	which	makes	it	hard	for	the	physical	body	to	heal.	Just	as	the
feminine	and	masculine	sides	must	be	balanced,	the	heaven	and	earthly	sides
must	also	be	balanced	and	integrated.	Ascension	is	infusing	the	soul	and	monad
into	the	physical	body	on
	Earth,	not	living	in	the	spiritual	world	and	celestial
realms	which	a	lot	of	lightworkers	do.
There	is	nothing	wrong	with	meditating	there	but	the	idea	is	then	to	come	back
and	get	grounded.	Live	in	all	parts	of	your	body	including	hands,	arms,	feet,	and
legs.	It	is	helpful	to	keep	a	grounding	cord	connected	to	the	center	of	the	Earth.
Run	energies	from	the	Earth	up	through	your	feet	as
	well	as	heavenly	energies
downwards.	Ask	that	your	personal	kundalini	be	connected	to	the	planetary
kundalini.	Spend	time	in	nature	and	with	trees.
Spend	more	time	being	instead	of	doing	when	going	through	a	healing	crisis.
Be	sure	to	sleep	as	much	as	the	physical	body	needs.	This	may	change	at
different	ages	and	stages	of	your	life.	Find	your	perfect	body	rhythms.	Mine	for
example	is	to
	sleep	about	five	hours	and	take	an	hour	nap	in	the	late	afternoon.
This	is	the	most	energizing	lifestyle	for	me,	however	each	person	is	different.	If
you	do	have	chronic	health	lessons,	pray	every	night	before	bed	for	healing	from
all	the	Masters.	Request	that	a	healing	platform	be	set	up	and	that	you	be	worked
on	24	hours	a	day	until	full	recovery	is	achieved.	In	cases	of	chronic	illness,
conserve
	your	sexuality	a	little	more	than	you	normally	would	to	use	this	energy
for	healing.	An	overuse	of	sexual	energy	can	be	depleting.
Lesson	23
Don’t	coddle	yourself	too	much	physically	and	become	a	hypochondriac,
however	on	the	other	side	of	the	coin	don’t	be	too	much	of	a	pusher	and	super
trooper	at	the	expense	of	the	physical	vehicle.	Both	extremes	can	be	damaging	to
your	physical
	and	spiritual	health.
Lesson	24
A	person	with	extreme	sensitivities	to	pills,	herbs,	and/or	homeopathics	may
try	radionics.	I	am	one	of	these	sensitive	types,	so	I	have	two	radionic	machines
that	I	use	to	send	myself	all	the	homeopathics,	herbs,	vitamins,	and	minerals
energetically.	I	honestly	don’t	understand	how	these	simple	machines	work	but
they	do.	I	keep	myself	in	perfect	health
	using	them	and	I	never	have	to	take	a
single	pill	or	take	any	remedies	orally.	It	is	an	absolutely	mind	boggling	science
and	I	have	proven	its	effectiveness	a	million	times	over.
If	you	want	more	information	on	this	call	Susan	and	Sandy.	They	can	do	the
radionics	for	you	and/	or	might	be	able	to	show	you	how	to	set	up	a	simplified
system	for	yourself!	The	two	radionics	machines	I	have	are
	called	a	“black	box”
and	a	more	modern	machine	called	an	“SE-5.”	This	is	truly	the	technology	of	the
future.	One	day	everybody	will	have	a	radionics	machine	as	they	do	a	television.
It	is	the	ultimate	self-healing	machine.	It	can	be	programmed	to	send	energy
through	words,	through	numerical	codes,	or	through	energetically	sending
products.	Instead	of	ingesting	the	physical	substance,	one’s	aura
	is	bombarded
with	the	energetic	substance.
If	you	are	interested	in	this,	there	are	many	easy	to	read	good	books	about	this	at
your	local	metaphysical	bookstore.
Lesson	25
Every	night	as	you	are	falling	asleep	and	as	you	are	waking	up	in	the	morning
give	yourself	a	self-hypnotic	suggestion	or	auto	suggestion	that	you	are	in
perfect	radiant	health.	Take	advantage	of	these	hypnotic
	states	where
suggestions	slip	into	the	subconscious	mind	more	easily.	Also	do	this	whenever
you	are	meditating	and	a	have	achieved	an	altered	state	of	consciousness.	I
would	also	recommend	making	a	health	focused	sleep	tape	that	you	can	play	on
an	auto-reverse	tape	recorder	all	night	long	at	a	barely	audible	sound	level.
Lesson	26
Contact	a	Science	of	Mind	practitioner	and	have	them
	help	you	write	up	a
“health	treatment”	which	you	are	to	say	every	day	religiously.	Stay	positive	at	all
times,	and	keep	yourself	focused	at	all	times	on	spiritual	pursuits	for	“an	idle
mind	is	the	devil’s	workshop.”
Lesson	27
Forgive	yourself	for	all	mistakes	from	this	life	and	past	lives	in	regards	to	your
health.	Forgive	yourself	and	just	start	a	completely	brand	new	fresh	cycle,
	like
your	life	is	completely	starting	over.
Lesson	28
Every	night	before	bed	pray	to	God	directly	in	a	most	sincere	and	humble	and
non-attached	manner	for	a	miraculous	healing	if	it	be	God’s	will.
Lesson	29
Every	morning	and	every	night	pray	for	protection	from	Archangel	Michael	in
the	form	of	a	golden	dome	that	only	the	energies	of	the	Christ	frequency	may
touch	you.
Lesson	30
Practice	all	the	ascension	techniques	and	meditations	in	
The	Complete
Ascension	Manual,	
the	
Beyond	Ascension	
book,	and	in	the	
Soul	Psychology
book	over	a	one	year	period.	If	you	do	this	you	will	have	so	much	light	and
advanced	Christed	technology	in	your	field	there	is	no	way	on	Earth	that	you
will	not	feel	physically	better.	Be	patient	in	your	practice	and	don’t	do	too	much
all	at	once.	Pace	yourself,	in	other	words.	Trust	your	intuition	as	what	to	practice
when.
I	do	have	ascension	activation	tapes	that	can	be	obtained	from	me	directly,
which	I	would	highly	recommend	getting.	I	have	recorded	these	so	you	can	just
kick	back	and	receive	the	activations	with	my	voice.	There	are	eleven	tapes	in
the	series,	which	can	be	ordered	individually	or	as	a	complete	set.
	The	set	costs
$180.00	including	postage.	This	is	an	incredibly	comprehensive	set.	Call	the
phone	number	listed	at	the	back	of	this	book	for	further	information	and
ordering.
Lesson	31
When	you	begin	to	explore	homeopathy,	radionics,	naturopathic	medicine,	and
bioenergetic	medicine,	health	becomes	a	lot	more	than	a	positive	report	on	a
blood	test.	Western	medicine,	in	truth,	is	still
	operating	in	the	Dark	Ages.	To
achieve	good	health	and	a	healthy,	functioning	immune	system	all	the	physical
toxins	must	be	cleared.	Most	of	these	things	Western	medicine	has	no	awareness
of	and	couldn’t	cleanse	if	their	life	depended	on	it.
In	dealing	with	chronic	illness	and/or	the	desire	to	really	obtain	good	health,
the	following	are	some	of	the	things	I	would	recommend	exploring	to
	make	sure
you	have	cleared:
Removal	of	mercury	fillings	and	homeopathic	cleansing	of	mercury	from	your
body
Balancing	of	yeast	and	bacteria	from	use	of	antibiotics
Removal	of	all	vaccines	which	are	totally	toxic	to	the	immune	system.
Removal	of	all	parasites	Removal	of	all	viruses
Removal	of	all	fungus
Removal	of	all	improper	bacteria
Removal	of	all	radiation
	from	color	televisions
Removal	of	electromagnetic	toxicity	from	powerlines	and	the	like
Removal	of	all	chemicals	from	body
Removal	of	all	past	drugs	you	have	taken
Removal	of	all	pesticides	from	vegetables,	dairy	products	and	other	sources
that	are	in	the	body
Balancing	of	the	bioenergy	fields
Cleansing	of	the	liver	and	kidneys
Upgrading	of	the	glandular
	system
Removal	of	negative	emotions	through	Bach	Flower	remedies
Immune	system	building
Removal	of	environmental	poisons
Proper	balance	of	vitamins	and	minerals
Energetic	check	of	physical	diet
Blood	cleansing
Cleansing	of	lymph	system	residual	toxin
Clearing	of	tuberculosis
Clearing	of	all	sexually	transmitted	diseases
It	must	be	understood
	that	very	often	we	carry	these	things	subliminally	in	our
system	but	this	does	not	mean	we	will	ever	get	these	diseases.	For	example,
tuberculosis	toxin	can	be	picked	up	by	drinking	milk	or	breathing	the	air	in	an
airplane.	I	am	speaking	here	of	subclinical	toxins	that	lodge	in	our	system	that
deplete	our	immune	systems.	The	medicine	of	the	future	works	on	a	much	more
subtle	level	then	Western
	medicine.	The	fact	is	a	person	can	be	dying	of	cancer
and	may	still	have	normal	blood.	Western	medicine	worships	science,	which
leaves	out	literally	90%	of	what	is	really	going	on	within	a	person’s	reality.
Just	as	I	have	spoken	in	this	book	about	the	need	to	remove	implants,
elementals,	negative	imprints,	astral	entities,	core	fear,	mental	toxins,	and
emotional	toxins,	there	are	also	subtle
	physical	toxins	which	Western	medicine
does	not	have	a	clue	about.	Just	as	traditional	psychology	is	missing	entirely	the
psychic	and	spiritual	realm	of	what	is	going	on,	Western	medicine	is	doing	the
same	but	even	worse.	It	is	only	when	you	go	to	a	New	Age	homeopathic,	or
bioenergetic	or	naturopathic	doctor	that	these	residual	toxins	will	be	addressed.
To	be	honest	even	a	lot	of	them	don’t	address
	it	so	you	must	find	someone	good.
What	I	am	speaking	of	here	is	the	cutting	edge	new	age	work	in	the	field	of
holistic	medicine.	In	my	books	I	have	tried	to	bring	forth	the	cutting	edge	work
that	is	going	on	in	the	spiritual	or	ascension	movement,	the	cutting	edge	work
going	on	around	the	planet	in	the	field	of	psychology.	In	this	chapter,	I	am
speaking	very	briefly	on	the	cutting	edge	work
	in	the	field	of	holistic	health.
Other	Things	to	Clear	And	Cleanse
All	past	medications.	An	interesting	story	on	this	point.	As	an	adolescent,	I
took	a	great	deal	of	antibiotics	for	some	acne	problems	I	had	around	the	age	of
15	or	16.	Can	you	believe	a	doctor	recommending	antibiotics	for	acne?	Is	that
barbaric	or	what?	Anyway	over	25	years	later	I	was	seeing	a	psychic	nutritionist
by	the	name	of	Eileen	Poole	who	one	day	told	me	I	was	cleansing	tetracycline
from	my	field.	I	told	her	that	was	impossible	for	I	had	not	had	a	single	antibiotic
in	almost	15	years.	It	turned	out	that	I	was	still	cleansing	the	drugs	from	25	years
ago.
Now	remember	I	am	and	have	been	a	health	food	fanatic	and	exercise	fanatic,
as	well	as	eating	one	of	the	purest	diets	on	the	planet.	Yet	25
	years	later	I	was
still	cleansing.	With	a	lot	of	these	toxins	without	homeopathics	or	herbs	one	may
never	be	able	to	cleanse	the	system.
Make	sure	all	Epstein-Barr	virus	is	cleansed.	Very	often,	we	carry	this	on
subclinical	levels	that	would	never	ever	be	detected	on	a	blood	test.
Make	sure	all	staph	and	strep	bacteria	are	cleared	from	the	subclinical	field.
(Really,	what	we	are	speaking
	of	here	is	the	whole	field	of	“subclinical
medicine”).
Stop	using	all	drugs	and	use	homeopathics	and	herbs	which	are	not	toxic	for
the	body.
Never	give	your	children	or	yourself	any	vaccines,	for	they	are	absolutely
poisonous	to	the	body.
Clear	all	herpes	virus	on	a	subclinical	level
Clear	all	cold	and	flu	medications,	aspirins,	pain	killers,	all	the	medication	you
have
	ever	taken	are	stored	in	the	liver	and	poison	the	body	and	deplete	the
immune	system.
In	essence,	ask	the	bioenergetic	specialist,	or	homeopathic	doctor,	or	Susan
and	Sandy	using	a	pendulum,	or	a	naturopath	to	do	a	complete	work-up	using
energetic	testing	to	check	your	entire	program	and	to	cleanse	everything.	The
spiritual	path	is	the	path	of	purification.	You	want	your	physical,	etheric,
	astral,
mental,	and	spiritual	bodies	cleared.
Cleanse	all	subclinical	cancers,	hepatitis,	and	mononucleosis	that	might	be
present	on	subclinical	levels.
Remember	all	disease	begins	in	the	astral	and	etheric	bodies	first,	as	well	as	in
the	mental	body.	Western	medicine	has	no	way	of	testing	or	recognizing	the
diseases	that	are	manifest	on	these	levels	let	alone	on	subclinical	physical
	levels
below	the	surface	of	a	blood	test.	A	blood	test	is	an	incredibly	gross	level.	Many
people	are	walking	around	with	walking	hepatitis,	walking	mononucleosis,
Epstein-Barr,	or	the	likes	and	are	being	greatly	debilitated.
Western	medicine	no	matter	how	many	tests	they	do	will	not	be	able	to	figure
it	out.	The	blood	test	is	just	the	tip	of	the	iceberg.	The	other	90%	of	the	iceberg
Western
	medicine	has	no	way	of	scientifically	detecting.	The	new	technology
that	is	now	being	invented	and	worked	with	is	in	the	field	of	homeopathy,	and
naturopathic	medicine.	Such	machines	as	the	vega	machine,	and	others	like	it,
can	scientifically	detect	the	other	90%	as	accurately	as	a	blood	test	on	the	gross
level.
Of	course,	Western	medicine	rejects	this	as	quackery	when,	in	truth,	the
reverse
	is	true.	I	would	never	ever	go	to	a	regular	medical	doctor	unless	it	was
for	emergency	procedures,	which	is	the	only	thing	they	are	good	at.	Western
medicine	with	its	focus	on	drugs	and	invasive	testing	is	still	in	a	very	“barbaric
stage.”	They	reject	homeopathic	medicine,	they	never	use	herbs,	they	have	no
understanding	of	diet,	and	they	reject	acupuncture.	They	have	absolutely	no	cure
for	viruses
	of	any	kind,	when	homeopathics	and	herbs	can	knock	out	any	virus
within	a	week	to	ten	days	and	does	not	poison	the	body.
I	can	knock	out	any	bacterial	infection	within	a	couple	of	days	using
homeopathics	while	the	doctors	prescribe	antibiotics	like	candy	for	everything
even	though	it	only	works	on	bacteria.	The	doctors	being	so	backwards	and
behind	the	times	don’t	even	tell	the	person	to
	take	extra	acidophilus	to	replace
the	friendly	bacteria.	People	really	have	no	idea	how	barbaric	Western	medicine
really	is.
Once	you	have	been	exposed	to	the	New	Age	holistic	cutting	edge	field	of
medicine	and	how	everything	can	be	tested	through	energy	rather	than	invasive
measures	you	will	never	consider	going	back	except	in	emergency	situations	like
a	broken	leg	or	car	accident	when
	immediate	help	is	instantly	needed.	True
preventive	medicine	and	true	healing	is	something	that	the	traditional	medical
profession	knows	little	about.	Very	often,	they	actually	interfere	in	the	process,
for	example,	by	giving	a	patient	Valium	for	emotional	distress.	Antibiotics	are
given	like	candy	for	every	known	problem	under	the	sun	when	homeopathics	are
just	as	effective	and	a	thousand	times	better
	for	the	body.
Other	things	that	need	to	be	cleansed	from	the	body	are	caffeine,	traces	of
former	drug	use,	alcohol,	nicotine,	metal	poisoning,	aluminum,	lead,	car	exhaust,
insect	bites,	malathion	poisoning,	and	salmonella	(75%	of	all	chickens	have
salmonella	poisoning	according	to	the	FDA).	This	again	is	what	I	am	talking
about	when	I	say	we	all	carry	this	stuff	on	subclinical	levels.	We
	all	must	clear
all	the	preservatives	we	have	eaten,	weed	killer,	bug	spray,	measles	vaccine,
chicken	pox	vaccine,	past	influenzas,	mumps,	and	polio	vaccine.
All	these	things	I	have	listed	here	get	stored	in	the	liver,	kidneys,	and	in
different	areas	of	the	body.	Most	of	these	residual	toxins	will	never	get	removed
from	the	physical	body	without	homeopathics	and	specialized	herbal	remedies.
All	of	these	residual	toxins	and	thousands	of	other	ones	I	have	not	mentioned
here	deplete	the	functioning	of	your	immune	system.	The	biggest	one	probably
being	all	the	food	poisons	we	have	eaten	in	our	life.
Going	on	prolonged	and	occasional	fasts	is	an	essential	key	to	retaining	good
health.	For	people	with	chronic	health	lessons	and	for	that	matter	really	for	every
person	who	wants	to
	become	Self-realized	I	recommend	that	you	get	checked	for
all	these	things	so	you	can	become	as	purified	in	your	energy	fields	as	you
possibly	can	on	physical,	etheric,	astral,	mental	and	spiritual	levels.	This	book
has	been	dedicated	to	help	give	you	the	tools	and	understanding	to	be	able	to	do
this	to	help	you	obtain	perfect	health	on	all	levels	and	to	help	you	realize	God!
Lesson	32
This	next	lesson	for	people	with	chronic	health	lessons	or	occasional	health
lessons	is	to	call	in	the	“Acupuncture	Inner	Plane	Healing	Team.”	This	is	a
phenomenal	method,	for	the	Inner	Plane	healing	team	will	give	you	“etheric
acupuncture”	in	the	comfort	of	your	own	home	any	time	you	want.	You	have
your	own	personal	acupuncturist	that	costs	you	nothing	out	of	your	wallet.	The
only	thing	it
	costs	you	is	your	love	and	gratitude	to	the	wonderful	beings	that
perform	these	services	on	our	behalf!
Lesson	33
The	next	method	for	people	dealing	with	chronic	health	lessons	is	a	new	one,
which	Djwhal	Khul	recently	told	me	about.	Call	in	the	inner	plane	Healing
Masters	and	your	own	Mighty	I	Am	Presence.	Then	request	that	a	radionics
machine	be	set	up	on	the	inner	plane	to	send	you
	the	energies	you	need	on	an
ongoing	basis	24	hours	a	day	to	correct	what	ever	type	health	lesson	you	are
dealing	with.	This	is	a	phenomenal	method	for	I	am	basically	giving	you	a
radionics	machine	right	now	that	again	costs	you	nothing,	but,	in	truth,	is	maybe
more	effective	then	even	a	real	physical	earthly	radionics	machine.
You	can	request	at	different	times	that	it	be	programmed	for
	different	things.
If	you	want	energy	and	wakefulness	request	this.	If	you	want	immune	system
building,	request	that.	If	you	want	to	work	on	a	long	term	basis	on	a	specific
problem,	request	that.	The	other	thing	you	request	is	that	it	send	you	whatever
energies	you	need	to	keep	you	in	balance	with	no	specific	focus.
The	best	method	is	probably	a	combination	of	all	of	these.	The	radionics
machine	can	be	used	even	to	send	you	vitamins	and	minerals	you	need.	The	list
is	truly	endless.	This	machine	can	be	used	for	anything	a	real	radionics	machine
can	be	used	with	and	more.	Look	at	the	amount	of	money	I	am	saving	you	with
these	last	two	methods	and	tools!	I	do	have	one	request	for	payment	however.
Tell	your	students,	friends,	family,	and	local	metaphysical	bookstores	about	my
books,	if
	you	like	them.	In	doing	this	all	can	share	in	God’s	generosity	and	care
for	his	beloved	sons	and	daughters.
Lesson	34
One	other	healing	tool	for	people	with	chronic	health	lessons	or	as	a
preventive	tool	which	again	will	save	you	a	ton	of	money	in	health	care	bills	is
to	call	the	inner	plane	Healing	Masters	and	request	to	be	given	the	vitamin	and
minerals	you	need	as	inner	plane	shots
	to	remain	in	perfect	physical	health.	Ask
for	all	inner	plane	shots	to	be	given	to	you	over	the	next	month	that	will	keep
your	physical	and	etheric	body	in	perfect	energetic	and	chemical	balance.
For	example,	lets	say	your	family	is	sick,	and	you	want	to	build	up	your
immune	system,	you	might	request	an	inner	plane	vitamin	C	shot	every	day	to
boost	your	immune	system.	You	can	also	just	request
	to	the	inner	plane	Healing
Masters	to	give	you	any	shot	or	substance	that	they	feel	you	need	to	bring	you
back	to	balance.
With	all	the	tools	in	this	chapter,	there	is	no	way	that	even	people	with	chronic
illness	are	not	going	to	start	feeling	better.	The	most	important	thing	in	dealing
with	chronic	illness	is	to	have	a	fighting	spirit	and	to	not	give	up.	As	long	as	you
are	assertively	attacking
	the	problem	with	all	these	tools	and	methods	the	illness
will	not	be	attacking	and	depressing	you.	This	chapter	is	your	spiritual	battle
plan,	so	to	speak,	to	win	this	war.
The	using	of	these	tools	will	not	only	help	you	to	feel	better	physically,	but
will	also	serve	to	give	you	good	practice	working	on	the	inner	plane,	and	will
accelerate	your	spiritual	growth	tremendously.	It	will	also
	help	you	to	develop
more	of	a	conscious	relationship	of	working	with	the	Ascended	Masters.	It	will
thin	the	veil,	so	to	speak,	and	help	you	to	recognize	that	you	are	never	alone.	It
will	also	demonstrate	to	you	in	infinite	ways	how	much	God	loves	you,	and	the
bountiful	blessings	He	has	bestowed	upon	you	for	the	asking.	Everything	in
God’s	infinite	universe	is	literally	available	to	you	for	the	asking.
	My	service	is
nothing	more	than	sharing	with	you	some	of	the	incredible	things	that	are
available.	It	is	up	to	you,	however,	to	ask.	Ask	and	you	shall	receive,	knock,	and
the	door	shall	be	opened.
Lesson	35
This	lesson	contains	four	meditations	involving	your	solar	angels	that	were
synthesized	and	condensed	from	a	book	called	
Healing	Yourself	with	Light
,	by
Launa	Huffines.	I	have	not
	read	the	book	myself,	however,	one	of	my	main
assistants	in	Djwhal	Khul’s	ashram,	Janna	Shelley	Parker,	thought	they	might	be
helpful	to	my	readers,	so	I	have	added	them	here	for	your	enjoyment,	healing,
and	light	activation.
Meditation	#1:	Entering	the	Room	of	Inner	Stillness
Relax,	relax,	relax,	and	breathe	deeply	and	rhythmically.	Allow	yourself	to	get
ready	to	enter	into	a	room
	of	utter	stillness,	tranquillity	and	harmony.	Bathe	in	a
cleansing	shower	of	colors	and	then	enter	a	room–your	room	of	Peace.
Completely	free	from	the	world,	you	are	totally	relaxed	in	your	special	place,
your	special	room	beyond	the	worries	of	the	world,	beyond	the	barriers	of
illness,	for	you	are	in	a	sanctuary	of	healing.
Find	your	position	of	comfort	and	let	every	cell	float	into
	relaxation.	Think
only	of	peace,	serenity,	harmony,	wholeness,	and	balance.	Let	everything
become	soft.
Invite	your	Solar	Angel,	for	whom	your	Guardian	Angel	is	but	a	mere
reflection.	Your	Solar	Angel	is	with	you	until	you	have	completed	your	rounds
of	incarnation.	It	is	itself,	yet	totally	at	one	with	our	higher	purpose.	Solar
Angels	work	for	evolution,	and	when	you	invoke	your	own	Solar
	Angel	you	will
be	bringing	this	Divine	Presence	into	you,	filling	you	with	Light,	healing	and
expansion.
In	your	private	place,	your	quiet	space,	focus	the	eyes	upward	and	invoke	this
Angel.	Allow	yourself	to	believe	you	can	be	healed.	Invite	your	Solar	Angel	to
come	to	you	like	a	sphere	of	golden	light.	Allow	this	light	to	circle	your	head,
your	thought-field	with	its	healing	energy.	This
	will	form	a	subtle	halo	around
your	head.
Now	ask	the	Solar	Angel	for	help	in	the	area	that	needs	healing.	Stay	in
silence	and	trust,	enwrapped,	enveloped	by	the	healing,	soothing	energy	of	the
Angel	of	the	Presence.	Feel	the	new	sense	of	balance	it	brings,	the	optimism.
Feel	and	take	note	of	your	inner	sense	of	feeling	that	are	beyond	mind.
When	you	are	through,	give	thanks	and	quietly
	leave,	knowing	that	this	room
is	ever	available	to	you.	Record	each	experience	in	your	journal.	You	can	now
monitor	your	progress,	what	works	best,	how	you	come	to	a	state	of	relaxation,
as	well	as	wisdom	learned	and	your	attitude	towards	your	healing.
Remember,	you	create	the	room	and	the	stillness.	It	is	always	there	for	you.
Meditation	#2:	Entering	the	Room	of	Light
Begin
	with	your	imagination.	Get	a	sense	of	this	room	and	the	wisdom	there-
in.	Be	sure	to	bathe	in	a	shower	of	Light	in	the	courtyard	of	the	temple	of
healing.	Bring	the	colors	of	light	over	you	individually,	drops	of	liquid	light	in
orange,	gold,	yellow,	and	rose.	Then	use	shades	of	green,	blue	and	violet.
Cleansed,	enter	into	your	room	to	again	meet	your	Solar	Angel.	Find	a	place	to
relax.	Everything
	in	the	room	glows,	but	the	brightest	point	is	where	
you	
are.
You	are	surrounded	by	White	Light	and	that	White	Light	enters	you.	It	is	a
living,	intelligent	Light,	and	makes	offerings	of	wisdom.	You	sense	the	essence
of	Self	and	the	essence	of	whatever	else	comes	to	mind.	The	mind	calms,	the
emotions	still	and	there	is	nothing	but	the	radiance	of	your	Solar	Angel.	Its
essence	of	Love	fills	your
	heart	and	being.
The	Solar	Angel	brings	its	light	into	the	room	from	the	heart	of	the	sun.	Its
rays	bring	elements	that	are	necessary	for	your	life.	To	tap	into	these	Solar
Beings	imagine	the	rays	of	Solar	Light	around	your	head.	The	more	you	allow
the	Solar	Light	to	enter	your	mind	and	heart,	the	greater	the	illumination	you
bring.	Think	upon	spiritual	qualities	and	they	are	yours	to	experience.
Solar	Light	is	also	an	agent	of	rejuvenation.	Invite	it	into	your	body	to	heal
and	rejuvenate.	The	Light	evolves	your	cells.	It	dissolves	toxins	as	it	filters	into
your	cells	and	transmutes	them.	Through	this	connection,	this	column	of	Light,
the	Solar	Light	continues	to	restore	your	body	cells.	As	you	connect	your	inner
sun	with	Solar	Light,	the	two	merge	and	distribute	great	Light	throughout
	your
body.
Use	imagination	to	facilitate	this	reality.	Picture	your	breath	drawing	healing
light	into	every	part	of	you.	Look	at	the	glorious	morning	sun.	Think	about	the
solar	entities	in	these	rays	that	can	help	you	solve	any	health	problems	for	that
day.	See	in	your	mind’s	eye	solar	rays	entering	your	body,	healing	each	cell,
vitalizing	you	with	renewed	life.
These	are,	in	truth,
	living	energies	which	heal,	strengthen,	and	evolves	your
body.	Breathe	into	your	heart	with	love	and	breathe	out	from	your	heart	loving
gratitude	and	feel	renewed.
Meditation	#3:	Healing	in	the	Room	of	Love
Bathe	in	a	shower	of	liquid	gold	and	rose.	See	each	color	rinse	the	dense
frequencies	from	your	energy	field.	Now	enter	the	Room	of	Love	and	find	your
comfortable	position	in	the
	room’s	center.
Breathe	in	the	Healing	Angelic	Presence	and	the	sweetness	of	the	rose	and
white	flowers	about	you.	Through	the	open	skylight	above	luminous	particles	of
Love	Essence	flow	down	into	the	room.	Open	up	any	and	all	places	in	your	four
lower	bodies	that	need	more	love.
Create	a	rose-colored	triangle	between	your	Solar	Angel,	your	soul,	and	your
four	lower	bodies.	Through
	the	energy	of	your	rose	triangle	comes	the	Angels	of
Divine	Love.	This	Love	contains	wondrously	healing	life	energy.	Ask	that	any
emotion	that	has	created	a	block	or	problem	in	your	emotional/astral	body	be
released.	If	your	problem	is	specifically	of	a	physical	nature,	call	upon	the	Love
of	these	Angels	to	intone	their	specific	healing	sound	in	that	direction.
Chant	“Ah”	slowly	and	open
	your	heart	even	more.	Remember	the	rose	filled
triangle	and	connection	with	your	Solar	Angel.
Chant	“El”	(as	in	bell),	calling	to	the	One	Creative	Force.	The	note	will	travel
up	a	column	of	Light	to	the	top	of	the	head.	Visualize	it.	“E”	is	for	serenity	and
“L”	uplifts	the	soul.	Peaceful	concentration	will	lift	you	up	to	the	angels	of	Love
Divine.
“I”	(pronounced	“ee”	as	in	see),	takes
	you	right	into	the	center	of	healing.
Place	sound	between	and	above	your	eyes	as	it	vibrates	between	the	eyebrows,
feel	the	soul	resonation.
As	you	say	“O”	(as	in	oh),	bring	a	line	of	lighted	energy	from	above	into	your
head	and	down	the	spinal	cord.	Visualize	the	Angels	of	Divine	Love	bringing
healing	into	every	nerve	in	your	body.
Chant	or	intone	the	full	vibratory	sound	A-El-I-O
	seven	times	and	imaging	it
ringing	in	your	temple	of	healing.	The	response	will	resonate	in	your	heart.	Each
syllable	calls	in	more	Angels	of	Divine	Love.
Now	bathe	in	the	frequencies	of	their	energies.	It	is	love	and	joy	which	purify
your	heart	and	neutralize	all	past	suffering.	As	they	recharge	you	with	Divine
healing	love	so	are	you	drawn	even	closer	to	the	Healing	Angels.
See	this
	love	flow	through	your	four	lower	bodies,	refining	and	purifying	all
density	from	the	past.	Tell	your	cells	it	is	OK	to	accept	this	wonderful	healing
love.	Fill	up	on	it.
After	this	process	and	intoning	the	healing	syllables	your	cells	will	vibrate
with	love	from	the	Spiritual	Dimension.	Give	your	four	lower	bodies	time	to
absorb	this	Divine	Gift.	Sit	quietly,	play	beautiful	or	spiritual
	New	Age	music,	or
look	at	beautiful	art	or	nature.	Stay	within	the	serenity	and	peace	of	Love	Divine.
Meditation	#4:	Color	Baths
Healing	Angels	use	specific	colors	in	their	healing.	They	weave	the	needed
colors	into	your	energy	field	to	offer	protection	from	disease.	For	vitality,	they
use	rose	or	orange	hues.	A	clear	hue	of	green	is	very	helpful	for	general	healing
needs.	It	cools
	down	the	center	of	the	atoms	in	order	to	bring	them	back	into
balance.
It	is	important	to	work	within	the	triangles	of	your	Solar	Angel,	your	soul,	and
your	self	(four	lower	bodies).	Then	you	will	receive	the	best	healing	colors	for
your	purposes.
In	general,	for	the	physical	body:	for	lung	congestion,	an	iridescent	orange	is
called	into	the	area.	For	infections,	sapphire	blue	might
	help	by	acting	as	a
disinfectant.	Sapphire	blue	might	be	used	for	poison	ivy	or	rashes	as	well.	A	rich
green	or	a	green	tinged	with	yellow	is	often	used	for	inflammation.	For	higher
energy,	they	use	stimulating	color,	such	as	a	bright	or	golden	orange	or	yellow.
For	emotions:	different	hues	of	yellow,	gold,	orange,	or	rose	are	great	for
inducing	cheerfulness,	confidence,	and	optimism.	Hues
	of	rose	from	intense	to
pastel	can	create	an	inner	feeling	of	Love.	One	needs	to	experiment	for	oneself
to	find	just	the	right	color	to	help	generate	the	desired	mood.
For	thoughts:	color	is	also	invaluable	to	calm	your	mind.	You	can	surround
yourself	with	luminous	green.	For	clear	thinking	and	mental	stimulation,	you
might	try	a	shower	of	bright	yellow	over	and	around	your	head.	A	tint
	of	yellow-
orange	may	very	well	get	you	out	of	a	mental	fog.	If	your	will	to	live	is	not	very
strong,	try	rose.	Two	or	three	shades	of	rose	will	build	your	will	to	live.
Color	is	already	used	to	create	healing	and	restful	environments.	Colors	are
energy	and	use	by	the	angels	and	man.	It	is	well	to	take	note	of	and	make	use	of
color	for	health	evolution	and	purification.
Final	Summation
In	concluding	this	chapter,	I	asked	Djwhal	Khul	to	eloquently	give	me	a
statement	as	to	health	and	disease	from	the	perspective	of	the	Spiritual	Hierarchy
and	Ascended	Masters.	The	simplicity	of	what	he	said	surprised	me.	Djwhal	said
that,	“Ill	health	is	basically	misdirected	thinking.”
Ill	health	then	is	the	physicalization	of	negative	ego	thoughtforms.	Health	is
the	physicalization
	of	Christ/Buddha	Consciousness	and	thinking.	Lack	of	health
is	not	a	bad	thing,	but	a	good	thing,	being	nothing	more	than	a	neutral	indicator
of	an	imbalance	or	misdirected	thought	in	the	psyche.	If	we	didn’t	have	health
lessons,	we	would	never	learn.	It	is	our	ultimate	teacher	to	help	us	align	our
minds	and	emotions	with	God’s	Laws.	Instead	of	cursing	your	body	for	getting
sick,	bless	your	body
	for	being	your	neutral	and	objective	guide,	which	does
nothing	more	than	mirror	your	state	of	consciousness.
If	our	bodies	never	gave	us	these	signals,	we	would	never	achieve	liberation
and	true	God-consciousness.	Our	bodies	in	essence	force	us	to	remain	on	our
spiritual	path.	God	is	balance,	and	it	is	our	bodies	that	force	us	to	hold	to	this
ideal.	God’s	sons	and	daughters	can	often	be
	quite	rebellious	and	disobedient,
like	little	children.	Health	lessons	are	nothing	more	than	the	body
communication	with	us	and	they	should	not	be	judged	or	looked	at	as	a	bad
thing.	It	is	through	our	suffering	and	health	lessons	that	most	of	us	have	found
God	and	our	spiritual	paths.	This	is	an	extremely	difficult	school	and	it	is
amazing	that	people’s	bodies	hold	up	as	well	as	they	do	given	all
	the	abuse	they
take.	When	they	do	break	down	have	great	compassion	and	love	and
understanding	for	self	and	others.	Let	the	physical	body	teach	you	to	remain
balanced,	integrated,	and	attuned	to	the	Mighty	I	Am	Presence	at	all	times!!!
21
The	Restructuring	of	the	Ego	
	
Lord	Maitreya,	Melchizedek,	and	Djwhal	Khul	told	me	that	there	was	a	focus
during	a	certain	two-week	time	frame	of	restructuring	the	ego,	during	a	certain
phase	of	work	I	was	doing	on	this	book.	I	found	this	comment	to	be	quite
interesting	and	I	knew	there	was	something	new	in	this	statement	beyond	that
which	I	had	previously	understood.	This	whole	book
	has	been	focused	on	how	to
consciously	restructure	the	conscious	and	subconscious	mind	from	negative	ego
thinking.	All	light-workers	must	do	this	work.
What	I	began	to	understand,	however,	through	some	digging	and	prodding
from	the	Masters,	is	that	there	is	a	new	technology	that	could	make	the	process
of	restructuring	the	negative	ego	a	lot	easier.	Before	I	explain	this,	I	want	to
explain
	what	I	mean	by	restructuring	the	negative	ego.	This	means	first	off,	of
course,	learning	to	think	with	your	Christ	Mind	and	not	with	the	negative	ego
mind.	It	also	means	learning	to	integrate	the	twelve	archetypes	in	a	balanced	and
appropriate	manner.	A	great	many	lightworkers	are	over-identified	with	certain
archetypes	and	are	caught	in	certain	complexes	I	spoke	of	many	of	these	in	the
chapter
	on	archetypes.
The	restructuring	of	the	negative	ego	also	has	to	do	with	learning	to	parent
oneself	properly	and	to	not	be	run	by	the	inner	child.	Another	factor	is	balancing
the	four	bodies	and	three	minds.	As	I	have	spoken	about	in	great	detail	in	this
book,	these	psychodynamics	are	often	imbalanced	and	off-kilter.	Consciously
working	and	studying	this	book	and	the	
Soul	Psychology	
book
	is	essential	to
make	the	appropriate	attitudinal	adjustments	in	your	thinking	to	have	a	healthy
psychoepistomology	and	a	healthy	ego.	Here	I	am	speaking	of	a	spiritualized
ego	and	not	a	negative	ego.
In	one	particular	meditation,	I	began	questioning	Djwhal	about	the	possibility
of	using	the	Tree	of	Life	as	a	tool	and	model	for	clearing	the	negative	ego.
Asking	this	question	seemed	to	be
	the	key	to	unlock	a	new	technology	that
Djwhal	Khul	said	he	wasn’t	planning	to	unveil	for	at	least	another	six	months.
Once	catching	wind	of	this	I	put	on	my	Sherlock	Holmes	hat	and	would	not	let
go	until	Djwhal	blessed	us.	As	usual,	he	blessed	way	beyond	my	wildest
imaginations.	He	told	me	that	the	science	that	I	was	using	to	achieve	our	goals	in
restructuring	the	ego	although	being	the	most	advanced
	on	the	planet	was	still	in
the	dark	ages	from	his	perspective.	Djwhal	said	there	is	a	more	advanced
technology	that	could	be	used	in	conjunction	with	one’s	basic	conscious
studying	that	could	greatly	enhance	this	process.	He	had	been	using	it	all	week
on	me,	however,	I	had	no	conscious	awareness	of	this	until	I	pretty	much
accidentally	stumbled	into	it,	which	is	usually	the	case.
What	Djwhal
	said	is	that	there	is	a	fifth,	sixth	and	seventh	dimensional
technology	that	could	be	used	to	greatly	accelerate	this	process	of	restructuring
the	negative	ego.	He	referred	to	this	as	a	process	that	could	greatly	enhance	the
re-establishing	of	a	person’s	“energy	signature.”	Asking	to	be	taken	to	Djwhal
Khul’s	ashram	and	requesting	to	enter	his	holographic	computer	room	does	this
process.	In	previous
	chapters,	I	have	begun	to	discuss	the	holographic	computer,
however	its	uses	cover	an	expanse	that	is	far	beyond	our	wildest	dreams.
I	recently	asked	Djwhal	Khul	how	he	spends	most	of	his	time	in	the	inner
plane	ashram.	What	he	told	me	is	that	most	of	his	time	is	spent	working	with	the
holographic	computer.	If	an	Ascended	Master	such	as	Djwhal	Khul	spends	this
much	time	on	such	a	project,
	you	know	it	must	be	incredible!
The	Holographic	Computer	and	The	Twelve	Archetypes
What	Djwhal	Khul	said	is	that	there	is	an	advanced	technology	that	can	be
used	using	the	holographic	computer	whereby	the	twelve	archetypes	can	be
divinely	imprinted	upon	the	core	of	one’s	being	along	with	the	proper	pranic
energy	flows	that	re-establish	each	person’s	monadic	energy	signature.	This
work,
	done	in	conjunction	with	the	conscious	work	of	studying	this	book	and	the
Soul	Psychology	
book	and	others	like	it,	would	be	the	one-two	punch	to
completely	restructure	the	ego	back	into	its	divine	blueprint.
It	must	be	understood	here	that	each	person’s	energy	signature	and	archetypal
pattern	is	completely	different.	This	is	why	the	holographic	computer	is	needed
in	conjunction	with	each
	person’s	soul	and	monadic	records.	God	creates	each
person	differently,	and	each	person	has	a	different	ray	configuration,	a	different
astrological	configuration	and	a	different	archetypal	mission	and	purpose.	All
these	factors	and	more	must	be	taken	into	account	in	the	archetypal	pranic
imprinting	process.
I	asked	Djwhal	if	this	holographic	computer	could	be	used	in	the	same	way	for
divine
	ray	imprinting,	divine	astrological	imprinting,	divine	Tree	of	Life
imprinting,	as	well	as	archetypal	pranic	imprinting.	Djwhal	said	it	most
definitely	could,	however	he	said	that	when	one	does	this	process	with	the
archetypes	and	pranic	energy	flows	it	automatically	does	the	other	systems	I
mentioned.	The	other	systems	are	just	other	forms	for	doing	similar	work	except
for	the	divine	ray	and
	pranic	flow	imprinting	which	could	be	a	second	procedure
that	could	be	done	in	conjunction	with	the	archetype	imprinting	procedure.	He
said	that	doing	them	all	would	just	be	repetitive.	Studying	them	all,	however,	is
not.
Updated	Information	on	Universal	Archetype	Attunement
Djwhal	Khul	began	to	give	us	more	information,	which	greatly	began	to
expand	our	understanding	of	this	process.
	The	first	thing	he	said	is	that	we
should	call	this	process	the	Universal	Archetype	Attunement.	He	said	that	in
reality,	this	was	a	one	time	imprinting	process	that	could	be	asked	for	in	the
future,	but	this	was	more	for	the	personality	rather	than	the	etheric	body.	You,
my	readers,	will	also	be	pleased	to	hear	that	we	received	a	divine	dispensation
for	this	to	be	something	that	you	can	ask	for
	in	meditation	telepathically	from
Djwhal	Khul	in	his	ashram.	For	those	coming	to	the	Wesak	Celebrations	put	on
each	year	this	attunement	and	another	attunement	called	the	Yod	Spectrum
Attunement	will	be	done	en	masse	at	these	celebrations.	The	Yod	Spectrum
Attunement	is	one	I	am	not	allowed	to	speak	of	at	this	time	and	is	only	for
seventh	degree	initiates;	however,	because	of	the	1000	people	in
	attendance	at
Wesak	it	will	be	allowed	to	be	given	out	to	everyone.	The	Universal	Archetype
Attunement	and	the	Yod	Spectrum	Attunement	will	be	done	together.
One	of	the	purposes	of	these	attunements	among	many	is	to	connect	each
person	to	their	mayavarupa	body	or	perfect	monadic	blueprint	body	in	terms	of
greater	realization.	It	is	the	individual	Ascended	Master	body	for	each	person.
The	Universal	Archetype	Attunement	Djwhal	said	is	to	bring	into	balance	all
past	life	archetypal	themes	and	future	lives	into	the	present.	The	idea	here	is	to
bring	each	person	into	the	universal	archetype,	which	of	course	is	the	twelfth
dimensional	level.	This	is	the	archetype	of	the	Master	in	their	fully	realized
mayavarupa	body.	As	was	stated	in	my	book	
Cosmic	Ascension
,	there	are	three
stages	to	realization	of	these	different	chakra	grids,	bodies,	and	levels.
These	are	installation,	activation,	and	actualization.	The	ultimate	ideal	for
Ascended	Masters	is	to	not	just	achieve	the	fifth	dimensional	level,	which	is	the
beginning	of	the	Ascended	Master	consciousness.	But	to	install,	activate,	and
actualize	all	the	way	up	through	the	twelfth	dimensional	level,	which	includes
the	group	soul,	group	monadic,	level,	solar	level,	galactic	level,	and	universal
level.	It	is	the	full	actualization	of	the	twelfth	dimensional	level	that	allows	one
to	teleport,	and	develop	other	such	advanced	Ascended	Master	abilities.
This	universal	archetype	energy	attunement	will	integrate	the	archetypes	and
pranic	energy	flows	up	through	this	level.	This	does	not	mean	that	you	have
achieved	fully	this	level,	but	it	is	most	definitely	a	step	in	the	right	direction.
You	will	have	achieved	this	permanent	imprinting	on	the	etheric,	psychological,
and	energetic	levels.	This,	of	course,	must	be	supported	by	one’s	own
psychological	work	on	this	level	with	the	archetypes	and	transcending	negative
ego	consciousness,	or	it	won’t	hold	psychologically	and	energetically	even
though	the
	imprinting	is	permanent	etherically.
Each	mind	and	each	body	in	a	sense	has	its	part	to	play	to	achieve	perfect
realization	and	integration.	This	particular	attunement	is	a	new	dispensation	now
given	to	humanity	that	has	never	been	available	before.	This	archetype
attunement	is	not	just	a	planetary,	solar,	galactic	archetype	attunement,	but	a
universal	archetype	attunement	hence	it	is	given
	by	the	grace	of	Lord
Melchizedek	himself,	the	Universal	Logos,	who	is	president	of	the	universal
level.	This	attunement	is	given	at	this	time	because	of	the	mass	waves	of
ascension	that	began	at	Wesak	1995	and	will	continue	through	the	year	2000	and
beyond.
Djwhal	Khul	said	it	is	an	attunement	that,	in	truth,	is	for	those	who	are	just
completing	their	fifth	initiation	and	about	to	ascend
	or	take	their	sixth	initiation.
For	those	receiving	this	attunement	at	Wesak	from	the	third	initiation	and	above,
it	will	serve	to	be	a	greater	accelerator	on	their	path	of	initiation	and	ascension.	It
will	fit	each	person	into	the	perfect	archetypal	energy	alignment,	and	pranic
energy	flow.	Each	person’s	archetypes	will	be	brought	together	and	centered.
For	those	below	the	sixth	initiation,	it	will
	plant	a	seed	and	help	them	to	develop
their	future	Ascended	Master	body.
The	Actual	Process
Ask	to	be	taken	to	Djwhal	Khul’s	ashram	and	ask	him	to	be	taken	to	the
holographic	computer	room	for	a	Universal	Archetypal	Energy	Attunement.	You
are	requesting	to	raise	the	light	quotient	and	to	bring	in	the	pranic	energy	flow
for	the	universal	archetypes.	The	first	station	will	be	the	crown
	chakra.	The
crown	chakra	will	bring	in	the	quality	of	“grace.”	The	second	station	will	be	the
third	eye	and	this	will	bring	in	the	quality	of	“wisdom.”
The	next	station	will	bring	in	the	quality	of	“unconditional	love”	in	the	heart
chakra,	and	will	serve	to	open	the	heart	beyond	the	wounds	of	all	other	lifetimes.
The	solar	plexus	will	be	the	station	to	anchor	the	quality	of	“universal	will.”
	This
will	then	be	grounded	into	the	Earth.
In	review,	we	have	the	universal	grace,	wisdom,	love	and	will	that	will	be
imprinted	into	the	core	of	your	being,	along	with	corresponding	universal	energy
flows	that	are	perfect	for	your	matrix,	so	to	speak.	This	will	serve	to	allow	each
person	to	stand	in	the	truth	of	their	mastery.
Then	a	protective	shield	will	be	placed	around	you,	which
	is	in	harmonic
vibration	of	the	love	of	all	life,	and	non-separateness.	Djwhal	Khul	referred	to
grace	as	standing	alone	in	the	crown	and	the	three-fold	flame	of	love,	wisdom,
and	power	standing	together.	The	addition	of	the	protective	field	then	creates	an
integrated	effect	of	peace	and	joy,	which	is	a	releasing	of	all	ancient	sorrow.
Then	an	invocation	is	done	to	release	the	collective	karma	of
	all	past	lives	into
the	light	of	mercy	and	compassion,	to	anchor	in	universal	archetypes	for
humankind.
Again,	I	now	mention	that	it	is	permissible	to	call	for	this	attunement
telepathically	from	Djwhal	Khul	directly,	however,	I	have	been	given	the
authority	to	facilitate	this	for	people.	If	you	would	like	to	have	this	done	by	one
of	us,	please	call	and	it	will	be	arranged.	It	will	be	a
	permanent	imprinting,
however,	Djwhal	said	that	you	might	periodically	go	back	into	the	energy	and
feeling	of	the	experience.	He	said	because	of	the	influence	of	the	negative	ego
there	is	often	the	losing	of	emotion	connection	with	this	universal	archetype
energy	attunement	state.	This	will	help	the	person	to	recover	their	balance,
which	is	a	nice	tool	to	have	in	your	tool	kit,	so	to	speak.	As	with
	everything	in
God’s	infinite	universe	it	is	there	for	the	asking.	Djwhal	concluded	this
discussion	by	saying	that	this	process	of	the	Universal	Archetype	Attunement	is
the	energetic	signature	of	the	Ascended	Master	in	the	physical	world.
22
How	to	Clear	the	Negative	Ego	through	the
Science	of	the	Tree	of	Life	
	
As	I	was	coming	to	the	completion	of	writing	this	book	Djwhal	Khul	requested
that	I	discuss	using	one	other	system	to	clear	the	negative	ego.	So	far,	we	have
discussed	the	sciences	of	the	archetypes,	rays,	and	astrology.	To	this,	we	now
add	the	science	of	the	Kabbalah	and	the	Tree	of	Life.	For	those	of	you	who
	have
never	studied	the	Kabbalah	or	Tree	of	Life,	I	would	highly	recommend	reading
the	easy-to-read	chapter	I	wrote	on	the	subject	in	my	book	called	
Hidden
Mysteries
.	This	chapter	will	give	you	a	quick	and	profound	foundation	in	this
most	incredible	science.	In	my	personal	opinion,	it	is	one	of	the	most	profound
spiritual	sciences	I	have	ever	come	across.
To	begin	this	discussion	on	the	Tree
	of	Life	I	have	enclosed	a	couple	of	the
charts	from	
Hidden	Mysteries
.
The	Tree	of	Life	is	composed	of	ten	sephiroth	or	ten	spiritual	centers.	There	is
actually	an	eleventh	spiritual	center	called	Daath,	which	refers	to	the	hidden
wisdom	that	is	opened	when	one	attains	higher	initiate	status.	Each	of	these	ten
sephiroth	embodies	a	certain	psychospiritual	quality.	For	the	purposes	of	this
chapter	I	am	not	going	to	review	what	I	already	wrote	about	in	the	
Hidden
Mysteries	
book;	however,	there	is	a	new	sequence	of	information	that	Djwhal
Khul	asked	me	to	write	about	in	this	book	that	is	not	contained	in	my	other	one.
This	has	to	do	with	how	the	Tree	of	Life	can	be	used	to	help	clear	the	negative
ego.
Djwhal	Khul	told	me	that	each	sephiroth	has	a	higher	and	lower	expression.
Sound	familiar	by	now?	This	is	exactly	what	I	have	presented	in	the	chapters	on
the	archetypes,	rays,	and	astrology.	The	same	is	true	of	the	Tree	of	Life.	Each
sephiroth	has	a	spiritual	expression	and	what	might	be	called	a	lower	psychic
expression.
Kether	or	Crown	Sephiroth
We	will	begin	our	discussion	with	the	sephiroth	called	Kether	or	the	crown.
The	crown	or	Kether	sephiroth	deals
	with	the	unmanifest	level	of	the	Tree	of
Life.	It	is	the	sephiroth	that	is	embodied	by	the	Archangel	Metatron.	It	is
connected	to	the	Ain	Soph	and	Ain	Soph	Aur,	or	the	Limitless	Light	and	Love.
Djwhal	said	that	this	spiritual	center	deals	with	the	type	of	person	who	puts
spirituality	as	their	top	priority.	They	live	a	very	in	tune	life	spiritually	and	have
spiritual	practices	and	sadhana.	They
	are	also	able	to	keep	their	physical	life	in
balance	and	are	able	to	move	forward.	Their	heavenly	and	earthly	life	has	a	good
balance.
Djwhal	Khul	said	the	lower	expression	of	the	Kether	sephiroth	is	too	top
heavy	or	over-identified	with	heavenly	energies	at	the	expense	of	their	physical
body	and	earth	life.	This	type	of	person	is	so	into	the	ephemeral	they	don’t	live
properly	on	the	Earth.
	They	haven’t	learned	the	lesson	of	bringing	heaven	to
earth.	Ascension	as	we	all	know	is	really	descension.	It	is	anchoring	your	soul
and	monad	into	your	physical	body	on	Earth	and	being	of	service	on	here.
This	is	a	very	common	theme	among	many	lightworkers.	They	often	don’t
take	care	of	their	physical	bodies	properly.	They	often	can’t	find	work	and	they
often	don’t	do	well	in	emotional
	relationships	because	they	are	too	cosmic.
There	is	nothing	wrong	with	being	cosmic.	I	happen	to	like	this	in	myself.
However,	balance	must	be	found	among	all	chakras,	all	bodies,	and	fusion	of
heaven	and	earth	must	be	achieved	for	true	Self-realization.	One	might	say	in	the
lower	expression	the	psychological	and	earthly	levels	are	not	integrated	properly
due	to	an	imbalanced	mindset.
Chokmah
	or	Wisdom	Sephiroth
The	next	sephiroth	on	the	Tree	of	Life	on	the	right	side	of	the	tree	as	one	looks
at	it	on	a	piece	of	paper,	is	Chokmah	or	wisdom.	The	higher	expression	of	the
sephiroth	is	connected	to	Lightworkers	who	have	a	learned	or	just	innate
connection	to	Divine	wisdom	and	who	are	realizing	their	potentials.	They	are	not
necessarily	very	metaphysical	in	realizing	this.	The	higher
	expression	has	a
strong	connection,	Djwhal	said,	to	the	proper	will/wisdom	balance.	This	type	of
person	has	the	wisdom	to	know	where	to	be	at	the	right	time.
Djwhal	Khul	said	that	this	sephiroth	often	tends	to	be	a	person	who	is	very
religious,	since	this	sephiroth	is	connected	to	the	Divine	Father	as	opposed	to	the
Divine	Mother.	It	is	connected	to	a	little	more	of	the	male	aspect	of	divinity.
	The
Jewish	religion	might	be	a	good	example.	A	great	emphasis	on	the	law,
academics,	and	education.	Will	and	academic	knowledge	make	up	the	wisdom.
Djwhal	Khul	said	that	in	the	higher	expression	they	are	emotionally	balanced,
and	are	quite	steady	and	evenminded.
The	lower	expression	of	this	sephiroth,	Djwhal	said,	has	a	weak	will	function.
Wisdom	is	taken	down	into	lower	more	materialistic
	endeavors,	functioning	just
on	the	concrete	mind	and	wisdom	rather	than	the	Higher	Mind	and	abstract
esoteric	or	philosophical	mind.	In	religion	that	might	mean	they	have	to	follow
the	letter	of	the	law,	instead	of	the	higher	meaning	of	what	is	really	intended.
What	this	leads	to	is	that	their	scope	of	potentiality	is	unmanifested.	Things	have
to	be	a	certain	way	and	have	become	more	limited	in
	scope.	They	might	be	too
conservative,	and	limited	in	certain	subconscious	and	conscious	patterns.
Wisdom	has	hence	taken	a	small	frame	of	reference	instead	of	a	large	frame	of
reference.	Wisdom	has	become	strictly	organized	and	limited	by	the	things	they
have	studied	or	experienced,	as	opposed	to	really	tapping	into	the	unlimited
Source.	The	negative	ego	or	fear	has	come	into	much	greater	play.
	This	in	truth
is	true	of	all	the	lower	expressions	of	all	ten	sephiroth.	Here	we	might	say	we
have	wisdom	with	a	little	“w,”	rather	than	a	big	“W.”	It	is	wisdom	more	of	the
personality	rather	than	the	progressing	wisdom	of	the	soul	and	monad.
The	Sephiroth	of	Binah	or	Understanding
The	sephiroth	of	Binah	or	understanding,	on	the	left	side	of	the	Tree	is
connected	more	with	the	Divine
	Mother	Principle	as	opposed	to	the	Divine
Father	in	the	Chokmah.	It	has	a	focus	upon	understanding	and	receptivity.	In	its
higher	expression,	Djwhal	Khul	said,	we	think	of	one	who	carries	the	Divine
Mother.	It	also	might	be	the	great	mystic	where	Chokmah	would	be	more	the
great	occultist	psychologist	or	master	spiritual	teacher.	The	Divine	Mother	of
course,	is	the	embodiment	of	receptivity,	love,
	compassion,	and	under-standing.
Djwhal	said	that	in	the	higher	expression	of	Binah	there	is	still	the	strong
expression	of	the	Divine	will	underlying	this	more	feminine	sephiroth.
In	the	lower	expression	of	Binah	we	have	the	person	who	is	always	taking	on
too	much.	Here	is	the	person	who	is	not	just	compassionate	but	is	too	empathic.
Also,	here	the	mother	is	a	codependent	rather	than	a	divine
	expression	of
unconditional	love	and	non-attachment.	We	also	have	over-mothering,	too
selfless,	not	knowing	how	to	take	care	of	self.	The	person	often	needs	to	mother
the	world	and	hence	puts	on	too	much	weight.
Djwhal	went	on	to	say	that	people	often	end	up	identifying	with	one	of	the	ten
sephiroth	just	as	people	often	end	up	doing	this	with	the	twelve	archetypes.	The
ideal	is	to	integrate
	and	utilize	all	ten	sephiroth	in	their	higher	expressions	in	a
balanced	and	appropriate	manner.	The	Tree	of	Life	hence	is	another	wonderful
method,	tool,	and	system	for	understanding	archetypes.	Each	of	these	tools	can
be	a	bit	repetitive,	however	each	person	will	attune	to	the	system	or	systems	that
work	best	for	them.	The	studying	of	them	all	in	an	eclectic	and	universal	manner
just	helps	to
	deepen	the	overall	understanding	and	helps	in	the	refinement	and
purification	process.	The	ideal	is	to	identify	more	with	the	top	of	the	tree,	but	be
well-balanced	and	integrated	in	all	of	them.
One	can	imagine	the	Tree	of	Life	as	superimposed	over	the	physical	body	and
etheric	body	much	like	a	chakra	system.	When	one	sephiroth	is	not	integrated
properly	this	will	prevent	the	prana	from
	flowing	properly	through	the	etheric
body.	Our	programming	acts	like	a	groove	in	a	record,	or	like	etheric	pipes,
which	govern	the	flow	of	this	energy.	When	archetypes,	rays,	or	sephiroth	are
not	integrated	properly	in	their	higher	expression,	the	flow	of	energy	will	be
imbalanced	which	will	create	physical	and	psychological	symptoms.	Every
person,	when	they	come	into	this	world,	is	usually	predominate
	in	one	sephiroth.
This	is	the	great	psychological	work	that	needs	to	be	done.
This	again	is	where	the	holographic	computer	room	and	the	studying	you	are
now	doing	can	correct	these	imbalances	in	thinking	and	prana	flow	in	a	most
amazing	and	complex	manner.	I	think	you	can	see	that	you	would	need	the
ultimate	computer	to	work	this	out	for	each	person.	This	is	also	a	type	of
technology	the
	Arcturians	are	so	well	versed	in.
Djwhal	Khul	said	that	Binah,	or	understanding,	really	means	compassion.	This
actually	might	be	a	better	word	to	describe	it	than	understanding	as	the
touchstone.	So,	in	review,	we	have	Kether	being	the	pure	Spirit	that	contains	all.
Chokmah	is	the	spiritual	knowledge	and	Binah	is	the	spiritual	compassion	and
understanding	when	manifest	in	their	highest	expressions.
The	Sephiroth	of	Chesed	and	Mercy
The	sephiroth	of	Chesed	on	the	right	side	of	the	Tree	of	Life	deals	with	the
soul	level	of	the	Tree	as	opposed	to	the	monadic	level	which	we	were	just
speaking	of	previously.	Chesed	deals	with	emotions,	and	the	feelings	of
unconditional	love	and	compassion.	Djwhal	Khul	said	the	upper	expression
would	be	someone	like	St.	Francis	of	Assisi,	or	Mother
	Teresa.	These	two	great
saints	are	different	than	the	sephiroth	Binah	for	they	don’t	mother	the	world	as
this	previous	sephiroth	did.	St.	Francis	and	Mother	Teresa	administer	mercy	in	a
very	balanced	way.	The	term	mercy,	Djwhal	said,	deals	also	with	the	Christ
quality	of	justice	and	fairness.
In	the	lower	expression	the	person	feels	like	they	have	never	been	treated
fairly	or	justly	and
	that	they	are	victims	of	mercilessness.	They	often	think	they
are	giving	mercy,	but,	in	truth,	what	they	are	doing	is	victimizing	themselves.
Geburah	and	The	Sephiroth	of	Serenity
Geburah	is	the	balance	to	Chesed.	Where	Chesed	is	unconditional	love,
compassion,	and	mercy,	Geburah	is	discernment	and	self-control,	and	divine
will.	It	is	the	will	with	the	wisdom	hence	blended	with	the
	love.	In	the	higher
expression	this	type	of	person	is	always	centered	and	in	the	middle	path,	as
Buddha	would	say.	They	are	always	in	inner	peace	within	themselves	and	at
inner	peace	with	other	people.	They	are	serene	and	are	very	much	the
peacemaker	in	a	very	positive	sense	of	the	term.	They	are	good	in	political
situations	for	they	have	the	serenity	and	strength	of	will	to	remain	clear	and
centered.
	They	are	excellent	mediators	and	arbitrators.
In	the	lower	expression	of	Geburah	is	a	person	who	is	undiscerning	in	life.
They	have	a	problem	making	decisions.	They	are	not	decisive.	They	don’t	know
how	to	retain	their	personal	power.	They	are	in	essence	out	of	balance	and	are
always	struggling.	They	do	not	have	mastery	over	their	emotions	and	are
victimized	by	the	outside	world	and	other
	people.	They	talk	about	the
importance	of	being	strong	but	have	not	learned	how	to	do	it	yet.
The	Sephiroth	of	Tiphareth	or	Beauty
The	sephiroth	of	Tiphareth	has	as	its	key	quality	that	of	beauty.	In	the	higher
expression	it	is	the	person	who	sees	beauty	in	everything,	rather	like	the	fourth
ray	type	in	its	higher	expression.	They	not	only	see	beauty	in	everything,	but
also	create
	beauty	all	around	them.	This	is	beauty	in	nature,	beauty	in	life,	in
environment	and	surroundings.	They	also	have	the	strength	of	beauty	about
themselves.
The	lower	expression	of	Tiphareth	is	vanity.	Instead	of	selfless	interest	in
beauty,	this	is	tainted	by	a	self-interest	in	beauty	beyond	the	quality	of
Godliness.	They	want	everything	to	be	beautiful	for	themselves	not	as	a	service
for
	God	and	humanity.
The	Sephiroth	of	Netzach	and	Victory
Netzach	has	to	do	with	the	personality	level.	The	key	word	is	victory	and	has
to	do	with	the	feeling	state.	On	the	higher	level,	Djwhal	said	that	this	is	the
person	who	sees	justice	and	triumph.	If	a	person	is	just	in	this	sephiroth	it	may
manifest	only	on	a	personality	level	of	self-actualization	and	not	necessarily	at
the	soul
	or	monadic	level	of	victory.	We	see	here	how	when	many	sephiroth
blend	together	in	function,	higher	levels	of	victory	and	triumph	can	be	achieved.
At	the	personality	level	of	victory,	we	might	have	the	great	athlete,	conqueror,	or
successful	psychologist	who	has	not	entered	the	realm	necessarily	of	soul
psychology,	but	is	very	successful	in	personality	level	psychology.	Here	we	are
speaking	of	personality
	level	of	mastery	rather	than	soul	or	spirit	mastery.
The	lower	expression	would	be	the	tyrant	or	dictator.	Here	we	have	the	person
who	always	needs	to	win	and	be	the	“top	dog,”	and	is	extremely	competitive.
They	have	not	yet	learned	to	transcend	the	negative	ego	game	of
superiority/inferiority	complex.	This	type	of	person	always	needs	to	be	right	and
is	hence	very	self-righteous.	They	strive
	for	victory	at	all	costs,	even	at	the
expense	of	their	own	soul.	They	make	bad	decisions	when	in	a	leadership	role
because	of	the	negative	ego.	They	always	need	to	hide	any	sense	of	weakness	or
vulnerability	because	of	their	need	to	the	best!
The	Sephiroth	of	Hod	or	Splendor
Hod	is	the	opposite	of	Netzach.	Its	key	word	is	splendor	and	is	focused	not	on
the	feeling	state,	but	on	logic,
	thinking,	and	analytical	perception	on	the
personality	level.	In	the	higher	expression,	this	is	a	person	who	is	a	great
organizer.	Since	we	are	still	focused	here	on	the	personality	level,	if	not	blended
with	other	sephiroth	it	will	remain	more	on	the	level	of	the	concrete	mind.	They
can	organize	great	splendid	banquets,	conferences,	political	campaigns,	or
weddings.
In	the	lower	expression,
	we	have	the	person	who	is	totally	disorganized	and
their	house	and	life	is	a	mess.	They	would	like	to	have	it	together	but	are	not
well-developed	yet	in	this	sephiroth.	They	are	often	very	limited	in	their
perspective,	and	see	life	through	a	very	small	selfish	lens	and	hence	do	not	see
the	bigger	picture.	They	are	often	striving	for	splendor,	but	it	is	done	in	service
of	the	negative	ego	rather
	than	the	true	splendor	of	Spirit.	This	reminds	me	of
what	Jesus	referred	to	in	
A	Course	In	Miracles	
as	grandeur	versus	grandiosity.	In
the	lower	expression,	we	have	misjudging	self	and	others.	Much	projection,	for
the	head	is	not	screwed	on	straight,	so	to	speak.	The	weakness	of	the	mental
function	allows	the	emotional	body	to	have	too	much	sway.
Yesod,	The	Sephiroth	of	Foundation
Yesod	again	deals	with	the	personality	level,	and	focuses	on	the	quality	of
foundation	and	the	subconscious	mind.	This	type	of	person	has	made	the
subconscious	mind	their	servant,	which,	of	course,	is	the	ideal	since	it	has	no
rational	reasoning.	In	addition,	the	person	has	learned	to	tap	and	utilize	the
unbelievable	abilities	of	the	subconscious	mind.	This	type	of	person	is	very
strong	in	their	convictions,
	has	faith,	and	has	mastered	fear.	They	can	go	into	the
most	difficult	situations	and	handle	themselves	extremely	well.	They	are	often
heroic	and	will	take	a	job	no	one	else	will	do.	This	is	because	they	are	so
grounded	and	strong	in	their	foundation.	The	foundation	of	all	advanced	spiritual
work	is	a	healthy	psychology,	which	has	its	foundation	in	the	relationship
between	a	person’s	conscious
	and	subconscious	mind.	This	type	of	person	might
also	be	very	psychic	but	not	necessarily	spiritual	if	not	blended.
In	the	lower	expression	of	Yesod	is	someone	completely	victimized	by	the
subconscious	mind.	There	are	an	enormous	number	of	people	in	this	world	who
suffer	this	malady.	They	are	on	automatic	pilot	and	not	conscious,	vigilant	and
do	not	have	personal	power	attached	to	the	conscious
	mind.	They	are	tormented
souls	who	by	no	fault	of	their	own	have	not	been	properly	educated	as	to	the
workings	of	their	mind.	They	feel	great	weakness	and	fear	in	all	situations.
The	Sephiroth	of	Malkuth	or	The	Kingdom
Malkuth,	or	the	Kingdom,	has	to	do	with	the	physical	earth	level	of	the	Tree.	It
is	the	counterpart	to	Kether	in	the	crown.	It	is	like	heaven	and	earth.	Malkuth	in
its
	higher	expression	is	a	person	who	can	live	like	a	king	on	the	Earth.	When	just
developed	in	this	one	sephiroth	they	are	physically	very	strong	and	healthy	and
function	extremely	well	in	earthly	life.	They	may	not	necessarily	be	developed
on	the	soul	or	monadic	level	but	are	very	successful	in	an	earthly	sense.	They	are
born	with	a	very	strong	physical	constitution.	They	are	successful	in	their
	jobs
and	make	a	good	living.	They	know	how	to	live	on	the	Earth	and	thrive.	A
person	with	very	good	physical	capabilities.	They	often	have	great	knowledge	on
how	to	fix	physical	things.	The	lesson	of	this	type	of	person	is	then	to	learn	to
blend	the	soul	level	into	this	earthly	function	and	then	finally	the	monadic	level
into	this	function.
The	lower	expression	of	Malkuth	is	the	person	who
	is	ridden	with	fears	of
physical	illness	or	is	a	hypochondriac.	A	person	who	is	fearful	of	money	and
physical	survival.	They	are	preoccupied	with	first	chakra	concerns.	They	are
often	very	superstitious.
Tree	of	Life	Summation
The	ultimate	example	on	this	planet	of	the	Master	who	fully	embodies	all
sephiroth	of	the	Tree	of	Life	and	much	more	is	his	Holiness	the	Lord	Sai	Baba.
Here
	we	would	also	have	the	hidden	sephiroth	of	Daath	in	the	upper	center	of
the	Tree	coming	into	play.	Daath	is	the	sephiroth	of	hidden	knowledge.	Djwhal
Khul	told	that	there	is	no	lower	expression	of	this	sephiroth,	for	it	doesn’t	come
into	manifestation	until	the	higher	expression	has	come	into	play.	In	Sai	Baba	or
Lord	Maitreya	on	Earth,	we	have	the	fully	realized	Tree	of	Life	where	all
sephiroth	are
	integrated	and	balanced	properly	as	God	would	have	it	be.
Again,	the	ideal	is	to	integrate	all	ten	sephiroth	in	a	balanced	manner	as	Sai
Baba	has	so	perfectly	embodied.	Superimpose	now	the	Tree	of	Life	upon	your
own	body,	and	chakra	system.	The	flow	of	prana	throughout	your	seven	basic
chakras	and	through	your	entire	etheric	body	will	be	governed	by	how	well
integrated	you	are	in	the	Tree
	and/or	where	you	are	undeveloped.	This	will	apply
to	specific	chakras	and	also	to	the	flow	of	energy	on	the	right	and	left	sides	of
your	body.	I	think	you	can	see	here	that	there	is	probably	no	more	perfect	model
for	understanding	creation	and	its	manifestation	on	a	macrocosmic	and
microcosmic	level	than	the	Tree	of	Life.
Do	read	and	study	the	chapter	on	the	Tree	of	Life	and	the	Kabbalah
	in	my
book	
Hidden	Mysteries
.	It	is	an	interesting	study	then	to	see	how	the	twelve	rays
fit	in	with	the	Tree	and	then	how	the	Tarot	Cards	as	another	archetypal	system	of
personality	integration	fits	in.	This	study	shows	how	the	twelve	signs	of	the
Zodiac	fit	into	this	system,	and	the	twelve	archetypes.	I	do	recommend	that	you
call	in	Djwhal	Khul,	Lord	Maitreya,	Lord	Buddha,	and	Lord	Melchizedek
	for	the
anchoring	and	activation	of	your	planetary	and	cosmic	Tree	of	Life.	Then	do
work	with	the	holographic	computer	in	Djwhal	Khul’s	ashram	under	his	tutelage
to	help	integrate	and	imprint	the	actual	archetypal	pattern	and	prana	flow	that	is
perfectly	precise	for	your	energy	signature	and	your	personal	Tree	of	Life
configuration.
This,	in	truth,	is	the	core	and	basis	of	all	psychological
	and	all	psycho-spiritual
work.	It	is	the	foundation	for	all	advanced	spiritual	study.	So	you	see	that	the
archetypes	can	be	balanced,	and	integrated	through	any	of	these	systems	be	it
archetypes,	rays,	astrology,	tarot,	or	the	Tree	of	Life.	I	have	included	all	of	them,
as	is	my	usual	eclectic	and	universalistic	style	to	try	and	give	you	the	full	scope
and	vision	of	the	entire	prism	of	light	in
	this	area.	The	study	of	all	systems	will
deepen	your	understanding	in	a	most	profound	way.	Seeing	how	each	of	these
systems	correlates,	further	deepens	this	process.	Djwhal	Khul	has	referred	to
these	sessions	in	the	holographic	computer	room	in	his	ashram	as	“archetypal
attunements.”	The	attunement	being	the	divine	archetypal	imprint	in	conjunction
with	the	perfect	prana	energy	flow	for	each	person’s
	mission	and	purpose	leads
to	the	cementing	in	of	each	person’s	monadic	energy	signature	being	put
perfectly	into	place.
23
My	Spiritual	Mission	and	Purpose	
by	Dr.
Joshua	David	Stone	
	
My	Spiritual	mission	and	purpose	is	a	multifaceted	process.	Spirit	and	the	inner
plane	Ascended	Masters	have	asked	myself	and	Wistancia	(married	since	1998),
to	anchor	onto	the	Earth	an	inner	plane	Ashram	and
Spiritual/Psychological/Physical/Earthly	Teaching	and	Healing	Academy!	This
Academy	is	called	the	Melchizedek	Synthesis
	Light	Academy!	We	are
overlighted	in	this	mission	by	Melchizedek,	the	Mahatma,	Archangel	Metatron,
the	inner	plane	Ascended	Master	Djwhal	Khul,	and	a	large	group	of	Ascended
Masters	and	Angels	such	as	the	Divine	Mother,	Archangel	Michael,	Archangel
Gabriel,	Sai	Baba,	Vywamus,	the	Lord	of	Arcturus,	Lord	Buddha,	Lord
Maitreya,	Mother	Mary,	Quan	Yin,	El	Morya,	Kuthumi,	Serapis	Bey,	Paul	the
Venetian,
	Master	Hilarion,	Sananda,	Lady	Portia	and	Saint	Germain,	and	a	great
many	others	who	we	like	to	call	the	“Core	Group”!
I	have	also	been	asked	by	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Master	Djwhal	Khul,	who
again	wrote	the	Alice	Bailey	books,	and	was	also	involved	in	the	Theosophical
Movement,	to	take	over	his	inner	plane	Ashram	when	he	moves	on	to	his	next
Cosmic	Position,	in	the	not	too	distant	future.
Djwhal	holds	Spiritual	Leadership	over	what	is	called	the	inner	plane	Second
Ray	Synthesis	Ashram.	On	the	inner	plane	the	Second	Ray	Department	is	a
gigantic	three	story	building	complex	with	vast	gardens.
The	Ascended	Master	Djwhal	Khul	runs	the	first	floor	of	the	Second	Ray
Department	in	the	Spiritual	Hierarchy.	Master	Kuthumi,	the	Chohan	of	the
Second	Ray,	runs	the	second	floor.
	Lord	Maitreya	the	Planetary	Christ	runs	the
third	floor!	When	Djwhal	Khul	leaves	for	his	next	Cosmic	Position,	I	will	be
taking	over	this	first	floor	Department.	The	Second	Ray	Department	is	focused
on	the	“Spiritual	Education,”	of	all	lightworkers	on	Earth,	and	is	the	Planetary
Ray	of	the	Love/Wisdom	of	God.	What	is	unique,	however,	about	the	Synthesis
Ashram,	is	that	it	has	a	unique	mission	and
	purpose	which	is	to	help
lightworkers	perfectly	master	and	integrate	all	Twelve	Planetary	Rays	which	is
one	of	the	reasons	I	love	this	particular	Spiritual	leadership	position	and
assignment	so	much!	For	this	has	been	a	great	mission	and	focus	of	all	my	work!
Wistancia	and	my	mission	has	been	to	anchor	the	Synthesis	Ashram	and
Teaching	Academy	onto	the	physical	Earth,	which	we	have	done
	and	are
continuing	to	do	in	an	ever	increasing	manner	on	a	global	Level.	Currently	there
are	over	15	branches	of	the	Academy	that	have	been	set	up	around	the	world!
The	Academy	actually	first	came	into	existence	in	1996!	This	we	have	been
guided	to	call	the	Melchizedek	Synthesis	Light	Academy	for	the	following
reasons.	It	is	called	this	because	of	the	Overlighting	Presence	of	Melchizedek
(Our	Universal
	Logos),	The	Mahatma	(Avatar	of	Synthesis),	and	the	Light
which	is	the	embodiment	of	Archangel	Metatron,	who	created	all	outer	light	in
our	Universe	and	is	the	creator	of	the	electron!	These	three	beings,	Djwhal	Khul,
and	a	very	large	Core	Group	of	inner	plane	Planetary	and	Cosmic	Masters	help
us	in	all	this	work.
I	have	also	been	asked	by	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters	to	be	one	of	the
main	“High	Priest	Spokespersons	for	the	Planetary	Ascension	Movement	on
Earth.”	I	have	been	asked	to	do	this	because	of	the	cutting	edge,	yet	easy	to
understand	nature	of	all	my	books	and	work,	as	well	as	certain	Spiritual
Leadership	qualities	I	humbly	possess.	In	this	regard,	I	represent	all	the	Masters,
which	works	out	perfectly	given	the	Synthesis	nature	of	my	work.	I	function	as
kind	of	a	“Point
	Man”	for	the	Ascended	Masters	on	Earth,	as	they	have
described	it	to	me.
The	Masters	under	the	guidance	of	Lord	Buddha,	our	Planetary	Logos,	has
also	guided	us	as	part	of	our	mission,	to	bring	Wesak	to	the	West!	So,	for	the	last
six	years	we	have	held	a	Global	Festival	and	Conference	at	Mt	Shasta,	California
for	2000	People.	This,	of	course,	honors	the	Wesak	Festival,	which	is	the	holiest
day	of	the	year	to	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters,	and	the	high	point	of
incoming	Spiritual	energies	to	the	Earth	on	the	Taurus	Full	moon	each	year!	We
invite	all	lightworkers	to	join	us	each	year	from	all	over	the	world	for	this
momentous	celebration	which	is	considered	to	be	one	of	the	premiere	Spiritual
Events	in	the	New	Age	Movement!
The	fourth	part	of	my	mission	and	purpose	is	the
	30	Volume	Easy	to	Read
Encyclopedia	of	the	Spiritual	Path	I	have	written.	So	far,	I	have	completed	27
volumes	in	this	Ascension	Book	Series.	The	Ascended	Master	Djwhal	Khul
prophesized	in	the	1940s	that	there	would	be	a	third	dispensation	of	Ascended
Master	teachings	what	would	appear	at	the	turn	of	the	century.	The	first
dispensation	of	Ascended	Master	teachings	was	the	“Theosophical	Movement,”
channeled	by	Madam	Blavatsky.	The	second	dispensation	of	Ascended	Master
teachings	was	the	Alice	Bailey	books,	channeled	by	Djwhal	Khul,	and	the	
I	AM
Discourses
,	channeled	by	Saint	Germain.	My	30	volume	series	of	books	is,	by
the	grace	of	GOD	and	the	Masters,	the	third	dispensation	of	Ascended	Master
teachings	as	prophesized	by	Djwhal	Khul.	These	books	are	co-creative
channeled	writings	of	myself
	and	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters.	What	is
unique	about	my	work	is	how	easy	to	read	and	understand	it	is,	how	practical,
comprehensive,	cutting	edge,	as	well	as	integrated	and	synthesized.	Wistancia
has	added	to	this	work	with	her	wonderful	book	“Invocations	to	the	Light.”
The	fifth	aspect	of	our	work	and	mission,	which	is	extremely	unique	is	the
emphasis	of	“Synthesis.”	My	books	and
	all	my	work	integrate	in	a	very	beautiful
way	all	religions,	all	Spiritual	paths,	all	mystery	schools,	all	Spiritual	teachings,
and	all	forms	of	psychology!	Everyone	feels	at	home	in	this	work	because	of	its
incredible	inclusive	nature!	This	synthesis	ideal	is	also	seen	at	the	Wesak
Celebrations,	for	people	come	from	all	religions,	Spiritual	paths,	mystery
schools	and	teachings.	The	Event	is	overlighted
	by	over	one	million	inner	plane
Ascended	Masters,	Archangels	and	Angels,	Elohim	Masters	and	Christed
Extraterrestrials.	Wesak,	the	books,	the	Academy	and	all	our	work	embody	this
synthesis	principle.	This	is	part	of	why	I	and	we	have	been	given	Spiritual
Leadership	of	the	Synthesis	Ashram	on	Earth,	and	soon	on	the	inner	plane	as
well.	This	also	explains	our	unique	relationship	to	Melchizedek
	who	holds
responsibility	for	the	“synthesis	development,”	of	all	beings	in	our	Universe.
Our	connection	to	the	Mahatma	is	explained	by	the	fact	that	the	Mahatma	is	the
Cosmic	embodiment	of	“Synthesis”	in	the	infinite	Universe.	This	is	also	why	the
Mahatma	also	goes	by	the	name,	“The	Avatar	of	Synthesis.”	Archangel
Metatron	who	holds	the	position	in	the	Cosmic	Tree	of	Life	of	Kether,	or	the
Crown,
	hence	has	a	“Synthesis	Overview,”	of	all	of	the	Sephiroth	or	Centers	of
the	Cosmic	Tree	of	Life!	Djwhal	Khul	holds	Spiritual	leadership	of	the
“Synthesis	Ashram”	on	a	Planetary,	Solar	and	Galactic	level	for	the	Earth!	The
Core	Group	of	Masters	that	overlight	our	mission	are	the	embodiment	of	the
synthesis	understanding!
The	unique	thing	about	our	work	is	that	it	teaches	some	of	the	most
	cutting-
edge	co-created	channeled	work	on	the	planet,	in	the	realm	of	Ascension	and
Ascended	Master	Teachings.	This	can	be	seen	in	my	books	
The	Complete
Ascension	Manual
,	
Beyond	Ascension
,	
Cosmic	Ascension
,	
Revelations	of	a
Melchizedek	Initiate
,	and	
How	To	Teach	Ascension	Classes
.	Because	of	my
background	as	a	professional	Psychologist	and	Licensed	Marriage,	Family,	and
Child	Counselor,	I	also
	specialize	in	some	of	the	most	advanced	cutting-edge
work	on	the	planet	in	the	field	of	Spiritual	psychology.	In	this	regard,	I	would
guide	you	to	my	books	
Soul	Psychology
,	
Integrated	Ascension
,	
How	To	Clear
The	Negative	Ego
,	and	
Ascension	and	Romantic	Relationships
!	Thirdly,	I	also
have	humbly	brought	forth	some	extremely	cutting-edge	work	on	the
physical/earthly	level	in	the	field	of	healing,
	Spirituality	and	society,	politics,
social	issues,	Extraterrestrials,	Spiritual	leadership,	Spirituality	and	business,
Goddess	work	with	Wistancia,	and	of	course	the	annual	Wesak	Celebrations.
This	can	be	found	in	my	books	
The	Golden	Keys	to	Ascension	and	Healing
,
Hidden	Mysteries
,	
Manual	for	Planetary	Leadership
,	
Your	Ascension	Mission:
Embracing	Your	Puzzle	Piece
,	
How	to	be	Successful	in	your
	Business	from	a
Spiritual	and	Financial	Perspective
,	and	
Empowerment	and	Integration	of	the
Goddess	
written	by	Wistancia	and	myself,	to	name	a	few!
Adding	to	this,	the	eleven	new	books	I	have	just	completed	and	am
completing:	
The	Golden	Book	of	Melchizedek:	How	To	Become	an	Integrated
Christ/Buddha	in	This	Lifetime
,	
How	to	Release	Fear-Based	Thinking	and
Feeling:	An	In-depth	Study	of	Spiritual
	Psychology
,	
The	Little	Flame	and	Big
Flame	
(my	first	children’s	book),	
Letters	of	Guidance	to	Students	and	Friends
,
Ascension	Names	and	Terms	Glossary
,	
Ascension	Activation	Meditations	of	The
Spiritual	Hierarchy
,	
The	Divine	Blue	Print	for	the	Seventh	Golden	Age
,	
How	To
Do	Psychological	and	Spiritual	Counseling	For	Self	and	Others
,	
God	and	His
Team	of	Super	Heroes	
(my	second	children’s	book),	and
	
How	To	Achieve
Perfect	Radiant	Health	From	The	Soul’s	Perspective
!
Currently	I	have	completed	27	Volumes	in	my	Ascension	Book	Series.
Fourteen	of	these	books	are	published	by	Light	Technology	Publishers.	A	new
version	of	
Soul	Psychology	
has	just	been	published	by	Ballantine	Publishers
which	is	owned	by	Random	House,	which	I	am	quite	excited	about	as	well!	The
other	books	are	in	manuscript
	form	and	I	am	currently	negotiating	with	various
publishers	for	publishing	rights!	My	books	have	also	been	translated	and
published	in	Germany,	Brazil,	Japan,	Holland,	Israel	and	this	process	continues
to	expand.
Spirit	and	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters	have	told	me	that	because	of	this
unique	focus,	that	what	I	have	actually	done	in	a	co-creative	way	and	manner
with	them,	is	open	a	new
	Portal	to	God.	This	new	portal	opening	stems	out	of	all
the	cutting-edge	Ascension	Activations	and	Ascended	Master	Teachings,	the
totally	cutting-edge	Spiritual	Psychology	work	because	of	my	background	as	a
Psychologist	and	Licensed	Marriage,	Family,	and	Child	Counselor,	and	the
unique	ability	to	ground	all	the	work	into	the	physical/earthly	world	in	a
balanced	and	integrated	manner.	Spirit	and
	the	Masters	have	told	me	that	this
new	Portal	to	God	is	on	an	inner	and	outer	plane	level,	and	continues	to	be	built
in	a	co-creative	way	with	Spirit,	the	Masters,	myself,	and	certain	other	Masters
and	High	Level	Initiates	who	are	helping	me	on	the	inner	and	outer	planes!	I
have	Spiritual	leadership,	however,	in	spearheading	this	project,	and	it	is	one	of
the	most	exciting	projects	I	am	involved
	in.
In	terms	of	my	Spiritual	initiation	process	as	I	have	spoken	of	in	my	books,	I
have	currently	now	taken	my	14th	major	initiation.	These	are	not	the	minor
initiations	that	some	groups	work	with,	but	are	the	major	initiations	that	embody
all	the	minor	initiations	within	them.	The	Seventh	Initiation	is	the	achieving	of
Liberation	and	Ascension.	The	Tenth	Initiation	is	the	completion	of
	Planetary
Ascension	and	the	beginning	of	Solar	Initiation.	The	Eleventh	Initiation,	being
the	first	Galactic	Initiation.	The	Twelfth	Initiation,	being	the	first	Universal
Initiation	from	an	Earthly	perspective.	Having	taken	my	14th	initiation,	what	is
most	important	to	me	is	that	these	initiations	have	been	taken	in	an	“integrated
manner,”	for,	in	truth,	the	Masters	told	me	that	they	are	not	really
	into
Ascension,	which	may	surprise	a	great	many	lightworkers.	The	Masters	are	into
“Integrated	Ascension”!	There	are	many	lightworkers	taking	initiations,	but
many	are	not	doing	so	in	an	integrated	and	balanced	manner!	They	are	taking
them	on	a	Spiritual	level,	but	they	are	not	being	properly	integrated	into	the
mental	and	emotional	bodies	or	psychological	level	properly.	They	are	also	not
transcending
	negative	ego	fear-based	thinking	and	feeling	and	properly
balancing	their	four	body	system.	They	are	also	not	integrating	their	initiations
fully	into	the	physical/earthly	level	addressing	such	things	as:	Healing,
Grounding	their	Missions,	Finding	their	Puzzle	Piece	Mission	and	Purpose,
Prosperity	Consciousness	and	Financial	and	Earthly	Success,	Integrating	the
God/Goddess,	Embracing	the	Earth
	Mother	and	the	Nature	Kingdom,	Properly
Integrating	into	Third	Dimensional	Society	and	Civilization	in	terms	of	the	focus
of	their	Service	Mission.	This	is	just	mentioned	as	a	very	loving	reminder	of	the
importance	of	an	integrated	and	balanced	approach	to	one’s	Spiritual	Path.	The
grace	to	have	been	able	to	take	these	14	major	initiations	and	be	able	to	have
completed	my	Planetary	Ascension
	process	and	to	have	moved	deeply	into	my
Cosmic	Ascension	process,	I	give	to	GOD,	Christ,	the	Holy	Spirit,	Melchizedek,
The	Mahatma,	and	Archangel	Metatron	and	the	Core	Group	of	Masters	I	work
with.	I	have	dedicated	myself	and	my	life	to	GOD	and	the	Masters	service,	and	I
have	humbly	attempted	to	share	everything	I	know,	have	used	and	have	done	in
my	Spiritual	path	and	Ascension	process	with	all	of
	you,	my	beloved	readers!
Melchizedek,	the	Universal	Logos,	has	also	inwardly	told	me,	that	because	of
the	Cosmic	work	I	am	involved	with,	that	I	have	taken	on	the	Spiritual
assignment	of	being	one	of	the	“Twelve	Prophets	of	Melchizedek	on	Earth.”	I
am	very	humbled	to	serve	in	this	capacity,	because	Melchizedek	is	the	Universal
Logos,	which	is	like	the	President	of	our	entire	Universe.	In
	truth,	all	religions
and	Spiritual	teachings	have	their	source	in	Melchizedek	and	in	the	Great
Ancient	Order	of	Melchizedek.	It	is	my	great	honor	and	privilege	to	serve	GOD
and	Melchizedek	in	this	capacity.	This	is	something	I	have	never	spoken	of
before,	although	I	have	known	of	this	for	many,	many	years.	I	have	been	guided
after	all	this	time	to	share	a	little	more	deeply	about	my	Spiritual	mission
	on
Earth	at	this	time.
The	Academy	Website	is	one	of	the	most	profound	Spiritual	Websites	you	will
ever	explore,	because	it	embodies	this	“synthesis	nature,”	and	is	an	ever-
expanding,	living,	easy-to-read	Spiritual	encyclopedia	that	fully	integrates	all	12
Rays	in	design	and	creation!	This	is	also	embodied	in	the	free	140	page
information	packet	that	we	send	out	to	all	who	ask	who	wish	to
	get	involved	and
know	more	about	our	work!	The	information	in	the	information	packet	is	also
available	by	just	exploring	the	Academy	Website!
We	have	also	set	up	a	wonderful	Ministers	Ordination	and	Training	Program,
which	we	invite	all	interested	to	read	about.	I	am	also	very	excited	about	a
relatively	recent	book	I	have	written	called	
How	to	Teach	Ascension	Classes
.
Because	I	have	become
	so	busy	with	my	Spiritual	leadership	and	global	world
service	work,	I	really	do	not	have	the	time	to	teach	weekly	classes,	as	I	have	in
the	past.	I	firmly	believe	in	the	motto	“Why	give	a	person	a	fish,	when	you	can
teach	them	to	fish?”	In	this	vein,	the	Masters	guided	me	to	write	a	book	on	how
to	teach	people	to	teach	Ascension	classes	based	on	my	work.	I	humbly	suggest
it	is	a	most	wonderful
	channeled	book	that	can	teach	you	in	the	easiest	way	and
manner	on	every	level	to	teach	Ascension	classes	in	your	home	or	on	a	larger
level	if	you	choose.	These	classes	are	springing	up	now	all	over	the	globe	and
have	been	successful	beyond	my	wildest	dreams	and	expectations.	When	I	wrote
the	book	I	was	so	involved	with	the	process	of	writing	it,	I	never	fully
envisioned	the	tremendous	success	it
	would	have	on	a	planetary	and	global	level.
Using	this	book	and	my	other	books,	I	have	really	done	the	initial	homework	for
you,	which	can	and	will	allow	you	to	immediately	begin	teaching	Ascension
classes	yourself.	I	humbly	suggest	that	you	look	into	the	possibility	of	doing	this
yourself	if	you	are	so	guided!
One	other	very	interesting	aspect	of	our	Spiritual	mission	is	something	the
Masters
	have	been	speaking	to	us	about	for	over	ten	years	which	is	what	they
described	as	being	“Ambassadors	for	the	Christed	Extraterrestrials”!	We	have
always	known	this	to	be	true!	This	was	part	of	the	reason	I	wrote	the	book
Hidden	Mysteries
,	which	I	humbly	suggest	is	one	of	the	best	overviews	and	an
easy-to-read	and	understand	manner,	of	the	entire	Extraterrestrial	movement	as	it
has	affected	our
	planet.	If	you	have	not	read	this	book,	I	highly	recommend	that
you	do	so.	It	is	truly	fascinating	reading!	My	strongest	personal	connection	to
the	Extraterrestrials	is	with	the	Arcturians!	The	Arcturians	are	the	most
advanced	Christed	Extraterrestrial	race	in	our	galaxy.	They	hold	the	future
blueprint	for	the	unfoldment	of	this	planet.	The	Arcturians	are	like	our	future
planet	and	future	selves
	on	a	collective	level.	Part	of	my	work,	along	with	the
Ascended	Master	Teachings,	that	I	have	been	asked	to	bring	through,	is	a	more
conscious	and	personal	connection	to	the	Arcturians,	the	Ashtar	Command,	and
other	such	Christed	Extraterrestrial	races.	This	year’s	Platinum	Wesak,	because
of	being	in	the	year	2001,	will	have	a	special	connection	to	these	Christed
Extraterrestrials,	and	we	invite	you
	all	to	attend	for	this	reason	and	many	others!
I	also	encourage	you	to	read	my	book	
Beyond	Ascension
,	where	I	explore	some
of	my	personal	experiences	with	the	Arcturians	and	how	you	may	do	so	as	well!
Currently,	behind	the	scenes,	we	are	working	on	some	further	expansions	of
this	aspect	of	our	mission,	which	we	will	share	at	a	later	time!	Wistancia	has	also
been	involved	with	White	Time
	Healing,	which	is	another	most	wonderful
Extraterrestrial	healing	modality	that	she	offers	to	the	public!
One	other	aspect	of	our	mission	deals	with	having	developed	with	help	from
the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters,	some	of	the	most	advanced	Ascension
activation	processes	to	accelerate	Spiritual	evolution	that	has	ever	been	brought
forth	to	this	planet.	In	this	co-creative	process	with	the
	Masters,	we	have
discovered	the	keys	to	how	to	accelerate	Spiritual	evolution	at	a	rate	of	speed
that	in	past	years	and	centuries	would	have	been	unimaginable!	This	is	why	I
call	working	with	the	Ascended	Masters	“The	Rocketship	to	GOD	Method	of
Spiritual	Growth.”	There	is	no	faster	path	to	God	Realization	than	working	with
the	Ascended	Masters,	Archangels	and	Angels,	Elohim	Masters,	and	Christed
Extraterrestrials!	What	is	wonderful	about	this	process	is	that	you	do	not	have	to
leave	your	current	Spiritual	practice,	religion,	or	Spiritual	path.	Stay	on	the	path
you	are	and	just	integrate	this	work	into	what	you	are	currently	doing!	All	paths
as	you	know,	lead	to	GOD	my	friends!	This	is	the	profundity	of	following	an
eclectic	path,	and	path	of	synthesis!	I	humbly	suggest	I	have	found	some
	short
cuts!	I	share	this	with	all	lightworkers	on	Earth,	for	I	love	GOD	with	all	my
heart	and	soul	and	mind	and	might,	and	I	recognize	that	we	are	all	incarnations
of	GOD,and	Sons	and	Daughters	of	this	same	GOD	regardless	of	what	religion,
Spiritual	path,	or	mystery	school	we	are	on.	We	are	all,	in	truth,	the	Eternal	Self
and	are	all	God!	There	is,	in	truth,	only	GOD,	so	what	I	share	with	you,	I
	share
with	you,	GOD,	and	myself,,	for	in	the	highest	sense	we	are	all	one!	What	we
each	hold	back	from	each	other,	we	hold	back	from	ourselves	and	from	GOD.
This	is	why	I	give	freely	all	that	I	am,	have	learned	and	have,	to	you,	my	beloved
readers,	giving	everything	and	holding	back	nothing!	In	my	books	and
audiotapes,	I	have	literally	shared	every	single	one	of	these	ideas,	tools,	and
Ascension	activation
	methods	for	accelerating	evolution	that	I	have	used	and
come	to	understand.	My	beloved	readers,	these	tools	and	methods	found	in	my
books	and	on	the	audio	tapes	will	“blow	your	mind	as	to	their	effectiveness,”	in
terms	of	how	profound,	and	easy-to-use	they	are!	I	would	highly	recommend
that	all	lightworkers	obtain	the	13	Ascension	Activation	Meditation	tapes	I	have
put	together	for	this
	purpose.	Most	of	them	were	taped	at	the	Wesak
Celebrations	with	1500	to	2000	people	in	attendance,	with	over	one	million
inner	plane	Ascended	Masters,	Archangels	and	Angels,	Elohim	Masters,	and
Christed	Extraterrestrials	in	attendance,	under	the	Wesak	full	moon	and	the
mountain	of	Mt	Shasta.	You	can	only	imagine	the	power,	love,	and	effectiveness
of	these	Ascension	activation	audiotapes.	I	recommend
	getting	all	13	tapes	and
working	with	one	tape	every	day	or	every	other	day!	I	personally	guarantee	you
that	these	tapes	will	accelerate	your	Spiritual	evolution	a	thousand	fold!	You	can
find	them	in	the	information	packets	and	on	our	Website.	They	are	only
available	from	the	Academy!	Trust	me	on	this,	the	combination	of	reading	my
books,	Wistancia’s	book,	and	working	with	these	audio	ascension
	activation
tapes,	will	accelerate	your	Spiritual	evolution	beyond	your	wildest	dreams	and
imagination!
One	other	extremely	important	part	of	my	mission,	which	is	a	tremendous
Spiritual	passion	of	mine,	is	the	training	of	lightworkers	on	Earth	in	the	area	of
Spiritual/Christ/Buddha	thinking	and	negative	ego/separative/fear-based
thinking!	These	are	the	only	two	ways	of	thinking	in	the	world,
	and	each	person
thinks	with	one,	the	other,	or	a	combination	of	both.	If	a	person	does	not	learn
how	to	transcend	negative	ego	thinking	and	feeling,	it	will	end	up	over	time
corrupting	every	aspect	of	their	lives	including	all	channeling	work,	Spiritual
teaching,	and	even	healing	work!	One	cannot	be	wrong	with	self	and	right	with
GOD.	This	is	because	our	thoughts	create	our	reality,	as	we	all
	know!	I	cannot
recommend	more	highly	that	every	person	reading	this	read	my	books	
Soul
Psychology
,	
The	Golden	Book	of	Melchizedek:	How	to	Become	an	Integrated
Christ/Buddha	in	this	Lifetime
,	and	
How	to	Release	Fear-Based	Thinking	and
Feeling:	An	In-depth	Study	of	Spiritual	Psychology
!	I	humbly	suggest	that	these
three	books	will	be	three	of	the	most	extraordinary	self-help	books	in	the	area	of
mastering	this	psychological	area	of	life.	They	are	extremely	easy	to	read,	very
practical	and	filled	with	tools	that	will	help	you	in	untold	ways.	The	last	two
books	I	have	mentioned	are	only	available	through	the	Academy.	Being	a
channel	for	the	Ascended	Masters	and	being	uniquely	trained	as	a	Spiritual
Psychologist	and	Marriage,	Family,	and	Child	Counselor,	as	well	as	being	raised
in	a	family
	of	psychologists,	has	given	me	an	extraordinary	ability	to	teach	this
material	through	my	books	in	a	most	effective	manner.	The	combination	of	my
books	on	Ascension,	and	these	books	on	Spiritual	Psychology,	along	with
Wistancia’s	book	on	the	art	of	invocation	will	literally	revolutionize	your
consciousness	in	the	comfort	of	your	own	home!	The	most	extraordinary	thing
about	all	this	work	is	how	incredibly
	easy	to	read,	and	easy	to	understand	it	is.	It
is	also	incredibly	comprehensive,	completely	cutting-edge,	and	totally
integrated,	balanced	and	synthesized.	It	contains	the	best	of	all	schools	of
thought	in	the	past,	present,	and	channeled	cutting	edge	future	understanding
that	is	available	now!	I	humbly	ask	you	to	trust	me	in	this	regard	and	just	read
one	of	these	books	and	you	will	immediately
	want	to	buy	the	others!
One	other	aspect	of	our	work	and	mission	is	our	involvement	with	the	“Water
of	Life,”	and	the	Perfect	Science	products	for	the	healing	of	our	own	physical
bodies	and	the	physical	body	of	Mother	Earth	of	all	pollution	in	the	air,	water
and	earth.	This	is	the	miracle	Mother	Earth	has	been	waiting	for	to	bring	her
back	to	her	“original	edenic	state”	after	so	much	abuse.
	This	is	not	the	time	or
the	place	to	get	into	this	subject	in	detail,	however	I	invite	you	to	check	out	the
“Water	of	Life”	and	the	Perfect	Science	information	in	the	information	packet
and	on	the	Academy	Website!	It	is	truly	the	miracle	we	have	all	been	waiting	for
to	help	heal	the	Earth!
One	other	aspect	of	our	work	and	mission	is	a	project	that	the	Ascended
Masters	have	asked	us	to	put
	together	on	behalf	of	lightworkers	and	people
around	the	globe.	It	is	called	the	“Interdimensional	Prayer	Altar	Program”!	The
Masters	have	guided	us	to	set	it	up	in	the	Academy	located	in	Agoura	Hills,
California	on	the	property	we	live	on.	We	have	set	up	a	“Physical
Interdimensional	Prayer	Altar”	where	people	can	send	in	their	prayers	on	any
subject	and	we	will	place	them	on	this	Altar.	In	consultation
	with	the	Masters,
Archangels	and	Angels,	Elohim	Masters,	and	Christed	Extraterrestrials,	we	have
set	up	an	arrangement	with	them	that	all	physical	letters	placed	upon	this	Altar
will	be	immediately	worked	upon	by	these	Masters.	We	have	been	guided	by	the
inner	plane	Ascended	Masters	to	create	15	Prayer	Altar	Programs	in	different
areas	of	life	that	people	can	sign	up	for.	For	example,	there
	is	one	for	health	and
another	for	financial	help	in	your	Spiritual	mission.	There	are	15	in	total,	and
two-thirds	of	them	are	totally	free.	There	are	five	or	six	that	are	more	advanced
Spiritual	acceleration	programs	where	written	material	is	sent	to	you	to	work
with	in	conjunction	with	these	programs	to	accelerate	Spiritual.	All	letters	we
receive	by	e-mail,	fax,	or	letter	are	placed	on	the	Altar
	by	myself	or	my	personal
assistant.	It	is	kept	100%	confidential	and	is	an	extremely	special	service
provided	by	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters	and	Angels	to	help	all
lightworkers	and	people	on	Earth	with	immediate	help	for	whatever	they	need,
should	they	desire	assistance.	Other	examples	of	Prayer	Altars	are:	Building
your	Higher	Light	Body,	Extra	Protection,	Relationship	Help,	World	Service
Prayers,	Help	for	your	Animals,	Prayer	Altar	for	the	Children,	Integrating	the
Goddess,	Integrating	your	Archetypes,	Integrating	the	Seven	Rays	and	working
with	the	Seven	Inner	Plane	Ashrams	of	the	Christ,	Integrating	the	Mantle	of	the
Christ,	Ascension	Seat	Integration,	and	Light,	Love,	and	Power	Body	Building
Program!	These	Prayer	Altar	Programs	have	been	co-created	with	the	inner
plane	Ascended
	Masters	as	another	tool	for	not	only	helping	all	lightworkers
with	whatever	they	need	help	with,	but	also	as	another	cutting-edge	tool	to
accelerate	Spiritual	evolution!
In	a	similar	regard,	the	Masters	have	guided	us	to	set	up	a	Melchizedek
Synthesis	Light	Academy	Membership	Program	which	is	based	on	three	levels
of	involvement.	Stage	One,	Stage	Two,	and	Stage	Three!	Stage	One	and	Stage
Three	are	totally	free.	Stage	Two	costs	only	$20	for	a	lifetime	Membership	with
no	other	fees	ever	required.	You	also	receive	free	large	colored	pictures	of
Melchizedek,	the	Mahatma,	Archangel	Metatron,	and	Djwhal	Khul	for	joining.	It
is	not	necessary	to	join	in	order	to	get	involved	in	the	work;	however,	it	has	been
set	up	by	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters	as	another	service	and	tool	of	the
Academy
	to	help	lightworkers	accelerate	their	Spiritual	evolution!	When	joining
the	different	Stages,	the	Masters	take	you	under	their	wing	so	to	speak,	and
accelerate	your	evolution	by	working	with	you	much	more	closely	on	the	inner
plane	while	you	sleep	at	night	and	during	your	conscious	waking	hours.	The
joining	is	nothing	more	than	a	process	that	gives	them	the	permission	to	work
with	you	in	this
	more	intensive	fashion!	Again,	it	is	not	necessary	to	join	to	get
involved	in	the	work,	and	it	is	really	just	another	one	of	the	many	fantastic	tools
and	services	the	Academy	has	made	available	to	you	to	accelerate	your	Spiritual,
psychological,	and	earthly/physical	evolution	in	an	integrated	and	balanced
manner!
I	had	a	dream	shortly	after	just	about	completing	my	two	new	books,	
The
Golden
	Book	of	Melchizedek:	How	to	Become	an	Integrated	Christ/Buddha	in
this	Lifetime	
and	
How	to	Release	Fear-Based	Thinking	and	Feeling:	An	In-depth
Study	of	Spiritual	Psychology
.	In	this	dream,	I	was	being	shown	the	different
Spiritual	missions	people	had.	My	Spiritual	mission	was	the	embodiment	of	the
Holy	Spirit.	I	was	clearly	shown	how	other	people	within	GOD,	Christ	and	the
Holy	Spirit,	had	missions
	of	being	more	detached	off-shoots	of	the	Holy	Spirit,
and	continuing	outward	from	there	with	all	kinds	of	different	Spiritual	missions;
however,	mine	was	the	embodiment	of	the	Holy	Spirit	on	Earth.
My	beloved	readers,	I	want	to	be	very	clear	here	that	in	sharing	this	I	am	in	no
way,	shape	or	form,	claiming	to	be	the	Holy	Spirit.	There	is	enough	glamour	in
the	New	Age	Movement	and	I	am	not
	interested	in	adding	any	more	to	it.	What	I
am	sharing	in	this	chapter	to	more	clearly	and	precisely	share	my	Spiritual
mission	and	purpose,	is	that	which	I	am	here	to	strive	to	embody	and
demonstrate.	The	Holy	Spirit	is	the	third	aspect	of	the	Trinity	of	GOD.	I	have
always	greatly	loved	the	Holy	Spirit,	for	the	Holy	Spirit	is	like	the	“Voice	of
GOD”!	It	is	the	“Still,	Small	Voice	Within”!	When
	one	prays	to	GOD,	it	is	the
Holy	Spirit	who	answers	for	GOD.	The	Holy	Spirit	is	the	answer	to	all
questions,	challenges,	and	problems.	The	Holy	Spirit	speaks	for	the	Atonement
or	the	At-one-ment!	It	teaches	the	Sons	and	Daughters	of	GOD	how	to	recognize
their	true	identity	as	God,	Christ,	the	Buddha,	and	the	Eternal	Self!	In	truth,	there
are	only	two	voices	in	life!	There	is	the	voice	of	the	negative
	ego	and	the	voice
of	the	Holy	Spirit!	There	is	the	voice	of	the	negative	ego/fear-based/separative
thinking	and	feeling,	and	there	is	the	voice	of	God/Spiritual/Christ/Buddha
thinking	and	feeling!	There	is	the	“Voice	of	Love”	and	the	voice	of	fear!	There
is	the	“Voice	of	Oneness”	and	the	voice	of	separation!
I	was	given	this	dream	after	completing	these	two	books	because,	I	humbly
suggest,
	this	is	the	energy	I	was	embodying	in	writing	them	and	that	I	am
striving	to	embody	at	all	times	in	my	Spiritual	mission	and	purpose	on	Earth.
This	is	not	surprising	in	the	sense	that	this	has	always	been	my	Spiritual	ideal
and	the	dream	was	just	an	inward	confirmation	in	that	moment	that	I	was
embodying	and	demonstrating	that	Spiritual	Ideal	in	the	energy	flow	I	was	in.
This	is	what	I	strive	to
	do	in	all	my	work,	be	it	my	Ascension	Book	Series,
Wesak	Celebrations,	Teaching,	Counseling,	Video	Tapes,	Audio	Tapes	and	all
my	work,	which	is	to	strive	to	be	the	embodiment	of	a	“Voice	for	God”!	By	the
grace	of	GOD,	Christ,	the	Holy	Spirit,	and	the	Masters,	I	provide	a	lot	of	the
“answers”	people	and	lightworkers	are	seeking!	I	teach	people	how	to	“undo”
negative	ego/fear-based/separative	thinking
	and	feeling	and	show	then	how	to
fully	realize	God/Christ/Buddha	thinking	and	feeling!	I	show	them	how	to
release	and	undo	glamour,	illusion,	and	maya,	and	instead	seek	“Truth,”	as
GOD,	Christ,	the	Holy	Spirit,	and	the	Masters	would	have	you	seek	it!
My	real	purpose,	however,	is	not	to	just	be	the	embodiment	of	the	Holy	Spirit
on	Earth,	for	I	would	not	be	embodying	the	Voice	and	Vision	of
	the	Holy	Spirit
if	I	just	focused	on	this.	The	Voice	and	Vision	of	GOD,	Christ,	the	Holy	Spirit,
and	Melchizedek	is	that	of	synthesis!	This	is	the	other	thing	I	feel	in	the	deepest
part	of	my	heart	and	soul	that	I	am	here	to	embody!	So	my	“truest	and	highest
Spiritual	ideal”	that	I	am	here	to	strive	to	embody	is	to	try	to	embody	GOD,
Christ,	the	Holy	Spirit,	the	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters,	he
	Archangels	and
Angels	of	the	Light	of	GOD,	the	Elohim	Councils	of	the	Light	of	GOD,	and	the
Christed	Extraterrestrials	of	the	Light	of	GOD.	I	feel	in	the	deepest	part	of	my
heart	and	soul	and	what	I	try	to	embody	every	moment	of	my	life	is	“All	that	is
of	GOD	and	the	Godforce	on	Earth”!	In	this	regard,	it	is	my	Spiritual	mission
and	purpose	to	strive	to	be	the	embodiment	of	the	“synthesis	nature	of
	God	on
Earth”!	This	is	why	I	have	been	given	Spiritual	leadership	of	the	Synthesis
Ashram	and	Academy	on	Earth,	and	future	leadership	of	the	inner	plane
Synthesis	Ashram	that	governs	our	Planet.
The	other	thing	I	strive	to	do	in	my	Spiritual	mission	is	to	embody	Spiritual
mastery	on	a	Spiritual,	psychological,	and	physical/earthly	level.	What	most
people	and	lightworkers	do	not	realize	is
	that	there	are	three	distinct	levels	to
God	Realization.	There	is	a	Spiritual	level,	a	Psychological	level,	and	a
Physical/Earthly	level!	To	achieve	true	God	Realization,	all	three	levels	must	be
equally	mastered!	Another	way	of	saying	this	is	that	there	are	“Four	Faces	of
GOD”!	There	is	a	Spiritual	Face,	a	Mental	Face,	an	Emotional	Face,	and	a
Material	Face!	To	truly	realize	God,	all	four	must
	be	equally	mastered,	loved,
honored,	sanctified,	integrated,	and	balanced!	The	“Mental	and	Emotional	Faces
of	GOD”	make	up	the	psychological	level	of	GOD.	So,	my	Spiritual	mission	and
purpose	is	to	fully	embody	Spiritual	mastery,	unconditional	love,	and	wisdom	on
all	three	of	these	levels	and	in	all	Four	Faces	of	GOD!	In	a	similar	vein,	my
Spiritual	mission	and	purpose	is	to	embody	self-mastery	and
	proper	integration
of	all	“Seven	Rays	of	GOD,”	not	just	one	or	a	few.	For	the	“Seven	Rays	of
GOD”	are,	in	truth,	the	true	“Personality	of	GOD”!	My	Spiritual	mission	and
purpose	is	to	not	only	strive	to	embody	all	levels	of	GOD,	but	to	also	try	and
develop	all	my	God-given	abilities	and	Spiritual	gifts;	on	a	Spiritual,
Psychological,	and	Physical/Earthly	level,	and	in	all	Four	Faces	of	GOD!
My	beloved	readers,	all	these	things	that	I	have	written	about	in	this	chapter
are	what	I	strive	to	fully	embody	and	demonstrate	on	the	Earth	every	moment	of
my	life,	and	is	what	I	strive	with	all	my	heart	and	soul	and	mind	and	might	to
teach	others	to	do	as	well!
As	the	Founder	and	Director	of	the	Melchizedek	Synthesis	Light	Academy
along	with	Wistancia,	with	great	humbleness	and	humility,
	it	has	been	my	great
honor	and	privilege	to	share	“my	Spiritual	mission	and	purpose	in	a	deeper	and
more	profound	manner	at	this	time.”	I	do	so	in	the	hopes	that	all	who	feel	a
resonance	and	attunement	with	this	work,	and	will	get	involved	with	the
“Academy’s	Teachings”	and	all	that	it	has	to	offer.	I	also	share	this	so	that	all
who	choose	to	get	involved	might	join	this	vast	group	of	lightworkers
	around	the
globe,	to	help	spread	the	teachings	and	work	of	the	inner	plane	Ascended
Master.	The	inner	plane	Ascended	Masters	and	I,	along	with	the	Archangels	and
Angels,	Elohim	Councils	and	Christed	Extraterrestrials,	put	forth	the	Clarion
Call	to	lightworkers	around	the	world	to	explore	this	work,	integrate	this	work,
and	become	Ambassadors	of	the	Ascended	Masters,	so	that	we	may	at	this
	time
in	Beloved	Earth’s	history	bring	in	fully	now	the	Seventh	Golden	Age	in	all	its
Glory!
	
About	the	Author
	
	
	
Dr.	Joshua	David	Stone	has	a	Ph.D.	in	Transpersonal	Psychology	and	is	a
Licensed	Marriage,	Family,	and	Child	Counselor,	in	Agoura	Hills,	California.
On	a	Spiritual	level,	he	anchors	
The	Melchizedek	Synthesis	Light	Academy	and
Ashram
,	which	is	an	integrated	inner	and	outer	plane	ashram	that	seeks	to
represent	all	paths	to	God!	He	serves	as	one	of	the	leading	spokespersons	for
	the
Planetary	Ascension	Movement.	Through	his	books,	tapes,	workshops,	lectures,
and	annual	Wesak	Celebrations,	Dr.	Stone	is	known	as	one	of	the	leading
Spiritual	Teachers	and	Channels	in	the	world	on	
the	teachings	of	the	Ascended
Masters,	Spiritual	Psychology,	and	Ascension!	He	has	currently	written	over	27
volumes	in	his	“Ascension	Book	Series,”	which	he	also	likes	to	call	“The	Easy
to	Read	Encyclopedia
	of	the	Spiritual	Path!”
For	a	free	information	packet	of	all	Dr.	Stone’s	workshops,	books,	audiotapes,
Academy	membership	program,	and	global	outreach	program,	please	call	or
write	to	the	following	address:
Dr.	Joshua	David	Stone	Melchizedek	Synthesis	Light	Academy	28951	Malibu
Rancho	Rd	Agoura	Hills,	CA	91301
Phone:	818-706-8458	Fax:	818-706-8540	e-mail:	
drstone@best.com
Please	come	visit	my	new	Website	at:	
http://www.drjoshuadavidstone.com

