Page 1: No text extracted
Page 2: This  free  for  download  ebook  is  a  direct  reproduction  of  the  original  bona  fide  personally  approved  and  blessed  by  Srila  Prabhupada.  This  ebook  was  made  by  the  official  website  for  Srila  Prabhupada's  original  books:  Krishnapath.org  All  the  content  was  directly  taken  from  the
Page 3: Beyond Birth and Death His Divine Grace A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda Founder-Ācārya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
Page 4: Readers interested in the subject matter of this book are invited by the International Society for Krishna Consciousness to correspond with its Secretary . International Society for Krishna Consciousness 3959 Landmark Street Culver City , California 90230 © 1972 by the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust ( B.B.T.) All rights reserved First Printing, 1972: 25,000 copies Second Printing, 1973: 100,000 copies Third Printing, 1974: 200,000 copies Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 72-84844 International
Page 5: Table of Content CONTENTS I . We Are Not These Bodies II . Elevation At Death III . Liberation From Material Planets IV . The Sky Beyond The Universe V . Associating With Kṛṣṇa
Page 6: No text extracted
Page 7: No text extracted
Page 8: His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupāda left India and came to America in 1965 to spread the Hare Kṛṣṇa Movement to the Western world. He is the first successful propagator of the science of bhakti-yoga in the West and the founder and spiritual master of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, which has over seventy centers around the world. He has translated and commented upon many great Vedic literatures- Bhagavad-gītā, Upaniṣads, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and others.
Page 9: Chapter 1. We Are Not These Bodies 1 We Are Not These Bodies dehī nityam avadhyo 'yaṁ dehe sarvasya bhārata tasmāt sarvāṇi bhūtāni na tvaṁ śocitum ar hasi "O desc endant of Bharata, he w ho dwells in the body is eternal and can never be slain. T herefore you need not grieve for any creature." (Bhagavad- gītā 2.30) The very first step in self-realization is realizing one's identity as separate from the body . "I am not this body but am spirit soul" is an essential realizat
Page 10: kind of Buddhis tic nirvāṇa i n which no ac tivities are performed. Buddha maintained that due to a combi nation of material elements, this body has come in to existe nce, and that so mehow or other if these material elements are separated or dismantled, the cause of suf fering is removed. If the tax collectors give us too much dif ficulty because we happen to possess a lar ge house, o ne simple solution is to destroy the house. However , Bhagavad-gītā indicates that this material body is not
Page 11: with our blunt senses, but this does not mean they are not there . By the aid of th e microscope and other in struments, many things can be perceived which had previously been denied by the imperfect senses. Just because the soul, which is atomic in size, has not been perceived yet by senses or instruments, we should not conc lude that it is not there. It can, however , be perceived by its symptoms and ef fects. In Bhagavad-gītā Śrī Kṛṣṇa points out that all of our miseries are due to false ide
Page 12: such wo nderful things can be performed by the minute spiri t spark, we cannot begin to imagine what can be accomplished by the Supreme Spirit Whole. The natural hankering of the minute spirit spark is for the qualities of the Whole—knowledge, bliss and eternality—but these hankerings are being fru strated due to the mate rial body . The information on h ow to attain the soul's desire is given in Bhagavad-gītā. At present we are trying to attain eternity , bliss and knowledge by means of an impe
Page 13: soul, not the body . We have to mold our lives in such a way that we will not be d iverted by bodily pleasure . If somehow we are diverte d, it is not possible for us t o establish our c onsciousness in its true identity beyond the body . bhogaiśvarya-prasaktānāṁ tayāpahṛta-cetasām vyavasāyātmikā buddhiḥ samādhau na vidhīyate traiguṇya viṣayā vedā nistraiguṇyo bhavārjuna nir dvandvo nitya-sattva-stho niryoga-kṣema ātmavān "In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjo yment and mate
Page 14: advancement in government or civilization without some regulations. In the verse above, Śrī Kṛṣṇa tells A rjuna that the regulative principles of the Vedas are meant to control the three modes of material nature—goodness, passion and ignorance ( traiguṇya-viṣayā vedā ). However , Kṛṣṇa is advising Arjuna t o establ ish himself in h is pure constitutional position as spirit soul beyond the dualities of material nature. As we have already pointed out, these dualities—such as heat and cold, pleas
Page 15: food, and if someone gives it to him to enjoy , and he eats it, he is further complicating his malady and is endangering his life. If we really want freedom from the miseries of material existence, we must minimize our bodily demands and pleasures. Actually materia l enjoyment is not enjoyment at all. Real enjoy ment does not cease. In the Mahābhārata there is a verse— ramante yogino 'nante— to the ef fect that the yogīs ( yoginaḥ ), those who are endeavoring to elevate themselves to the spiri
Page 16: is enhan ced, an d if we can discuss Kṛṣṇa before many , many people, the enjoyment is all the greater . En joyment means variety . God became many for H is enjoyment, and thus our position is that of enjoyed. That is our constitutional position and the purpose for our creation. Both enjoyer and enjoyed have consciousness, but the consciousness of the enjoyed is subordinate to the consciousne ss of the enjoyer . Although Kṛṣṇa is the enjoyer and we t he enjoyed, the enjoyment can be participated
Page 17: janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair vimukto 'mṛtam aśnute "When the embodied being is able to transcend these three modes (goodness, passion and ignorance), he can become free from birth, death, old age and their distresses and can enjoy nectar even in this life." (Bg. 14.20) To e stablish ourselves on the pure brahma-bhūta s pir itual platform, above the three modes, we must take up the method of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. The gift of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the chanting of the names of Kṛṣṇa-Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare
Page 18: Chapter 2. Elevation at Death 2 Elevation at Death There are dif ferent kinds of t ranscendentalists who are called yogīs— haṭha-yogīs, jñāna-yogīs, dhyāna-yogīs and bhakti-yogīs— and all of them are eligi ble to be transferred to the spiritual world. The word yoga means "to l ink up," and the yoga systems are meant to enable us to link with the transcendental world. As mentioned in the previous chapter , originally we are all connected to the Suprem e Lord, but now we have b
Page 19: practice during our lives for the examination at the time of death, and if we pass the examination, we are transferred to the spiritual world. Our whole life is examined at the time of death. yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram taṁ tam evaiti kaunteya sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ "Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body , that state he will attain without fail." (Bg. 8.6) There is a Bengali proverb that says that whatever one does for perfection will be tested a
Page 20: om ity ekākṣaraṁ brahma - vyāharan mām anusmaran yaḥ prayāti tyajan dehaṁ sa yāti paramāṁ gatim "After b eing situated in this yoga prac tice and vib rating the sacred syllable om, the supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and quits his body , he will certainl y reach the spiritual planets." (Bg.8.13) In this way , all the senses have to be stopped in their external activities and concentrated on the form of viṣṇumūrti, the form of God. The mind
Page 21: no birth, old age, disease and de ath. Those who are intelligent d o not try to elevate themselves to any planet within the material universe. If on e tr ies to enter higher planets by mechanical means, instant death is assured, for the body cannot stand the radical changes in atmosphere. But if one atte mpts to go to higher pla nets by means of the yoga s ys tem, he will acquire a suitable body for entrance. We can see this demonstrated on this earth, fo r we know it is not possible for us t
Page 22: who are trying t o promote themselves to higher planets within t his material world. The self or so ul of the indiv idual is a minute spiritual s park. The perfection of yoga lies in the transferral of this spiritual spark to the top of the head. Having attained this, the yogī can tran sfer himself to any planet in the m aterial world according to his desire. If the yogī is curious to know what the moon is like, he can transfer himself there, or if he is interested in higher p lanets, he c
Page 23: residence. We don't wish to die because in actuality we are perm anent. Nor do w e want to grow old or be diseased because these are all external or nonpermanent states. Although we are not meant to suf fer from fever , sometimes fever comes, and we have to take precautions and remedies to get well again. The fourfold mis eries are like a fever , and they are all due to the material body . If somehow we can get out of the material body , we can escape the miseries that are integral with it
Page 24: to e arth. In any case, rest is required. In the impersonal fo rm, rest is uncertain. Therefore Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam say s that even after so much endeavor , if the impersonalist en ters into the spiritual world and acquires an impersonal form, he returns again into the material world because of neglecting to serve the Supreme Lord in love and devotion. As long as we are here on earth, we must lear n to practice to love and serve Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord. If we learn this, we can enter into thos
Page 25: The tree s are wish-fulfilling tree s or "desire trees," for one can r eceive from them wh atever h e wishes. In thi s world we get mangoes from mango trees and app les from apple trees, but there from any tree one can get whatever he d esires. Similarly , the cows a re called surabhi , a nd they yield an endless supply of milk. These are des criptions of the spiritual planets found in Ved ic scriptures. In th is m aterial world we have b ecome acclimatized to birth, death and all sorts of suf
Page 26: Chapter 3. Liberation fr om Material Planets 3 Liberation from Material Planets The jñānis and yogīs ar e generally im personalists, an d although they attain the temp orary form of liberation by mer ging into the impersonal ef fulgence, the spiri tual sky , their knowledge, according to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam , is not considered pure. By penances, austerities and meditations, they can rise up to the Supreme Absolute platfo rm, but, as has been explained, they again fall
Page 27: by submissive hearing. It is our position to hear Bhagavad-gītā from the lips of Arjuna or his bona fide representative, the spiritual m aster . After hearing, it is necessary to prac tice this acquired knowledge in daily life. "My dear Lord, You are unconquerable," the devotee prays, " but by this process, by hearing, You are conquered." God is unconquerable, but He is conquered by the devotee who abandons mental speculation an d listens to authoritative sources. According to Brahma-saṁhitā
Page 28: Himself, becaus e He is bestowin g freely what no one else has e ver given— pure lov e of Kṛṣṇa." Rūpa Gosvāmī called Caitanya Mahāprabhu "the most munificent, the most charitable personality ," because He was of fering the most pre cious th ing of all very cheaply—love of God. We all want Kṛṣṇa and are all han kering after Him. Kṛṣṇa is the most attractive, the most beautiful, the most opulent, the most powerful and the most learned. That is the obje ct of our hankering. We're hankering afte
Page 29: further his animalistic propen sities instead of finding out how to get liberation from this miserable condition. Here Kṛṣṇa explicitly states that one who comes to Him will nev er be reborn to suf fer miseries again. Those great souls who come to Him have attained the highest perfection of life which a lleviates the living entity from the suf fering of conditional existence. One of the dif ferences between Kṛṣṇa and an ordinary being is that an ordinary entity can be only in one place at a t
Page 30: One may point out that although the devotees of Kṛṣṇa are trying to enter Kṛṣṇa's planet, our interest is in going to the moon. Isn't going to the moon also perf ection? The tendency to travel to other planets is always present in the livin g entity . One name for the living entity is sarva-gata, which means "one wh o wants to travel everywhere." Travel is part of the n ature of the living entity . The desire to go to the moon is not a new thing. Th e yogīs also are interested in entering
Page 31: a spiritu al body whereby we may enter into Kṛṣṇa's planet. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is not a religious formula or some spiritual recreation; it is the most important part of the living entity .
Page 32: Chapter 4. The Sky Beyond the Universe 4 The Sky Beyond the Universe If even the high er planets in this universe are subject to birth and death, why do great yogīs st rive for eleva tion to them? Although they may have many mystic powers, these yogīs still have the tendency to want to enjoy the f acilities of material life. On the higher planets, it is possible to live for incredibly long lifetimes. The time calculation on these planets is indicated by Śrī Kṛṣṇa: sahasr
Page 33: rātry-āgame pralīyante tatraivāvyakta-saṁjñake "When Brahmā's day is manifest, this multitude of living entities comes into being, a nd at the arrival of Bra hmā's night, they are all annihi lated." (Bg. 8.18) At the end of t he day of Brahmā, all the lower planetary sy stems are covered with water , and the b eings on them are annihilated. After this devastation and after the night of Brahmā passes, in the morning when Brahmā arises, there is again creation and all these beings come forth. Thu
Page 34: moving, and as soon as the living entity , the spiritual spark, is out of the body , the body is immovable. T he spiritual nature is called Kṛṣṇ a's superior nature, and the material is called the inferior . Beyond this material nature there is a superior nature which is totally spiritual. It is not possible to understand this by experiment al knowledge. We can see millions and millions of stars through a tele scope, but we cannot approach them. We have to understa nd our incapabilities. If we
Page 35: descriptions of the spiritual sky and of its inhabitants. There is even information given that there are spiritual airplanes in the spiritual sky and that the liberated entities there travel about on these planes lik e lightning. Everything that we find here can also be found there in reality . Here in the material sky everything is an im itation or shadow of that which exists in the spiritual sky . As in a cinema we simply see a show or facsimile of the real thing, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is
Page 36: The spiritual world is called un manifested because it cannot be perceived by material senses. avyakto 'kṣara ity uktas tam āhuḥ paramāṁ gatim yaṁ prāpya na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama "That supreme abode is called unmanifested and infallible, and it is the supreme destination. When one goes there, he never comes back. That is My supreme abode." (Bg.8.21) A great journey is indicated in t his verse. We have to be able to penetrate outer sp ace, traverse the material universe, penetrate
Page 37: this human form of life and take advantage of this knowledge to prepare ourselves in Kṛṣṇa consciousness so that twenty-four hours of the day we will be absorbed in Kṛṣṇa and at death at once transfer to that spiritual sky . puruṣaḥ sa paraḥ pārtha bhaktyā labhyas tv ananyayā yasyāntaḥsthāni bhūtāni yena sarvam idaṁ tatam "The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than all, is attainable by unalloyed devotion. Althou gh He is present in His abode, He is all- pervading, and everythin
Page 38: Puruṣaḥ sa paraḥ : in the spiritual sky , the Supreme Lord is present as the Supreme Person. There are innumerable self-luminous planets t here, and in each one an expansion of Kṛṣṇa resides. They are four -armed, and have innumerable names. They are all persons—they are not impersonal. These puruṣas or persons can be approach ed by bhakti, no t by challenge, philosophical speculation or mental concoctions or by physical exercises, but by devotion without the deviations of fruitive activity .
Page 39: Lord and His energies. Hare means energy , and Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord, so when we chant Hare Kṛṣṇa we are saying, "Oh ener gy of the Lord, O Lord, please accept me." We have no other prayer for acceptance by the Lord. There is no question of praying for daily bread, for the bread is always there. Hare Kṛṣṇa is but an address to the Supreme Lord requesting Him to accept us. Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself prayed, ayi nandatanuja kiṅkaraṁ patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau kṛpayā tava pāda-
Page 40: We do not just give the money to anyone. The company is aut horized and the airline is authorized, so faith is created. With out faith we cannot take one step forward in the ordinary course of our life. Faith we must have, but it must be faith in that which is authorized. It is not that we have blind faith but that we accept something that is recognized. Bhagavad-gītā is recognized and accepted as scripture by all classes of men in I ndia, and as far as outside India is conc erned, many scho
Page 41: disposed to every living entity . In that state he attains pure devotional service unto Me." (Bg.18.54) He who has progressed in devotional life and who is relishing service to Kṛṣṇa will automatically become detached from material enjoyment. The symptom of one absorbed in bhakti is that he is fully satisfied with Kṛṣṇa.
Page 42: Chapter 5. Associating with Kṛṣṇa 5 Associating with Kṛṣṇa If on e ge ts some thing superior , he naturally gives up all inferior things. We want enjoymen t, but impersonalism and voidism has created such an atmosphere that we have become addicted to material enjoyment. There must be enjoyment in connection with the Supreme Person (puruṣaḥ sa paraḥ) , w hom we can see face to face . In the spiritual sky we are ab le to speak pe rsonally with God, to play , eat with Him, etc.
Page 43: features are exactly like God's. On some of these planets God is manifested with two arms, and on others He has four . The inhabitants of these planets, like the Supreme Lord, also manifest two and four arms, and it is said that one cannot distinguish betwee n them and the Supreme Per son. In the spiritual world there are five kinds of liberation. Sāyujya - mukti is a form of liberation in which one mer ges into the impersonal existence of the Supreme Lord, called Brahman. Another form of libe
Page 44: to G od that he shall not for get Him and that he will always be able to engage i n His transcendental service. These are symptoms of pure devotion. Of c ourse a devo tee, wherever he is, remains in the spiritual kin gdom, even while in this ma terial body . But he does not demand anything from God for his own personal elevation or comfort. Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa indicates that He can be easily reached by o ne who is devoted to Him, there is an element of risk involved for the yogīs who practice ot
Page 45: dhūmo rātris tathā kṛṣṇaḥ ṣaṇ-māsā dakṣiṇāyanam tatra cāndramasaṁ jyotir yogī prāpya nivartate śukla-kṛṣṇe gatī hy ete jagataḥ śāśvate mate ekayā yāty anāvṛttim anyayāvartate punaḥ "The mystic wh o passes away f rom this world during the smok e, the night, the moonless fortnight, or in the six months when the sun passes to the south, or who reaches the moon planet, again comes back. According to the Vedas, t her e ar e two ways of passing from this world—one in light and one in d arkness. Wh
Page 46: "And wh oever , a t the time of death, quits his body rememberin g Me alone, at once attains M y nature. Of th is there is no doubt. He who meditates on the Supreme Personality of G odhead, his mind constantly engaged in remembering Me, undeviated fr om the path, he, O Pārtha [Arjuna], is sure to reach Me." (Bg. 8.5,8.8) Such meditation on Kṛṣṇa may seem very dif ficult, but it is not. If one practices Kṛṣṇa consciousness by chanting the mahā-mantra Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Har
Page 47: The vibrations of Hare Kṛṣṇa are so potent that anyone can immediately begin chanting them without any knowledge of Sanskrit whatsoever . vedeṣu yajñeṣu tapaḥsu caiva dāneṣu yat puṇya-phalaṁ pradiṣṭam atyeti tat sarvam idaṁ viditvā yogī paraṁ sthānam upaiti cādyam "A p erson who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of the results d erived from studying the Vedas, performing austere sacrifices, giving charity or pursuing philo sophical and fruitive activities. At the end he rea
Page 48: Back cover
Page 49: No text extracted
