
--- Page 25 ---

I
PILLAR	
1
Participating	in	Your	Own	Rescue
f	you	want	to	be	that	first-generation	millionaire,	if	you	want	to	succeed,	if
you	want	to	reap	the	benefits	of	your	hard	work,	you	
must
	be	willing	at	all
costs	to	participate	in	your	own	rescue.	You	must	have	the	mindset	of	a	
winner
.
Not	a	whiner.	What’s	the	difference?	Let	me	tell	you	a	story.
It	was	early	fall	of	1995.	I	was	20	years	old.	I	had	finished	my	degree	in
acting	school	and	was	focused	on	getting	a	job	that	would	allow	me	to	go	to
auditions.	Becoming	a	sales	rep	seemed	like	the	obvious	choice;	I	could	control
my	schedule	and	set	my	own	hours.	To	meet	that	goal,	I	started	working	in	the
sales	department	of	a	national	insurance	agency.	In	Texas,	you	can	get	a
temporary	90-day	insurance	license,	mainly	to	try	it	out	to	see	if	you	like	it
enough	to	stay	in	the	industry.	At	the	end	of	the	
90-day	trial	period,	you	take	the
test	to	get	your	permanent	license.	By	the	end	of	
my
	trial	period,	I	was	one	of	the
highest-earning	agents	in	the	United	States.	Out	of	thousands	of	licensed	agents,
as	a	temporary	licensed	agent,	I	had	risen	to	the	top	50	agents	in	just	90	days;
deciding	whether	to	take	the	test	and	get	my	official	license	was	not	difficult	at
all.
After	failing	the	test	twice,	I	finally	passed	the	test	on	my	third	go-around
with	a	just-passing	grade	of	72.	That’s	3	points	over	failure,	but	it	was	enough!	I
had	paid	for	my	own	classes,	and	I	had	paid	for	the	test	three	times	in	less	than
four	weeks.	This	was	me	participating	in	my	own	rescue,	but	this	was	just	the
beginning.	The	unknown	massive	rejection	was	still	awaiting	just	around	the
corner.
Still	superexcited	that	I	had	passed	the	test,	I	mailed	in	my	application	and
test	results,	and	then	I	waited	for	my	license	to	arrive.	Finally!	This	was	my
major	reset	button	on	life.	This	was	my	foundational	point	of	personal
redemption,	from	homelessness	to	failing	in	school	to	that	teenage	felony	arrest.
I	was	now	a	professional	licensed	insurance	agent	for	the	state	of	Texas.	Eagerly
I	awaited	for	what	seemed	like	months,	and	a	week	later,	a	letter	from	the	Texas
