
--- Page 14 ---

W
Foreword
hat	does	it	take	to	be	a	success	in	today’s	unprecedented	economic
climate?	Is	it	skill,	determination,	grit,	knowledge?
Sure,	those	are	all	key	elements	of	success,	but	to	truly	make	it	today,	and	in
the	future,	you	have	to	have	much	more.	You	need	to	have	the	
millionaire
mindset
.
Many	years	ago,	I	received	a	phone	call	from	a	young	man	who	told	me	that
he	wanted	to	train	with	me	and	to	learn	how	to	do	what	I	do.	I	wasn’t	flattered.	I
know	there	are	millions	of	people	who	want	to	change	the	world	with	their
voices,	and	I	receive	countless	requests	to	train	speakers	all	the	time.
I	listened	to	his	story	and	told	him	that	I	was	willing	to	teach	him,	but	it
wouldn’t	be	easy,	and	it	would	require	a	substantial	financial	investment.	He	told
me	that	he	didn’t	have	the	money	at	the	time	but	he	would	get	it.
Afterward,	I	forgot	about	the	conversation,	but	within	one	week’s	time,	I
received	the	follow-up	call	that	would	change	not	only	Johnny	Wimbrey’s	life
but	my	life	too!
Johnny	converted	that	investment	in	training	with	me	to	millions	of	dollars
and	influence	around	the	world.	He	has	literally	built	an	empire	where	he	now
teaches	others	how	to	dream	and	become	the	greatest	versions	of	themselves.
What	is	it	about	Johnny	that	makes	him	unique?	Here’s	a	guy	who	was
literally	raised	by	the	streets	who	has	gone	on	to	become	a	revered	thought
leader	and	elite	coach	in	the	personal	development	world.
Johnny	likes	to	say,	he	went	“from	the	hood	to	doing	good!”
How	did	he	do	it?	He	beat	the	seemingly	insurmountable	odds	and	kept	going
when	so	many	others	would	have	tucked	their	tails	and	run.	What	made	him	so
unstoppable?
It	was	by	using	the	principles	in	
Building	a	Millionaire	Mindset
.
If	you	are	ready	to	transform	your	life	and	your	bank	account	the	way	Johnny
has	done,	read	this	book!
Within	these	pages,	you	will	awaken	the	millionaire	mindset	within	you	and

--- Page 15 ---

Within	these	pages,	you	will	awaken	the	millionaire	mindset	within	you	and
find	yourself	stretching	and	growing	into	the	person	that	you	were	designed	to
be.
The	strategies,	principles,	and	truths	that	Johnny	shares	are	beyond	anything
you	have	encountered	before.
Johnny	is	a	dedicated	husband	and	father,	and	he’s	a	person	who	I	believe	is
living	the	calling	on	his	life—being	a	voice	of	transformation.	We	are	all
fortunate	that	he’s	willing	to	share	what	he’s	learned	with	the	world.
Congratulations	on	investing	in	yourself	and	for	getting	out	of	your	head	and
into	your	greatness	by	reading	
Building	a	Millionaire	Mindset
.
L
ES
	B
ROWN
Emmy	Award–winning	speaker,
trainer,	author

--- Page 16 ---

T
Acknowledgments
hank	you	to	Crystal	Wimbrey	and	my	family.	I	am	forever	grateful	for	your
unconditional	love	and	support.
Sincere	gratitude	to	Carol	Fields,	Derek	Williams,	and	my	team	at	Wimbrey
Training	Systems	for	unmeasured	time,	dedication,	and	teamwork	in	making	this
possible.
Special	thanks	to	Deepa	Chungi	for	helping	formulate	the	book.
And	thank	you	to	2	Market	Media	and	Steve	Carlis	for	believing	in	my	vision
and	supporting	my	every	step	in	this	process.
And	an	enormous	thank	you	to	McGraw	Hill	for	the	opportunity	to	publish
this.

--- Page 17 ---

T
Introduction
here	have	been	no	millionaires	before	me	with	the	last	name	Wimbrey.	I
am	the	first	one.	My	father	was	a	trash-man.	He	was	a	very	hard	worker;	all
I	saw	in	him	was	hard	work.	He	was	not	a	millionaire,	but	my	father’s	mindset	to
expose	my	siblings	and	me	to	the	multimillion-dollar	homes	from	his	sanitation
truck	route	had	a	direct	bearing	on	my	vision,	hunger,	and	passion	for	massive
increase.
Vision	is	created	only	by	exposure,	and	whether	he	knew	it	or	not,	my	father
teed	up	my	vision	exactly	the	way	golfers	tee	up	their	golf	ball	for	a	better	view
and	advantage	to	swing	for	distance	and	momentum.	I	don’t	know	anyone	on
either	the	black	or	white	sides	of	my	family	who	had	a	million	in	the	bank	when
they	died.	Growing	up,	I	never	expected	an	inheritance	or	looked	forward	to
getting	access	to	a	trust	fund	when	I	turned	18.	Nothing	like	that	existed	for	me.
But	it	will	for	my	children	because	the	book	you	are	about	to	read	was	written	by
a	true,	genuine,	first-generation	millionaire.
However,	I	want	to	take	a	step	back	from	the	money	for	a	moment.	First,	I
want	to	talk	about	your	character.	Becoming	successful—becoming	that	first-
generation	millionaire	in	your	family—has	everything	to	do	with	the	
character
you	bring	to	the	table.	Before	you	can	even	start	thinking	about	the	money,	
the
success,	or	the	clout,	first	you	must—
must
—have	a	conversation	with	your
character.	Your	true	character,	the	person	you	are	when	it	is	just	you	and	you.
Without	the	right	character	in	place	and	without	knowing	who	you	are	and
what	you	are	capable	of,	you	will	never	achieve	and	maintain	true	success.
True	success	should	begin	within.	You	make	the	success!	The	success	should
never	make	you.	This	is	why	the	millionaire	mindset	must	begin	from	within,	so
that	you	not	only	
gain
	but	also	
maintain
	and	
sustain
	that	which	leads	to
generational	wealth.
That	is	what	this	book	is	about.	It	is	not	about	closing	sales	or	how	to	run	a
multimillion-dollar	company	or	how	to	cash	in	on	your	side	hustle	so	you	can
quit	your	day	job.	
This	book	is	about	building	the	character	you	need	in

--- Page 18 ---

order	to	succeed.
	I	firmly	believe	that	people	who	continuously	work	to
develop	their	
internal
	success	of	personal	character	will	ultimately	have	many
external
	successes.
Almost	every	millionaire	I’ve	helped	coach	or	train,	every	personal	business
client	I’ve	coached,	and	every	person	I’ve	mentored	was	broke	and	hungry	for	a
greater	life	when	I	met	him	or	her.	Today,	many	of	them	are	worth	millions	not
because	of	their	business	acumen	or	their	ability	to	convince	the	people	they
meet	to	buy	something.	No.	It’s	because	I	have	ingrained	in	them	the	exact
millionaire	mindset	that	has	been	ingrained	in	me,	the	three	most	important	keys
they	need	in	order	to	have	the	character	of	a	first-generation	millionaire.	If	you
don’t	build	these	keys—these	mental	muscles—and	exercise	them	constantly,
your	success	will	be	miniscule	and	fleeting.
Before	you	start	flipping	through	the	book	and	rushing	to	
Pillar	1
,	ask
yourself	if	you	have	the	desire	to	disrupt	the	past	to	create	a	new	you.	There	are
no	shortcuts	here	to	obtain	the	
true	mindset	of	a	first-generation	millionaire.
Absolutely	no	cutting	corners.	There	is	no	cheating.	This	is	your	life.	
You
	must
do	the	work.
To	get	started,	answer	the	following	questions:
•			Do	you	have	the	drive	to	transform	yourself	into	a	person	who	knows	for
a	fact	that	you	will	not	die	working	but	rather,	die	watching	your	work
lead	to	generational	wealth?
•			Will	you	grant	yourself	permission	to	implement	a	foundational	vision
statement	that	says	the	following:	“I	will	not	leave	debt	to	my	children	and
my	children’s	children,	but	rather	I	will	leave	generational	wealth.	My
family	members	will	be	able	to	live	off	of	my	work,	which	will	tee	them
up	for	their	personal	works	even	if	their	paths	are	totally	different.”
If	you	answered	yes	to	one	or	both	of	those	questions,	you	are	ready	to
embrace	the	mindset	of	a	first-generation	millionaire.	Duplicating	the	millionaire
mindset	is	far	greater	than	duplicating	an	industry	or	product.	Products	and
industries	change	and	can	even	die,	but	the	millionaire	mindset	is	designed	to
last	for	generations.	Are	you	ready	to	be	the	person	in	your	family	who	finally
creates	lasting	wealth?	If	so,	you	must	be	ready	to	learn	about	yourself,	to	allow
yourself	to	discover	things	that	you	thought	you	had	forgotten	or	hidden	away,	to
transform	into	someone	who	has	the	character	of	a	first-generation	millionaire.	If
you	truly	have	a	burning	desire	xxto	implement	this	mindset	and	take	on	the
assignment	of	becoming	a	first-generation	millionaire,	then	I	invite	you	to	read
on.

--- Page 19 ---

The	three	keys	essential	to	the	character	of	every	first-generation	millionaire	I
know	are	these:
Value:
	Do	you	value	yourself	and	your	abilities?	If	you	truly	want	to
succeed	in	life	with	a	solid	foundation,	first	you	need	to	understand	and
appreciate	your	personal	value.	Just	as	every	human	being’s	thumbprint
and	DNA	are	unique,	there	is	something	unique	about	you	that	only	you
were	designed	to	leave	on	this	planet	before	you	depart.
All	of	your	personal	answers	will	be	uncovered	and	revealed	page	by
page	during	your	journey	of	completing	this	book.	Your	personal	value	is
directly	linked	to	the	personal	confidence	and	posture	that	you	bring	to
any	conversation,	deal,	or	presentation.	Confidence	and	posture	show	up
only	when	you	can	truly	identify	and	walk	in	your	God-given	value.	The
world	benefits	for	many	generations	from	those	who	tap	into	their	true
personal	value.
Faith:
	Do	you	have	faith	in	
yourself
?	Not	in	your	ideas.	Not	in	your	team.
Not	in	your	product.	Not	in	your	website.	Not	even	in	your	family.	In
yourself
.	When	things	go	south,	when	your	best	employees	quit,	or	when
your	product	gets	trumped	in	the	marketplace,	do	you	have	faith	that	you
will	be	able	to	start	from	scratch	and	create	success	all	over	again?	You
must	have	faith	in	yourself	and	your	abilities.	Otherwise,	the	very	first
wave	will	wash	you	away	completely.
Those	who	consistently	build	faith	in	themselves	will	ultimately	tap
into	a	much	higher	degree	of	personal	purpose.	I	am	going	to	expose	you
to	the	exact	practices	I	use	even	to	this	day	to	build	my	faith	in	myself.	I
was	born	in	poverty,	and	my	first	memory	is	of	when	I	was	homeless	and
living	in	a	shelter	for	battered	women.	The	most	vivid	memories	after	that
are	when	I	failed	the	second	grade	and	when	I	had	a	teenage	felony	arrest.
These	are	just	a	few	of	the	many	obstacles	that	I	will	share	with	you	in
this	book.	But	through	it	all,	I	still	had	faith.	I	decided	at	the	age	of	20	that
my	past	would	not	dictate	my	future!	That	mindset	alone	was	and	has
been	one	of	my	foundational	faith	keys	that	have	led	me	to	become	the
man	I	am	today.
Commitment:
	Do	you	have	the	commitment	to	take	this	all	the	way?	Are
you	honest	enough	with	yourself	to	ensure	that	you	will	give	this	effort
100	percent	of	your	energy	100	percent	of	the	time?	Without	commitment,

--- Page 20 ---

quitting	is	too	easy.	Without	commitment,	you	will	never	be	a	first-
generation	millionaire.
Think	of	wealth	mastery	and	the	millionaire	mindset	as	a	house	you	want	to
renovate.	You	can	change	the	doors,	redo	the	windows,	and	add	a	garage,	but
there	are	some	walls	that	your	contractor	will	tell	you	that	you	cannot	touch.
These	walls	are	integral	to	the	structure	of	the	house.	Without	them,	everything
will	start	to	crumble.	These	three	keys—value,	faith,	and	commitment—are	like
those	walls.	The	house	was	built	around	them.	You	are	no	different.	You	can’t
play	with	them,	you	can’t	negotiate	with	them,	and	you	can’t	succeed	without
them.
Let’s	talk	about	
value
.	When	I	was	about	25	years	old,	I	was	asked	to	speak	at	a
prominent	church.	I	wasn’t	asked	to	speak	to	leadership	or	the	congregation	but
to	the	leaders’	children.	The	youth	of	the	church.	Now,	I	am	always	ten	toes
down,	ready	for	anything,	when	talking	to	young	people.	I	was	the	troublemaker
and	class	clown	when	I	was	young,	and	I	looked	up	to	those	people	who	came	to
speak	to	me,	so	I	am	always	looking	for	my	past	self	in	the	crowd	when	I	am
speaking	to	young	people.	I	want	to	be	able	to	handle	him	or	her	before	he	or	she
jumps.
But	this	crowd	was	different.	These	weren’t	kids	who	were	forced	to	be	there,
rolling	their	eyes	from	the	get-go.	This	audience	was	made	up	of	the	children	of
the	leaders	we	all	respect.	They	were	being	exposed	to	phenomenal	teachings
every	day.	They	were	constantly	surrounded	by	greatness.	It	was	in	their	blood.	I
had	to	improve	on	what	they	already	knew,	so	the	topic	I	chose	that	day	was
something	all	children	should	hear	about	starting	from	a	young	age.	I	spoke	to
them	about	their	personal	value.
I	started	my	speech	by	pulling	out	a	hundred-dollar	bill.	I	showed	it	to	them
and	asked,	“How	much	is	this	worth?”	They	said	it	was	worth	a	hundred	dollars.
I	folded	it	in	half	and	asked	them	again,	“How	much	is	this	worth?”	Again,	they
said	it	was	worth	a	hundred	dollars.	I	asked	them	why	the	value	didn’t	change
when	I	folded	the	bill,	and	they	told	me,	“Even	folded,	it	is	still	worth	a	hundred
dollars.”
“What	if	I	fold	it	again?”	I	asked.	Now	it	was	a	quarter	of	what	it	once	was,
but	the	children	said	it	still	worth	a	hundred	
dollars.	“You’re	telling	me	that	if	I
decrease	the	size	and	visibility	to	a	
quarter
	of	what	it	was,	that	the	value	is	still
there?”	That	was	when	they	started	looking	at	me	like	I	was	crazy.

--- Page 21 ---

“
Yes!
”	they	all	screamed.
“What	if	I	fold	it	
again
?	What	if	I	crumple	it	up	and	throw	it	on	the	ground?
What	if	it	gets	mud	all	over	it	and	it	looks	like	garbage?	What	if	I	step	on	it?
Then	what	is	it	worth?”
“Brother	Johnny,”	they	shouted	back,	“it’s	still	worth	a	hundred	dollars!”
With	emotions	extremely	high,	I	enthusiastically	asked,	“So,	you’re	telling
me	that	as	long	as	it	stays	intact—as	long	as	I	can	smooth	it	out,	rinse	it	off,
make	it	straight—there	is	nothing	I	can	do	to	this	piece	of	paper	to	cause	it	to
lose	its	value?”	They	all	nodded	back	at	me.	Then	I	asked	them,	“What	would
you	do	if	someone	stepped	on	your	dreams?	Crumpled	up	your	ambitions	and
aspirations?	Folded	you	in	half?	Mentally,	emotionally?	Would	you	lose	your
value?”	Silence.	Then	I	asked	them,	“How	can	this	man-made	object,	this	bill
made	of	paper,	have	more	value	than	you,	a	God-made	object?”
You	
must
	value	yourself	or	you	will	never	be	a	first-generation	millionaire.
People	from	any	bloodline	who	have	ever	accomplished	something	that	has
never	been	done	before	can	always	trace	that	accomplishment	back	to	their
breakthrough	in	understanding	and	accepting	their	personal	value.	It	is	one	of	the
core	characteristics	you	need	to	succeed	on	this	journey.	If	people	try	to	fold	you
in	half,	crumple	you	up,	or	step	on	you—
and	they	will
—you	must	be	sure	that
nothing	and	nobody	has	the	ability	to	take	away	your	value.	Knowing	this	as	a
certainty	and	exercising	this	value	is	something	I	learned	from	a	young	age.	
This
book	will	show	you	how	to	internalize	that	feeling	and	use	it	to	empower
yourself	as	you	work	to	accumulate	your	first	million	and	beyond.
The	second	key	is	
faith
.	I’m	not	talking	about	your	faith	in	God.	I’m	talking
about	your	faith	in	
yourself
.	Where	is	that	faith	in	yourself?	In	your	abilities?	In
your	drive?	Before	you	answer	those	questions,	think	about	the	last	chair	you	sat
in;	perhaps	the	one	you	are	sitting	in	right	now.	When	you	went	to	sit	down,	you
didn’t	check	the	chair	first.	You	simply	walked	up	to	it	and	sat.	When	you	go	to
a	restaurant	or	to	see	a	play,	you	don’t	inspect	the	chair	in	which	you	are	about
to	sit.	You	just	sit.	You	have	faith	that	the	chair	will	hold	you	up.	Now,	do	you
have	that	same	faith	in	yourself?	Or	do	you	say	to	yourself,	“What	if	I	call	this
person	and	he	or	she	says	no?	It’s	going	to	hurt	my	feelings.”	Or,	“What	if	my
employees	don’t	think	I	know	what	I	am	doing?”
You	didn’t	talk	to	the	chair	about	being	there	for	you,	about	doing	its	job,
about	not	letting	you	down.	But	when	you	have	to	do	the	thing	that	needs	to	be
done,	do	you	start	asking	yourself	if	it’s	even	possible?	If	so,	
why?
	Why	do	you
have	more	faith	in	the	chair	than	you	do	in	your	own	ability	to	be	a	first-
generation	millionaire?	You	
must
	have	faith	in	yourself	or	you	will	never

--- Page 22 ---

succeed.	It’s	a	fact	that	I	have	proven	over	and	over	again.
When	presented	with	an	opportunity	to	expand	my	team,	I	got	on	a	plane	to
go	to	South	Africa	on	my	own	dime,	to	Australia	on	my	own	dime,	to	London	on
my	own	dime.	My	company	didn’t	want	to	send	me.	The	company’s	leaders
didn’t	want	to	take	the	risk;	they	didn’t	want	to	invest	in	something	that	was	not
a	sure	thing.	But	I	had	faith	in	myself.	I	knew	that	if	I	went	to	those	places,	I
could	build	the	relationships,	build	the	partnerships,	and	create	something	out	of
nothing.	I	had	faith	that	
the	very	same	executives	and	partners	who	stayed
behind	would	soon	see	what	I	was	capable	of	achieving	and	follow	me	across
continents.	I	want	you	to	have	that	same	faith	in	yourself.	Take	your	faith	that	a
man-made	chair	will	hold	you	up,	and	apply	that	faith	to	yourself.	Only	when
you	are	able	to	do	this	will	you	have	what	it	takes	to	be	a	first-generation
millionaire.
Alongside	value	and	faith,	there	is	
commitment
.	When	I	say	“commitment,”
I	mean	
your
	definition	of	being	committed,	not	someone	else’s.	Commitment
requires	a	personal	connection	to	an	assignment.	If	you	are	working	on
something	that	you	cannot	create	a	genuine	connection	to,	that	should	be	your
first	red	flag.	What	you	are	working	on	now	is	someone	else’s	assignment.	It’s
not	yours.
That	said,	when	you	are	first	starting	out,	the	best	way	to	understand	the	idea
of	commitment	is	to	become	a	part	of	other	people’s	commitment	to	
their
assignment	for	a	season.	By	working	on	others’	commitment,	you	can	expose
yourself	to	new	ideas,	hone	your	skills,	and	figure	out	what	it	is	that	you	want
your	own	commitment	to	be.	You	can	find	your	own	value	in	raising	up	their
work.	By	working	with	other	people	initially,	you	can	learn	about	what	you	love
and	put	your	stamp	on	something	as	you	work	on	it.	Use	these	experiences	as	a
jumping	off	point	before	you	commit	to	a	project	that	really	speaks	to	what	you
love	and	what	you	are	good	at.
You	
know
	what	you	are	masterful	at—everyone	is	masterful	at	something.
But	when	you	are	blessed	and	gifted	in	a	certain	area,	it’s	so	easy	to	hide	behind
someone	else’s	definition	of	greatness.	Even	if	you	know	better.	Just	because
someone	says	you	are	the	best	salesperson,	promoter,	or	marketing	mind	he	or
she	has	ever	seen,	that	doesn’t	mean	that	it	is	
your
	best.	I	am	at	
the	top	of	my
field.	I	have	been	speaking	in	front	of	hundreds	of	thousands	of	people	every
year	for	well	over	a	decade	now.	My	companies	generate	nine	figures	a	year	in
global	production.	But	that	is	still	not	
my
	best.	I	am	writing	this	book	because	I
want	to	commit	to	what	I	am	called	to	do	and	help	you	do	the	same.


--- Page 23 ---

To	understand	your	commitment	to	your	goal,	imagine	a	vending	machine.	If
you	want	some	chips	but	you	feel	like	eating	only	half	the	bag,	you	still	have	to
put	in	the	whole	dollar.	The	machine	will	never	give	you	half	the	chips	for	50
cents.	If	you	put	in	50	cents,	the	machine	will	give	you	
nothing
.	As	a	matter	of
fact,	just	like	life,	it	will	reject	your	efforts	and	spit	your	coins	back	out.	You
need	to	commit	to	the	whole	bag.	You	need	to	put	in	100	percent,	the	whole
dollar.	There	is	no	negotiation.
You	may	
say
	you	want	to	be	a	first-generation	millionaire,	but	then	you	try	to
negotiate	your	life	away.	You	don’t	commit	to	waking	up	two	hours	early	to
chase	leads	and	do	research.	You	don’t	stay	at	work	late	to	follow	up	on	calls
and	ideas.	You	just	want	to	put	in	that	50	cents	and	get	that	half	bag	of	chips.
This	is	where	I	tell	you	to	stop	that	behavior	now.	Before	you	read	any
further,	you	
must
	commit	to	the	whole	bag.	You	simply	cannot	negotiate
commitment	if	you	want	to	be	a	first-generation	millionaire.	Negotiate	your
desire	to	have	everyone	like	you.	Negotiate	what	you	are	OK	with	when	others
talk	about	you	behind	your	back.	But	never	negotiate	your	commitment	to	this
journey.	You	will	not	become	a	first-generation	millionaire	without	first
committing	to	it	100	percent.
If	you	know	that	you	cannot	give	everything	you	have	to	these	three	keys—
value,	faith,	and	commitment—stop	reading	
now,	and	put	this	book	away	until
you	can	make	that	personal	commitment,	or	give	this	book	to	someone	you	care
about	who	is	hungry	and	has	a	burning	desire	to	be	that	breakout	generation.
This	book	is	designed	for	those	who	want	to	awaken	the	giant	that	lives	within.
This	book	is	for	those	who	will	commit	to	the	commitment!
These	keys	will	be	the	foundation	of	your	character,	which	will	bring	you	that
success	and	allow	you	to	
keep	it
.	The	character	that	will	pick	you	up	when	you
fall.	The	character	that	you	will	pass	on	to	your	children’s	children	so	they	can
continue	on	this	path.
If	you	are	obsessed	with	the	numbers	in	your	bank	statement,	your	rank	in	a
company,	or	the	amount	of	sales	you	bring	but	you	do	
not
	think	about	your
character,	you	will	fail.	I	can	give	you	all	the	information	you	need	on	how	to
close	a	sale,	pitch	to	investors,	or	run	a	business,	but	it	won’t	mean	
anything
unless	you	invest	in	your	character	first.	This	book	is	your	first	step	toward
investing	in	your	own	character.	These	three	keys	will	carry	you	on	this	journey
to	being	a	first-generation	millionaire.
Remember	that	hundred-dollar	bill	that	keeps	its	value,	no	matter	what.
Remember	that	man-made	chair	in	which	you	have	so	much	faith.	Remember
that	vending	machine	that	demands	you	go	all	in	or	get	nothing.	If	you	truly

--- Page 24 ---

want	to	have	this,	to	build	this,	to	be	a	first-generation	millionaire,	you	need	to
have	faith	in	yourself.	You	have	to	value	what	you	bring	to	the	table.	And	you
have	to	commit	to	your	cause.	This	book	is	not	for	just	anyone	and	everyone.	It
is	for	the	people	who	are	willing	to	change	the	
trajectory
	of	their	lives.	It	is	for
those	who	are	ready	to	change	who	they	are	in	order	to	take	the	next	step—those
who	are	willing	to	do	the	work	and	own	the	person	they	will	become.
This	book	is	your	road	map	to	greatness.	Do	the	work.	Lock	it	up.	Make
it	happen	for	your	family	and	yourself.	Everything	you	do	from	now	on	is	in
your	control.	Don’t	let	anyone	tell	you	otherwise.
With	these	keys	and	the	lessons	from	the	journey	we	are	about	to	embark	on
together,	success	is	standing	right	in	front	of	you.	Build	and	maintain	that	true
character—who	you	are	when	it	is	just	you	and	yourself.	Laying	this	foundation
is	the	first	step	to	becoming	a	first-generation	millionaire.	Let’s	get	started.
