
--- Page 131 ---

T
competing	only	with	
your
	previous	success.	And	the	amazing	thing	about	the
principle	is	that	it’s	not	hard	to	accept	the	fact	that	you	can	do	something	again
that	you	have	already	accomplished	and	push	for	just	a	little	bit	more.	It’s	a
friendly	competition	between	you	and	your	previous	year.
Having	and	keeping	to	a	point	of	no	return	is	a	key	element	in	my	life	that
creates	perpetual	success.	You	will	never	become	a	first-generation	millionaire	if
you	hit	your	very	first	goal	and	just	stop.	Set	your	goal,	do	the	math,	and	reach
it.	Then	set	an	even	higher	goal.	This	book	is	designed	to	create	personal
accountability	by	your	never	being	passive	with	yourself	when	it	comes	to	being
OK	with	going	backward.	For	over	15	consecutive	years,	I	have	never	gone
backward	when	it	comes	to	a	year-after-year	financial	increase.	I	credit	that	to
the	simple	fact	that	I	can	never	go	backward	once	I’ve	established	a	new	point	of
no	return.
What	started	out	as	a	personal	principle	in	my	life	has	now	become	a
Wimbrey	Financial	Law	that	is	a	major	contributor	to	mastering	the	mindset	of	a
first-generation	millionaire.	As	your	coach	during	this	journey,	it	is	my	desire
that	you	implement	this	law	by	scratching	off	my	last	name	in	“Wimbrey
Financial	Law”	and	replacing	it	with	your	last	name	and	that	you	teach	your	new
law	to	your	children	with	the	hopes	that	they	will	pass	it	down	to	their	children
and	beyond.
ACTION	STEP
hink	back	to	a	time	when	you	moved	backward	in	your	life.	How	did	you
approach	your	goals	back	then?	How	did	you	go	about	reaching	them?
What	happened	when	you	didn’t	reach	them?	Or	what	happened	when	you	found
yourself	taking	a	step	down	the	rungs	on	your	ladder	or	staying	on	one	rung	for
much	
too	long?	Use	this	as	the	inspiration	for	what	
not
	to	do	going	forward.
Write	down	where	you	went	wrong	and	how	to	fix	that	in	the	future.
Next,	think	back	to	each	of	these	instances,	and	write	out	all	the	excuses	you
have	given	yourself	(and	others)	when	they	happened.	How	did	you	justify	your
downward	trajectory?	Did	you	blame	a	boss,	a	spouse,	a	child?	Did	you	blame
your	education	level?	Your	parents?	Your	upbringing?	Keep	this	list	handy
because	you	will	be	using	that	list	in	this	pillar’s	assignment.

--- Page 132 ---

PILLAR	14
EMBRACING	YOUR	NEW	POINTS	OF	NO
RETURN
REPLACE	YOUR	EXCUSES	WITH
SOLUTIONS
You’ve	set	your	goals,	and	you’ve	done	the	math	on	how	to	get	there.	You
know	that	your	only	direction	is	forward.	Each	time	you	hit	a	goal,	that	is
your	new	
point	of	no	return.
Your	Assignment
•			Take	the	excuses	you	wrote	down	after	you	finished	reading	this
chapter.
•			Focus	on	the	ones	you	can	change.	If	it	was	a	toxic	work
environment,	how	can	you	address	this	problem	so	that	it	won’t	keep
you	from	moving	forward?	If	it	was	an	unsupportive	spouse,	what
conversations	can	you	have	to	put	him	or	her	at	ease?	If	it	was	an
issue	with	your	education,	how	can	you	earn	the	degree	you	need	for
what	you	want	to	do?
•			Add	these	solutions	to	your	list	of	goals.	Keep	this	list	handy	so	that
if	you	find	yourself	making	the	same	excuses	again,	you	have	a	go-to
list	of	responses	to	squash	them	before	they	can	stop	you	from
moving	forward.
Now	take	a	picture	with	the	book	and	your	filled-in	answers,	and	tag	me
on	Instagram	and	Twitter	(@wimbrey),	as	well	as	on	Facebook	and
LinkedIn.	Share	your	progress	and	cheer	on	others!
Be	sure	to	add	our	hashtags:
#BAMM
#WIMBREY

--- Page 133 ---

#CoachJohnny

--- Page 134 ---

O
PILLAR	
15
Eating	off	One	Plate	at	a	Time
ne	of	the	misconceptions	about	personal	development	is	that	the	more
information	you	have,	the	better	off	you	will	be.	That	is	a	fallacy.	In
actuality,	the	more	laser	focused	you	are	on	certain	information	that
complements	where	you	want	to	go—even	if	it’s	less	information—the	more
successful	you	will	be.
I	cannot	stress	enough	the	importance	of	staying	focused.	In	order	to	talk
about	staying	focused	and	in	position,	let’s	talk	about	something	unexpected:
food.	I	love	food.	There	is	nothing	like	the	joy	and	satisfaction	of	a	well-
prepared	meal.	Let’s	pretend	that	I	love	all	types	of	foods	so	much	that	I	decide
to	go	to	all	of	these	restaurants	on	the	same	day.	Soul,	Mexican,	Thai,	Indian,
Italian.	I	eat	it	all.	The	reality	is	that	even	if	they	are	all	
five-star,	high-quality
restaurants,	there	is	a	100	percent	chance	that	I’m	going	to	get	sick.	No	matter
how	much	I	love	it	and	want	it,	my	body	will	start	to	reject	the	food.	Even
though	the	chefs	at	these	restaurants	may	be	at	the	top	of	their	game	and	each
dish	is	tastier	than	the	last,	I	will	
never
	be	able	to	enjoy	all	these	restaurants	in
one	day.
The	same	thing	applies	to	learning	new	languages.	If	you’re	struggling	to
learn	five	different	languages	at	the	exact	same	time,	it’s	because	you’re
focusing	on	too	many	languages	and	alphabets	and	vocabularies	at	once.	Learn
one	well	and	then	learn	another	and	then	another.	The	danger	of	learning	too
many	things	at	one	time	leads	to	chaos	because	you	aren’t	able	to	give	all	your
attention	to	one	thing.	You	have	to	take	time	to	digest	it.	You	have	to	take	time
to	appreciate	it.	To	savor	it.	If	you	don’t,	all	that	time	and	money	you’ve	spent
will	be	wasted.
If	you	find	yourself	a	victim	to	having	too	many	self-development
approaches,	too	many	seminars,	and	too	many	voices	in	your	head,	I	want	you	to
slow	down.	Look	down	at	your	table.	If	you	spend	all	your	time	and	energy
trying	to	absorb	as	many	lessons	as	you	can	without	actually	being	able	to	apply

--- Page 135 ---

trying	to	absorb	as	many	lessons	as	you	can	without	actually	being	able	to	apply
those	lessons	and	see	real	change	in	your	life,	chances	are,	you	are	eating	off	too
many	plates	at	once.	Take	a	step	back	and	look	at	where	you	want	to	be	in	the
moment	and	where	you	want	to	be	in	the	near	future.	The	rest	can	wait	until	you
are	able	to	focus	on	those	two	points.
For	example,	say	you	want	to	learn	about	leadership,	how	to	invest	in	the
stock	market,	how	to	manage	employees,	and	how	to	grow	your	business.	Of
course,	all	of	those	are	important,	but	only	one	is	important	now.	If	you	are
starting	your	own	business,	
read	about	how	to	be	a	better	CEO.	Own	that
information	while	knowing	that	the	next	thing	you	need	to	know	is	how	to
manage	your	new	employees.	Your	employees	don’t	care	how	you	invest	in	the
stock	market.	They	don’t	care	how	you	are	going	to	grow	a	business	you	just
started.	They	care	about	your	being	the	best	CEO	you	can	be	and	then	being	the
best	boss	to	them	you	can	be.	Sometimes	you	don’t	even	have	to	read	an	entire
book	to	get	what	you	need	out	of	it.	Pick	and	choose	the	chapters	that	apply,	and
go	back	to	the	other	parts	when	you	need	them.
Holton	Buggs	has	a	unique	way	of	looking	at	this	idea.	He	told	me	once	to
think	of	a	grocery	store.	When	you	go	food	shopping,	you	don’t	go	up	and	down
the	aisles,	putting	literally	everything	you	see	in	your	cart,	right?	That	would	be
insane.	You	know	what	you	want	to	eat,	you	make	a	list	of	what	you	need,	and
you	buy	just	that	and	nothing	else.	You	don’t	get	distracted	and	buy	everything
in	the	butcher’s	window,	every	bag	of	chips,	every	type	of	fruit,	and	then	every
brand	of	pet	food	when	you	don’t	even	have	a	pet.	Treat	your	mind	like	that
grocery	cart.	Only	take	what	you	know	you	need,	and	leave	everything	else
behind.
In	order	to	really	bring	this	visual	home,	I	want	you	to	imagine	a	funnel.
Google	the	image	if	you	have	to.	Anything	that	goes	into	the	funnel	has	to
complement	your	goal.	Anything	that	has	nothing	to	do	with	your	goal	
cannot
	go
into	the	funnel.	If	you	stuff	too	many	things	in	the	narrow	head	of	the	funnel,	it
will	get	blocked.	Not	only	will	you	not	be	able	to	do	the	things	you	need	to	do
well,	but	you	won’t	even	be	able	to	do	the	extra	things	well	either.	It’s	a	lose-
lose	situation	all	around.
How	can	your	goals	make	it	through	to	the	other	side	if	the	funnel	is	blocked?
If	your	main	goal	is	to	be	a	writer	but	you	also	
have	a	dog-walking	business,	a
child-care	business,	and	a	meal-delivery	service,	I	will	tell	you	right	now	that
you	will	never	be	a	writer.	The	dogs,	and	the	kids,	and	the	food	packages	are
clogging	up	your	funnel.	Not	only	will	your	writing	career	never	take	off,	but
you	won’t	even	be	able	to	focus	on	one	job	to	make	it	lucrative.	You	will	never
be	able	to	give	any	of	these	four	things	your	everything	because	there	are	too

--- Page 136 ---

W
many	plates	on	your	table.	There	are	too	many	items	in	your	grocery	cart.	There
are	too	many	things	clogging	your	funnel.
Go	inside	your	funnel,	and	pluck	out	anything	that	goes	against	your	main
goal.	Go	back	to	your	lists	from	
Pillars	5
,	
11
,	and	
13
.	What	foes	might	you	have
overlooked	because	they	were	disguised	as	productivity?	If	multiple	businesses
are	pulling	you	out	of	position,	they	need	to	come	out	of	the	funnel.	Anything
that	takes	your	goal	out	of	your	crosshairs	needs	to	go.	Take	the	temporary	loss
for	the	ultimate	gain.
ACTION	STEP
rite	down	everything	you	are	doing	that’s	complementing	where	you
want	to	go.	If	your	goal	is	to	master	a	certain	skill,	write	down	all	the
ways	you	are	going	to	master	that	one	skill.	If	your	goal	is	to	open	a	certain	type
of	business,	write	down	all	the	ways	you	are	going	to	open	that	business.
The	point	of	this	exercise	is	to	make	your	main	goal	your	main	source	of
income.	Everything	after	that	is	extra.	Say	you	want	to	become	a	master	chef,	for
example,	but	your	essential	income	is	from	a	lawn	mowing	company.	If	this	is
the	case,	you	now	have	to	prioritize.	If	mowing	lawns	is	taking	away	
from
becoming	a	chef,	you	have	to	eliminate	that	stream	of	income.	“But,	Johnny,”
you	may	ask,	“if	the	point	of	this	book	is	to	become	a	first-generation
millionaire,	
why
	would	I	eliminate	income?”
If	your	goal	is	to	become	a	chef	and	you	are	unable	to	meet	that	goal	because
you	are	mowing	lawns,	then	the	lawn	mowing	is	taking	you	away	from	your
goal.	It’s	as	simple	as	that.	Remember,	the	very	thing	that	is	producing	could	be
distracting	you	from	your	goal.	Sometimes,	you	have	to	give	up	to	get	up.	If	you
focus	on	becoming	a	chef,	finding	success	in	that	field,	and	making	the	money
you	set	out	to	make,	you	can	then	add	the	lawn	mowing	back	in	as	an	extra
stream	of	income	if	you	need	to.
Every	significant	level	of	increase	that	I	have	ever	accomplished	in	my	life
was	directly	attached	to	my	ability	to	sacrifice	and	leave	behind	something	that
was	holding	me	back	in	life.	If	I	found	I	was	eating	off	two	plates	at	the	same
time,	I	pushed	one	plate	aside	and	focused	on	the	other	with	all	my	energy.
To	this	day,	I	eliminate	any	and	everything	that	has	the	potential	of	hindering
my	progress	as	soon	as	I	identify	it	as	a	foe	to	my	goals.	There	are	things	in	my
life	that	I	have	eliminated	for	a	season,	but	there	are	also	things	in	my	life	that	I
have	eliminated	permanently,	with	zero	chances	of	return.	
When	I	let	those
