
--- Page 137 ---

things	go,	I	know	that	I	am	participating	in	my	own	rescue.
	In	doing	so,	I
know	I	am	going	from	generational	poverty	to	ultimately	establishing	myself	as
a	first-generation	millionaire.
PILLAR	15
EATING	OFF	ONE	PLATE	AT	A	TIME
STAY	IN	POSITION	AND	AVOID	THE	SIDE
HUSTLES
A	distraction	doesn’t	always	take	the	form	of	a	foe.	Sometimes	when	you
stretch	yourself	too	thin,	you	end	up	getting	in	the	way	of	your	primary
goals.
At	this	moment,	you	need	
laser	focus
.	Someone	with	a	one-track	mind	is
more	likely	to	reach	the	finish	line	than	someone	who’s	juggling	multiple
projects.
It’s	time	to	
clear	the	path
.
Your	Assignment
Access	all	of	your	revenue	streams.
Eliminate	any	project	or	side	hustle	that’s	
pulling	you	out	of	position
	to
reach	your	primary	goal.	Leave	the	ones	that	keep	you	on	a	
productive
path
	toward	wealth.
List	all	of	your	
revenue	streams
.	Then	decide	which	ones	you	will
maintain	and	which	ones	you	will	eliminate.

--- Page 138 ---

Now	take	a	picture	with	the	book	and	your	filled-in	answers,	and	tag	me
on	Instagram	and	Twitter	(@wimbrey),	as	well	as	on	Facebook	and
LinkedIn.	Share	your	progress	and	cheer	on	others!
Be	sure	to	add	our	hashtags:
#BAMM
#WIMBREY
#CoachJohnny

--- Page 139 ---

E
PART	V
EXECUTE	VERSUS	EXCUSE
xcuses	and	execution	are	two	sides	of	the	same	coin.	Whiners	excuse,	and
winners	execute.	Whiners	have	mastered	the	art	of	excuses.	They	always
have	an	explanation	for	why	they	are	losing.	Winners	simply	execute	and	win.
There	is	no	spectrum;	there	is	no	in-between.	Remember,	this	is	a	book	for
people	who	will	become	first-generation	millionaires,	not	for	people	who	are
simply	trying	to.

--- Page 140 ---

Y
PILLAR	
16
Executing	Instead	of	Excusing
ou	can	either	become	a	master	at	making	excuses	and	procrastinating	or	a
master	at	putting	a	plan	into	action	and	following	through	with	your
intentions.	I	want	to	encourage	you	to	subscribe	to	the	mindset	of	someone	who
executes	a	plan.	Do	you	want	to	be	a	
goal	setter
	or	a	
goal	getter
?	Do	you	want	to
see	results,	not	just	activity?
If	you	want	to	make	excuses,	you	will	live	in	the	land	of	those	who	finish
before	they	even	start.	That	is	not	where	first-generation	millionaires	live.	They
decide	to	do	something,	figure	out	how	to	do	it,	and	follow	through.	When
things	get	off	course	due	to	circumstances	outside	of	your	control,	you	need	to
know	how	to	get	back	on	track	without	making	excuses	to	yourself	and	to	others.
I’m	not	saying	that	there	aren’t	opportunities	for	explanations.	But	when	you
explain	what	went	wrong,	you	have	to	tell	the	truth.	You	are	going	to	have	to
explain	your	mistakes	or	your	team’s	mistakes	to	someone	one	day.	The	trick	is
to	make	sure	it’s	honest.	Don’t	embellish,	don’t	blame	others,	and	don’t	make
excuses.	You	will	get	nowhere	fast	if	you	fill	up	your	tank	with	excuses.
We	all	make	mistakes.	Making	a	mistake	doesn’t	make	us	bad	or	good.	It
makes	us	human.	When	you	do	make	a	mistake,	go	through	the	following
process	to	get	everything	back	on	track:
First:
	Own	it.	Acknowledge	the	mistake.	Don’t	ignore	it.	The	absolute
fastest	way	to	self-sabotage	is	personal	denial.
Then:
	If	it	is	a	public	mistake,	seek	wisdom	immediately.	Get	help	in
orchestrating	your	response,	and	make	sure	your	path	of	correction	is	very
clear	while	extending	your	personal	remorse	and	commitment	to	fixing
the	problem.	Do	not	allow	any	time	to	go	by	to	allow	anyone	to	dictate	a
false	narrative.

--- Page 141 ---

Lastly:
	Offer	something	to	make	up	for	your	mistake	because	doing	so
will	build	trust.	Then	overdeliver	on	your	offer.	Remember,	trust	is	a
voluntary	bridge	that	people	have	to	want	to	cross.	Your	offering	a	bonus
or	free	gift	and	overdelivering	is	an	invitation	to	return	and	cross	over
your	bridge	of	trust.
Doing	this	will	help	others	restore	their	confidence	in	you	and	the	goal	you
are	working	to	accomplish.	If	you	simply	make	
excuses	and	walk	away,	you	will
leave	room	for	a	false	narrative	to	be	dictated	by	anyone	motivated	to	share	their
opinions.	Remember,	perception	wins	over	facts	in	the	short	run.	To	win	back
people’s	trust,	show	remorse,	offer	a	plan	and	a	promise	to	remedy	the	problem,
and	overdeliver	on	that	promise.	When	things	go	off	course,	you	need	to	know
how	to	get	them	back	on.	You	need	to	form	a	plan	and	execute	it.	Excuses	will
get	you	nowhere.
Making	excuses	to	others	when	something	goes	awry	is	one	thing.	But	what
about	the	excuses	you	make	to	yourself?	What	happens	when	you	find	yourself
stuck	in	a	cycle	of	complacently	wandering	away	from	the	path	you	set	for
yourself?	Do	you	try	to	justify	why	you	aren’t	meeting	your	goals?	These
excuses	and	justifications	are	foes	to	your	goals.	Facing	the	truth	about	yourself
can	be	hard,	but	doing	so	means	you	are	participating	in	your	own	rescue,	and
you	are	making	sure	that	your	actions	and	attitudes	are	in	the	friends	category.
I	hear	my	clients	give	me	excuses	all	the	time:
“It	wasn’t	my	fault!”	or	“I	couldn’t	finish	because	life	got	in	the	way	and	I
could	not	find	the	time!”	or	even	“My	car	broke	down.	What	was	I	supposed	to
do?”
When	you	find	yourself	making	excuses	for	your	lack	of	progress,	I	want	you
to	return	to	
Parts	I
	and	
III
.	I	want	you	to	revisit	your	goals.	Find	your	goal
ladder.	What	rung	are	you	on?	If	you	aren’t	on	the	ladder	anymore,	why	not?
What	in	your	life	took	you	away	from	the	goals	you	set	for	yourself?
Then,	I	want	you	to	take	an	inventory	of	your	choices	and	your	actions.
Remember,	these	excuses	you	are	
making	to	yourself	are	your	goal’s	foes.	Think
carefully	about	why	you	are	making	them.	Are	the	excuses	you	are	making	now
helping	your	future	self?	Of	course,	they	aren’t.	If	that’s	the	case,	why	the	hell
are	you	making	them?
You	can	master	the	art	of	execution	and	be	truthful	about	what	is	happening
during	your	moments	of	setback,	or	you	can	be	a	master	of	giving	excuses.	But
you	can’t	execute	and	give	excuses	at	the	same	time.	Now	is	the	time	to	build

--- Page 142 ---

I
you	can’t	execute	and	give	excuses	at	the	same	time.	Now	is	the	time	to	build
your	character	by	learning	how	to	execute	your	plans	and	to	give	honest
explanations	if	those	plans	go	south.
You	are	the	only	one	who	decides	whether	you	are	going	to	give	up	and
make	excuses	about	it	or	execute	your	dream	and	participate	in	your	own
rescue.
	Most	people	decide	to	execute	a	plan	based	on	dramatic	situations.	My
mother	quit	smoking	because	she	thought	she	had	cancer.	My	father	quit
drinking	because	his	doctor	told	him	if	he	didn’t,	drinking	would	lead	to	a
certain	death.	I	want	you	to	decide	to	execute	not	because	you	want	your	life	to
continue
	as	it	has	been	but	because	you	want	to	
launch
	your	new	life.
You	have	the	potential,	you	have	the	drive,	and	now	you	have	the	character	to
build	yourself	into	a	first-generation	millionaire.	Commit	to	yourself,	solidify
your	faith,	know	your	value.	Make	it	happen.
ACTION	STEP
f	you	are	willing	to	lie	to	yourself,	you	will	never	master	wealth.	Be	honest
with	yourself.	I	want	you	to	write	down	the	reasons	
you	have	skipped	certain
assignments	in	this	book.	Don’t	look	shocked!	If	I	were	a	betting	man,	I	would
say	that	you	have	probably	skipped	at	least	one	of	the	assignments,	or	you
simply	did	not	give	it	100	percent,	which	means	you	cut	corners.	Remember,	this
is	your	life	not	mine.	If	you	have	skipped	assignments,	now	is	the	time	to	look	at
why	you	did	so	and	then	go	back	and	complete	them.
By	cutting	corners	when	you	begin	your	journey,	you	are	cutting	down	your
own	character.	Without	a	strong	character	in	place,	you	will	never	be	able	to
achieve	and	maintain	the	first-generation-millionaire	mindset.	The	more	times
you	cut	corners,	the	more	times	you	give	excuses,	the	more	times	you	don’t
participate	in	your	own	rescue,	the	more	times	you	don’t	inspect	what	you
expect,	the	more	likely	it	is	that	you	will	form	the	character	of	someone	who	is
good	at	giving	excuses,	at	reacting,	at	embellishing	why	he	or	she	is	failing.
True	character	is	who	you	are	when	no	one	is	around.	You	can	act	however
you	want	in	front	of	other	people,	but	if	you	lie	to	yourself	over	and	over	and
over	again,	soon	you	will	have	nothing	but	lies.	That	is	not	the	foundation	of	a
first-generation	millionaire.	You	can	take	my	word	for	it,	or	you	can	learn	it	the
hard	way.
I	recommend	that	you	look	back	at	where	you	cut	corners	in	this	book,	figure
out	why,	write	down	those	reasons,	and	then	complete	the	assignments	you
