
--- Page 72 ---

risks.	Taking	a	risk	takes	a	moment,	but	not	taking	that	risk	becomes	a	lifestyle
that	leads	to	regret.	If	a	person	has	a	lifestyle	of	someone	who	doesn’t	take	risks,
I	can	guarantee	that	he	or	she	won’t	be	wealthy	or	successful.	You	must	take
risks.
I	want	to	push	you	into	the	land	of	taking	risks.	In	order	to	do	so,	let	me	talk
about	a	time	when	I	forced	myself	into	taking	risks	and	how	it	made	me	the
person	I	am	today.	I	knew	at	the	age	of	23	that	I	wanted	to	have	my	first	six-
figure	year.	I	wanted	to	make	$100,000	in	52	weeks.	That	was	that.	I	was	so
specific	in	my	calculations	on	how	to	go	about	doing	this	that	I	narrowed	it
down	to	the	fact	that	I	had	to	make	at	least	two	calls	every	day	for	52	weeks	to
hit	this	goal.
In	order	to	make	sure	I	made	those	two	calls	every	day,	I	took	two	coins	and
put	them	in	my	left	pocket.	Whenever	I	made	a	call,	I	moved	a	coin	over	from
my	left	pocket	to	my	right	pocket.	At	the	end	of	the	day,	those	two	coins	
had
	to
move	from	the	left	to	the	right	pocket;	if	they	hadn’t	yet,	I	didn’t	let	myself	go	to
sleep.	Now,	there	were	days	when	I	absolutely	forgot	to	do	this.	On	those	days,	I
would	take	my	jacket	off	at	the	end	of	the	day,	or	hang	up	my	pants,	and	one	or
two	coins	would	fall	out.	That	accountability	set	in	immediately	because	I	could
not	go	to	sleep.	Why?	
It	was	my	job	to	participate	in	my	own	rescue.
If	I	found	a	coin	in	my	left	pocket	at	the	end	of	the	day,	no	matter	what	time	it
was,	I	would	force	myself	to	make	that	phone	call,	to	make	that	presentation,	to
make	an	exposure.	I	was	not	above	using	pity:	“Ma’am,	I	am	so	sorry	to	be
calling	you	this	late,	but	it	is	mandatory	that	I	do	another	sales	call	before	I	go	to
bed.	I	don’t	care	if	you	are	not	interested.	Please	let	me	do	a	five-minute	call
right	now,	and	then	you	can	be	on	your	way	and	I	can	go	to	sleep.”	It	was	a	pity
call,	but	it	was	still	so	impactful.	Some	honored	me	with	the	five	minutes	I
requested	because	they	simply	felt	sorry	for	me,	and	that	is	why	I	call	it	“the	pity
call.”	Many	of	the	people	I	called	honored	the	hustle;	they	honored	my	work
ethic.	And,	eventually,	many	of	them	became	clients.
I	reached	my	goal	that	year	thanks	to	those	two	little	coins	in	my	pocket.
Those	coins	created	accountability,	and	the	accountability	gave	me	the	courage
to	take	the	risk.	The	purpose	of	this	exercise	is	much	greater	than	the	objects
used.	I’ve	seen	people	use	two	wristbands	or	two	earrings.	Whatever	your
personality	type	is	and	whatever	visual	will	hold	you	accountable	on	a	daily
basis	doesn’t	matter.	The	practice	alone	will	lead	you	closer	to	the	millionaire
mindset.


--- Page 73 ---

I	want	you	to	think	about	where	you	can	take	risks	in	your	life.	For	me,	it	was
finding	a	way	to	force	myself	to	make	those	cold	calls	every	day.	For	you,	it	may
be	using	this	principle	to	track	your	daily	advancement	toward	a	project	or	goal,
challenging	yourself	to	exercise	the	mental	muscle	of	meeting	two	new	people
every	day,	or	implementing	a	positive	impact	shift	on	the	planet	every	day.
Whatever	your	personal	mission	or	goal	is,	when	you	attach	that	goal	to	a
tangible,	daily	act	of	accountability,	you	are	on	a	for-sure	track	to	getting	to	that
goal.
The	most	important	muscle	that	you	are	flexing	during	this	exercise	is	facing
a	new	fear.	You	may	not	believe	me	when	I	say	this,	but	I	have	had	to	get	over
my	fear	of	talking	to	strangers.	This	was	a	huge	problem	for	me,	and	it	still	is!
To	the	world,	I	may	be	the	guy	who	speaks	on	stages,	is	showcased	on	media
outlets	around	the	world,	and	affects	millions	through	social	media,	but	when	it
comes	to	one-on-one	contact,	I	find	myself	being	the	quiet	person	looking	down
on	the	elevator	floor	or	acting	like	I’m	asleep	with	headphones	on	the	airplane.
When	people	find	out	who	I	am	and	what	I	do,	they	want	to	talk	about	it.	I’ve
always	hated	tooting	my	own	horn	to	strangers,	so	I’ve	thought	that	ignoring
everyone	around	me	was	OK.	Basically,	hiding	in	plain	sight	became	very
comfortable	for	me,	and	I	still	struggle	with	this	today.
But	I	also	know	that	I	need	to	work	on	this	fear	and	flex	the	mental	muscle	of
talking	to	strangers.	Les	Brown	told	me,	“Johnny,	you	must	be	the	message	that
you	bring!”	And	that	statement	alone	has	caused	me	to	implement	a	daily
practice	of	having	
conversations	with	two	total	strangers	with	the	intent	of
having	them	asking	me	what	I	do.
The	reason	I	pushed	myself	directly	into	my	fear	of	talking	about	myself	with
strangers	was	to	create	an	opportunity	to	bring	positive	impact	into	those
strangers’	lives.	I	simply	attached	my	goal	to	a	purpose	that	was	greater	than	my
selfish	fears	of	inconvenience	and	my	shyness.	Taking	that	risk	has	created
incalculable	positive	results,	and	it	has	changed	lives	around	the	world.	One	way
to	face	your	fear	is	to	make	overcoming	it	purposeful	and	greater	than	your
selfish	desires.	Focusing	on	the	good	is	a	major	step	toward	the	process	of
mastering	the	art	of	a	millionaire	mindset	and	becoming	a	first-generation
millionaire.
Taking	that	risk	is	everything.	Simply	
wishing
	for	something	will	get	you
nothing.	Taking	a	risk	can	give	you	everything.	Take	my	mentee	George,	for
example.	A	while	back,	I	was	in	Spain,	speaking	for	a	company	that	I	was
partnering	with.	The	company	was	operating	on	five	continents,	and	George
oversaw	one	part	of	its	distribution	for	Europe	and	Asia.	When	I	had	first	met

--- Page 74 ---

him,	he	had	no	position	in	the	company,	but	over	the	decade—under	my
guidance	and	mentorship—he	carved	out	a	position	for	himself.	I	was	especially
excited	about	the	event	because	it	meant	I	would	finally	be	able	to	catch	up	with
George.	He	was	a	great	guy,	and	his	wife	had	just	had	a	baby.	I	was	so	proud	of
how	far	he	had	come	in	the	company.	I	was	getting	amped	up	backstage,	about
to	go	live	in	front	of	10,000	people,	and	seeing	George	walk	up	to	me	boosted
my	spirits	that	much	more.	As	he	came	over	to	me,	however,	my	smile	faded
when	I	saw	his	worried	expression.	He	asked	to	speak	to	me,	and	I	said	yes
immediately.
“What	happened?”	I	asked.
“My	bosses	just	yelled	at	me	for	something	I	didn’t	do.	Like	five	minutes
ago.	I	can’t	believe	it.”
“What?”
“I	had	to	take	the	blame	for	dropping	the	ball	when	it	wasn’t	my	fault.	I	am
now	the	face	of	this	huge	mistake,	and	I	had	nothing	to	do	with	it.”
“George.	If	you	had	a	magic	wand,	what	would	you	want	to	happen?	What	do
you	want	here?”
“I	love	the	company.	I	love	what	we	do.	But	I	don’t	like	taking	the	abuse
when	I	did	nothing	wrong.	I	don’t	like	being	the	scapegoat.”
“How	much	do	you	not	like	it?”	I	asked	him.	“Do	you	dislike	it	to	the	point
where	you	can	put	your	foot	down	and	say	this	can	never	happen	again?	Or	is	it
not	that	painful	yet?”	He	shrugged	his	shoulders	in	defeat.	“If	it’s	not	that
painful	yet	and	you	can	deal	with	their	treating	you	like	this,	you	are	just	training
them	to	continue	to	treat	you	like	this.	They	are	thinking	to	themselves	
right
now
,	‘If	George	isn’t	going	to	fight	back,	we	can	keep	using	him	as	a
scapegoat.’”
“Well,	I	don’t	want	that,”	he	shot	back,	perking	up	a	bit.
“Here	is	my	advice,”	I	replied.	“Set	up	a	meeting	at	this	event—right	now—
and	you	tell	them,	‘This	can	never	happen	again.	I	would	be	more	than	happy	to
walk	away	from	this	position	if	staying	means	that	I	have	to	keep	taking	the	hits
publicly	for	things	that	I	did	not	do.	However,	I	am	more	than	happy	to	take
responsibility	if	you	give	me	the	entire	division.’	If	they	are	going	to	go	off	on
you,	you	might	as	well	take	all	the	ownership	for	real.”
George	looked	at	me	with	disbelief.	“You	are	telling	me	to	go	back	to	the
people	who	
just
	made	me	feel	awful?	I	have	a	
brand-new	baby	at	home,	and	you
are	telling	me	to	go	back	and	threaten	to	quit?”	He	walked	away,	I	went	onstage,
and	I	didn’t	see	George	for	the	rest	of	the	evening.	The	next	morning,	however,
he	walked	into	breakfast,	all	smiles.	“They	gave	the	whole	thing	to	me!”

--- Page 75 ---

When	you	don’t	feel	like	your	value	can	win	on	its	own	merit,	you	will	settle
in	life	because	you	don’t	have	the	value	to	take	the	risk.	Value	yourself.	Value
your	time	and	energy	and	ideas.	
Building	your	value	and	exercising	that
muscle	is	a	must	if	you	want	to	build	the	character	of	a	first-generation
millionaire.	No	one	will	take	a	risk	on	you	if	you	aren’t	willing	to	put
yourself	and	your	self-worth	on	the	line.
My	protégé,	Michael	Jex,	is	the	epitome	of	being	a	risk	taker,	not	a	wish	maker.
Right	before	I	met	Jex,	he	had	been	out	of	work	for	just	over	a	year.	He	had	been
working	in	construction,	but	his	employer	lost	its	contract,	and	just	like	that,	he
lost	his	income.	After	that,	he	just	couldn’t	find	work.	He	thought	about	going
back	to	the	sales	jobs	he	hated—retail	stores	and	call	centers—but	the	very	idea
turned	his	stomach.	He	told	me	later,	“I	couldn’t	stand	the	idea	of	working	in	a
store	again,	but	I	didn’t	have	a	choice.	My	daughter	had	just	turned	one,	and	my
lady	was	the	only	one	working	in	our	family.	So	I	asked	my	friend	to	hook	me
up	with	a	job	at	the	AT&T	store.	But	even	with	the	personal	reference,	I	still
didn’t	get	the	job.	Instead	of	being	upset,	I	remember	being	perfectly	calm	in
that	moment	after	finding	out.	This	was	happening	for	a	reason.	I	let	it	go.”
A	week	later,	he	got	a	call	from	
another
	friend	of	his	who	was	already
working	with	me.	He	wanted	to	join	the	company,	
but	he	didn’t	have	the
investment	capital	he	needed.	What	he	
did
	have,	however,	was	his
unemployment	check.	Now,	for	him	to	take	his	unemployment	check,	something
that	was	meant	for	diapers	and	rent,	and	invest	it	in	himself	is	unheard	of	and	a
serious
	risk.	That’s	not	what	unemployment	checks	are	for.	But	Jex	knew	that
this	money	would	be	the	beginning	of	something	great.	He	could	have	stuck	with
the	status	quo,	but	he	chose	to	take	the	risk	instead.	He	was	participating	in	his
own	rescue.
Years	after	we	started	working	together,	I	found	out	exactly	how	committed
he	was	to	joining	my	company.	As	Jex	tells	it:	“The	week	before	I	heard	about
Johnny’s	company,	I	shattered	my	phone	screen.	It	was	completely	unusable,
and	I	knew	I	needed	a	new	phone.	By	the	time	I	heard	about	this	opportunity,	I
had	already	spent	my	unemployment	check	on	a	new	phone.	For	some	reason,
though,	they	hadn’t	charged	my	credit	card	or	shipped	the	phone	to	me.	When	I
saw	that	I	had	the	chance	to	invest	with	Johnny,	I	had	a	decision	to	make:	a
working	phone	or	this	opportunity.	In	the	end,	it	was	easy.	I	called	AT&T,
canceled	the	order,	and	used	the	check	to	join	the	team.	That	check	led	to	the
millions	I	have	today.”

--- Page 76 ---

Most	people	would	have	used	that	unemployment	check	to	do	what	society
dictates	as	“right.”	Not	Jex.	He	used	100	percent	of	it	to	start	his	business,	and	I
coached	him	during	the	process.	Now	he	is	making	millions	on	an	international
level.	Jex	is	a	true	first-generation	millionaire.	He	did	the	unthinkable.	As	Jex
says,	“Success	for	me	didn’t	happen	overnight.	It	took	work.	But	I	could	have
easily	just	used	the	phone	as	an	excuse.	I	could	have	used	my	baby,	or	my
single-income	family	as	an	excuse.	I	had	a	whole	lot	of	reasons	to	
not
	spend	the
check	on	this	
opportunity—it	was	the	safer	decision	to	make.	But	I	always
wanted	this	life.	I	had	conversations	with	God	about	it.	I	felt	that	he	was	always
testing	me.	He	put	so	many	obstacles	in	front	of	me,	but	when	I	saw	this	door,	I
was	intent	on	kicking	it	open.”	Jex	took	his	wishes,	transformed	them	into	reality
with	that	risk,	and	has	never	looked	back.
The	risk	doesn’t	have	to	be	huge.	You	don’t	have	to	put	all	your	chips	on	the
table	all	the	time.	Sometimes,	taking	the	risk	just	means	putting	out	a	hand	to
introduce	yourself.	I	have	found	that	the	common	denominator	to	any	success
can	always	be	traced	back	to	an	introduction.	Any	merger,	any	acquisition,	any
partnership.	If	the	common	denominator	to	success	is	an	introduction	and	you
are	not	successful,	I	would	immediately	question	how	many	people	you	are
meeting.	Not	partnering	with,	not	pitching—but	meeting.	If	you	want	to	narrow
it	down	to	what	makes	a	person	successful,	focus	on	making	those	introductions.
When	you	look	at	things	that	way,	your	motive	is	not	to	meet	new	clients	or	new
business	partners.	It’s	just	to	meet	more	
people
.
There	have	been	so	many	business	decisions	that	I	made	in	my	life	because	I
liked	someone,	and	vice	versa.	Remember,	the	fact	that	I	have	so	many	people	in
my	life	and	am	constantly	trying	to	meet	more	is	ultimately	the	reason	I	met	Les
Brown.	But	I	didn’t	meet	him	because	I	simply	decided	to	one	day.	There	were
years	of	decisions	to	meet	new	people	that	led	to	that	moment,	and	to	this	day	I
can	still	connect	the	dots	to	every	single	one	that	led	me	to	Les	Brown.
Don’t	sit	with	your	back	against	the	wall.	Walk	to	the	middle	of	the	floor	and
start	talking.	Be	a	risk	taker,	not	a	wish	maker.	Here,	the	risk	is	meeting	new
people.	The	fear	is	rejection.	You	have	to	connect	your	fear	to	someone	or
something	that	motivates	you,	not	demotivates	you.	I	am	afraid	of	losing
everything	and	going	back	to	the	homeless	shelter,	so	I	use	my	fear	as	a
motivator.	I	take	the	risk	of	meeting	new	people.	How	many	introductions	have
you	made	in	the	last	24	hours?	How	many	will	you	make	in	the	24	hours	after
reading	that	sentence?	
All	three	characteristics	of	a	first-generation
