
--- Page 44 ---

#CoachJohnny

--- Page 45 ---

Y
PILLAR	
3
Establishing	Accountability
ou	have	your	goal	in	front	of	you:	becoming	a	first-generation	millionaire.
You	have	started	the	search	for	a	mentor.	You	believe	in	your	value,	you
have	faith	in	yourself,	and	you	are	committed	to	your	cause.	Now	what?	You
need	
accountability
.	It	is	well	and	good	to	have	all	these	pieces	ready	to	go,	but
you	must	have	a	driving	factor	in	your	life	that	will	keep	you	moving	forward.
This	is	where	accountability	comes	in.	While	your	mentor	can	hold	you
accountable,	that	is	not	his	or	her	primary	job.	You	need	to	find	someone	who
cares	about	you,	who	is	invested	in	your	success,	and	who	will	help	you	stay	on
track.	I	had	such	a	person	in	my	own	life	when	I	was	working	on	one	of	my	first
big	projects.
In	my	church	leadership	program,	I	was	blessed	to	be	surrounded	by	truly
special,	genuine	people	every	week.	One	of	my	
fellow	students	at	the	time,
Christopher	Lloyd	(no,	not	the	actor),	is	such	a	person.	When	he	asks	you	how
you	are,	he	is	not	just	making	conversation.	He	truly	cares	about	how	your	day	is
going.	It	is	a	rare	gift	that	everyone	around	him	appreciates,	and	it	was	especially
appreciated	during	that	grueling	leadership	training.
This	was	back	in	2002.	I	was	27	years	old.	Christopher	and	I	were	both	high-
level	students	in	an	exclusive	leadership	class	that	required	major	service	and
volunteering.	I	served	so	much	back	then	that	I	had	holes	in	my	shoes,	but	I
could	not	afford	to	replace	them.	My	oldest	daughter	had	been	born	the	year
before,	and	my	wife	was	pregnant	with	our	second.	It	was	an	extremely	tough
time	for	all	of	us.	But	I	served	through	pain	and	tears	because	I	was	so	hungry	to
learn	leadership.	And	a	major	part	of	learning	was	getting	through	endless	days
of	serving	leaders	by	driving	and	being	on	hotel	duty	and	acting	as	their	security
detail.	While	it	meant	long	days	and	time	away	from	my	family,	it	was	this
service	that	got	me	in	the	presence	of	very	influential	global	trailblazers.	I	was
not	allowed	to	talk	to	or	engage	with	them	unless	they	started	a	conversation
with	me	first,	but	that	didn’t	matter	because	I	had	always	found	that	the	best	way

--- Page 46 ---

with	me	first,	but	that	didn’t	matter	because	I	had	always	found	that	the	best	way
to	learn	was	to	watch,	not	talk.	Christopher	and	I	did	this	for	years,	bringing	us
closer	and	building	our	character	together.
When	I	was	writing	my	first	book—
From	the	Hood	to	Doing	Good
—I
needed	to	describe	it	to	everyone	I	knew	in	order	to	make	it	real,	to	make	it
happen.	If	I	had	kept	talking	about	the	book,	but	no	book	appeared,	everyone
would	know	that	I	hadn’t	followed	through	on	my	goals.	I	knew	if	I	told
Christopher,	he	would	ask	me	about	how	the	book	was	going	every	time	he	saw
me—at	least	twice	a	week	in	our	leadership	meetings.	And	he	did.	Every	time	he
asked,	I	would	reply,	“Fine.”	As	long	as	I	
thought	about	the	book,	wrote	some
notes	down,	or	even	talked	about	it,	I	would	reply,	“Fine.”	But	in	truth,	nothing
was	happening.	Months	went	by,	and	all	I	was	doing	was	spinning	my	wheels.
Christopher’s	questions	only	reminded	me	that	I	was	not	getting	anywhere	on	a
project	that	was	very	important	to	me.	I	was	going	from	being	a	winner	to	being
a	whiner.
One	day,	before	Christopher	could	ask	me	how	the	book	was	going,	I	cut	him
off.	“Enough	of	asking	me	how	it’s	going.	From	now	on,	I	want	you	to	ask	what
page	I	am	on.”	I	knew	that	if	I	had	to	see	him	twice	a	week,	I	wouldn’t	be	able	to
stand	repeating	the	same	page	number	even	once.	I	would	be	extremely
embarrassed	about	my	lack	of	progress,	especially	when	I	had	to	say	it	out	loud.
“Fine”	was	no	longer	going	to	cut	it.	Christopher	was	holding	me	accountable,
even	if	
he
	didn’t	know	it.
After	that,	I	finished	the	book	within	a	month,	proudly	giving	Christopher	a
new	number	every	time	he	asked	me	what	page	I	was	on.	My	plan	worked	only
because	I	knew	Christopher	cared	so	much,	that	he	had	a	genuine	interest	in	my
success,	and	that	he	was	paying	attention.	I	would	have	never	trusted	my
accountability	to	someone	who	only	half	listened,	or	forgot	to	ask	me,	or	didn’t
even	remember	I	was	writing	a	book.	My	accountability	was	precious	to	me.
Be	very	careful	to	never	place	your	precious	jewels	into	the	mouths	of	pigs.
As	it	is	written	in	ancient	writings,	“Do	not	cast	your	pearls	amongst	swine.”	I
was	not	about	to	cast	my	pearls	among	swine.	A	pig	will	eat	a	million	dollars	in
cash!	Why?	Swine	have	no	concept	of	value	or	extravagance.	Likewise,	never
cast	your	ideas	or	goals	onto	the	ears	of	someone	who	has	no	interest	in	seeing
you	succeed.	The	faster	you	learn	the	value	of	protecting	your	ideas,	visions,	or
intellectual	property,	the	more	
likely	you	are	to	establish	a	millionaire	mindset.
Why?	When	you	decrease	the	invitations	and	opportunities	for	negative	noise
and	distractions,	you	become	more	empowered	with	divine	discernment	of
whom	to	allow	into	your	inner	circle	for	support	and	accountability.	Only	those
who	have	a	genuine	interest	in	my	success	have	access	to	anything	that’s

--- Page 47 ---

building	my	future	wealth.	The	danger	of	allowing	random	people	into	your
success	circle
	just	to	impress	them	could	be	a	self-inflicted	death	blow	killing
your	ability	to	truly	establish	a	millionaire	mindset.
I	established	accountability	without	permission.	Most	people	wouldn’t	have
known	the	difference	between	asking	me	about	my	book	or	asking	me	about	the
weather.	It	was	all	the	same	to	them.	Instead,	I	chose	someone	special,	someone
who	cared	about	me,	someone	who	took	a	keen	interest	in	me	and	my	life,	and
someone	who	would	hold	me	accountable.	
I	knew	that	by	doing	so,	I	was
pushing	myself	forward	and	participating	in	my	own	rescue.
My	experience	with	accountability	goes	both	ways.	For	every	time	I	have	asked
someone	to	keep	me	accountable,	I	have	done	the	same	for	someone	else.	Take
my	amazing	mentee	Lillie	Ennis	from	Connecticut	as	an	example.	Very	soon
after	she	started	working	with	me,	she	began	scaling	the	ladder	quickly	and
aggressively,	landing	a	very	significant	rank	in	the	company	right	out	of	the
gate.	I	was	very	impressed,	but	I	didn’t	want	her	to	rest	on	her	laurels.	It	was
wonderful,	what	she	had	accomplished,	but	I	knew	she	had	more	in	her.
I	told	her,	“If	lightning	strikes	once,	that’s	great.	But	it	is	really	special	when
lightning	strikes	twice.	I	want	lightning	to	
strike	you	twice.”	I	told	her	to	take
what	she	did	in	her	own	accounts	and	duplicate	that	success	with	someone	on
her	team.	She	said	to	me	later,	“When	you	told	me	this,	it	was	my	first	time
meeting	you,	and	honestly,	I	was	surprised.	Any	other	boss	or	mentor	would
have	blown	smoke	up	my	ass,	would	have	told	me	that	I	was	doing	a	great	job,
and	to	just	keep	doing	well.	But	not	you.	You	said,	‘You	did	well.	Now	you	can
do	better.’	I	took	this	push	and	made	sure	you	held	me	accountable	to	the	task.”
Lillie	chose	a	member	of	her	team	and	mentored	him	with	the	same	lessons	I
had	taught	her.	He	excelled,	and	her	rank	in	the	company	grew	even	higher.	“I
would	have	never	hit	that	next	level	if	Johnny	hadn’t	given	me	that
accountability.	Instead	of	saying	‘You	are	doing	great,’	Johnny	always	gave	me
a	challenge.	He	is	good	at	giving	you	homework.	He	never	settles	and	never
wants	his	mentees	to	settle	either.”
Finding	someone	or	something	(like	an	app	or	tracking	system)	that	will
hold	you	accountable	speaks	directly	to	your	commitment.
	Share	that
commitment	with	someone	else	if	you	can.	Remember,	the	vending	machine	will
not	give	you	half	a	bag.	Getting	someone	to	hold	you	accountable	is	part	of
putting	that	whole	dollar	in	and	getting	the	whole	bag	out.	You	won’t	succeed	in
becoming	a	first-generation	millionaire	if	you	don’t	put	in	that	whole	dollar.
The	first	step	in	getting	an	accountability	partner	is	to	find	the	right	person.

--- Page 48 ---

The	first	step	in	getting	an	accountability	partner	is	to	find	the	right	person.
Do	this	by	looking	for	people	with	the	following	qualities:
1.
			They	have	a	genuine	interest	in	you.	They	genuinely	desire	to	see	you
win.	They	have	no	personal	motives	or	expectations	to	benefit	other	than
being	proud	of	you.
2.
			
They	are	already	inquisitive	and	excited	to	listen	when	you	talk.	Invite
them	into	your	goals	without	making	it	sound	like	homework.	Make	it
effortless—no	one	wants	helping	you	to	be	their	part-time	job.	An	easy
assignment	can	be	established	by	simply	sharing	a	current	project	with
them	and	asking	them	to	hold	you	accountable	on	completion.
3.
			They	are	not	full	of	fluff	and	just	stroking	your	ego.	They	actually
challenge	you	in	conversation	in	a	way	that	encourages	you	to	become
better.
Then,	make	sure	you	put	yourself	in	a	position	to	see	or	hear	from	them
regularly,	establish	frequent	accountability,	and	be	extremely	transparent	with
your	progress	and	failures.	This	will	ensure	that	you	are	not	going	to	back	down.
Here	are	two	possible	scripts	you	can	use	to	start	the	accountability	process:
Script	1
“Hey,	Chris,	how	are	you?”
“Doing	good,	Johnny.	Just	staying	busy.”
“I	hear	you,	man.	I’m	staying	busy	myself	getting	back	into	shape
physically.”
“Really,	what	are	you	doing	to	make	that	possible?”
“Nothing	major,	just	daily	activities	that	increase	my	heart	rate	to	burn
calories.	As	a	matter	of	fact,	Chris,	do	me	a	favor	please.	Every	time	you
see	me	or	we	talk,	ask	me	how	many	minutes	of	cardio	I	did	the	day
before.”
Script	2
“Hey	guys,	I	am	trying	to	push	myself	a	little	with	my	sales	goals	this
week.”

--- Page 49 ---

A
“Oh,	yeah?	What	did	you	have	in	mind?”
“Well,	how	about	we	each	share	our	numbers	at	the	end	of	every	day,	no
matter	how	high	or	low.	Seeing	how	we	all	are	doing	will	be	a	great	kick
in	the	pants	to	get	me	over	this	line.”
I	used	Script	2	when	I	was	first	starting	out	and	wanted	to	be	the	first	one	to
reach	the	highest	level	in	my	rank	in	global	sales.	Not	only	did	I	reach	my	goal
but	all	my	buddies	leveled	up	too.	It	was	the	perfect	way	to	keep	us	all
accountable.
Adapt	these	scripts	to	your	situation	and	personality—and	keep	them	simple!
After	starting	the	process	of	finding	mentors,	you	are	responsible	for	putting
yourself	in	a	position	for	them	to	ask	the	question,	whether	that’s	in	person,	via
social	media,	or	by	phone.	Be	extremely	honest	(this	is	your	life),	and	show	your
gratitude	that	they	asked,	and	tell	them	that	their	question	has	held	you
accountable	and	it	is	working.	This	will	show	you	how	far	you	have	come.	If
these	mentors	are	a	good	fit	for	you,	keep	going.	If	they	aren’t,	then	find	others
who	are.
Speaking	of	a	good	fit,	it’s	important	that	you	find	the	people	or	resources
that	fit	your	personality	type.	An	application	or	online	tracker	that	shows	you
your	daily	progress	might	be	the	best	fit	for	you	because	you	don’t	need
someone	else	holding	you	accountable	if	you	can	see	your	progress	(or	lack
thereof)	on	a	screen.	But	others	might	be	more	successful	working	with	
people,
as	opposed	to	online	trackers,	because	they	will	feel	more	embarrassment	if	they
don’t	succeed.	What	works	for	me	might	not	work	for	you,	and	what	works	for
you	may	not	be	a	good	fit	for	me.	That’s	fine.	As	long	as	you	find	something
that	works,	that’s	all	that	matters!
ACTION	STEP
sk	yourself:	What	is	my	goal?	Why	am	I	here?	Why	did	I	pick	up	this
book?	What	do	I	want	from	this?	Once	you	have	that	figured	out,	
tell
someone	else	who	has	a	genuine	desire	to	see	you	win	in	life
.	Don’t	just	tell	him
or	her	what	you	are	doing,	however.	Make	sure	you	share	where	you	are	in	the
process.
Accountability	isn’t	just	saying	everything	is	good	and	moving	on.	I	want	you
to	create	a	lifestyle	of	a	winner.	Team	up	with	people	who	want	to	see	you
succeed.	Choose	people	who	have	a	desire	to	see	you	be	a	winner	in	your	life.
Chris	was	excited	for	me,	but	he	didn’t	have	a	tangible	way	to	help	me.	When	I

--- Page 50 ---

Chris	was	excited	for	me,	but	he	didn’t	have	a	tangible	way	to	help	me.	When	I
changed	his	question	from	“How	is	it	going?”	to	“What	page	are	you	on?”	I	gave
him	that	power.	The	fact	that	he	was	asking	me	“What	page?”	put	me	at	risk	of
being	embarrassed.	That	risk	of	embarrassment	pushed	me	to	keep	going	and
ultimately	finish	my	book	within	a	month.
If	I	can	do	it,	you	can	do	it.	Never	be	afraid	to	throw	yourself	into	the	deep
end.	There	are	generations	depending	on	you.	You	cannot	learn	how	to	swim	in
shallow	water.	Establishing	accountability	is	throwing	yourself	into	the	deep
water,	and	that’s	where	you	will	find	your	first-generation-millionaire	mindset.
Write	out	your	vision,	and	make	it	extremely	clear:	a	certain	number	of	calls	a
day,	or	more	money	in	your	account,	or	a	list	of	dream	partnerships	you	want	to
make.	Invite	someone	into	that	vision	who	has	a	genuine	desire	to	see	you	win.
Make	that	person	a	part	of	your	goal.	It	may	be	awkward.	It	may	be
uncomfortable.	But	you	will	never	learn	to	swim	in	shallow	water.	It	may	be
scary	at	first,	but	you	won’t	progress	if	you	are	hanging	on	to	that	pool	wall.	Go
find	that	accountability	partner.	Write	the	vision.	Invite	him	or	her	into	that
vision.	Participate	in	your	rescue.	Commit	to	your	goal.	If	you	cannot	do	these
things,	then	you	will	never	rise	to	first-generation-millionaire	status.
PILLAR	3
ESTABLISHING	ACCOUNTABILITY
CHOOSE	YOUR	PARTNER
External	accountability	will	transform	your	productivity.	The	key	is	finding
people	who	are	
invested
	in	your	success—and	who	will	also	ask	you	the
hard	questions.
Your	Assignment
Find	people	who	
celebrate
	you,	not	tolerate	you.	Tell	them	your	
goal
.	Then
ask	them	to	help	you	track	your	progress.
This	requires	a	
benchmark
.	They	need	to	know	where	you	are	on	your
path	toward	your	goal.
For	example,	if	your	goal	is	to	increase	your	weekly	income,	your
accountability	partners	should	know	your	current	income.	Then,	a	week
