
--- Page 80 ---

It	was	my	vision.	In	my	mind,	it	was	already	a	reality	for	me.	But	the	fact	that	it
was	my	reality	also	meant	that	it	was	my	responsibility	to	make	it	happen.	Don’t
get	me	wrong;	I’m	not	criticizing	my	mother-in-law.	I	love	her.	And	she	loves
me.	Her	words	didn’t	come	from	a	place	of	malice	but	of	love	and	concern.	She
was	simply	acting	based	on	
her
	reality,	not	mine.
Your	vision	is	for	you	and	you	only.	You	don’t	need	to	waste	your	time
convincing	other	people	that	it	is	sane	or	realistic	or	
doable.	You	know	it	is
doable	because	you	have	every	intention	of	doing	it.	Someone	else’s	opinion	of
your	vision	has	nothing	to	do	with	your	reality.	You	cannot	make	it	your
problem	when	someone	else	comes	along	and	tells	you	that	you	are	reaching	too
high,	that	you	are	crazy	for	wanting	what	you	want,	that	you	are	going	to	regret
this,	or	that	they	will	never	forgive	you	for	leaving	them	behind.
Just	as	the	state	of	Texas	did	for	my	insurance	license,	my	mother-in-law
didn’t	piss	me	off	by	telling	me	I	couldn’t	do	something.	She	
pissed	me	on
because	she	made	my	desire	that	much	stronger	to	build	that	house.	She	made
me	realize	that	
no	one	is	qualified	to	push	my	vision	into	reality	except	me
.
So	here	is	what	I	did:	just	like	the	settlers	of	Jericho,	I	walked	around	the	land
seven	times,	claiming	this	land	as	my	own.	People	were	watching,	people	were
whispering,	but	I	didn’t	care.	I	was	declaring	my	vision,	and	no	one	could
convince	me	that	it	wasn’t	going	to	happen.
Guess	what?	I	got	the	land.	I	built	the	house.	And	I	still	own	it	today.	In	fact,
when	my	wife	and	I	moved	into	a	house	twice	the	size	of	that	first	house,	I	gave
that	house	to	my	mother,	where	she	and	my	stepfather,	Tim,	live	today.	Then,	in
2016,	my	wife	Crystal	and	I	bought	my	mother-in-law—the	same	person	who
told	me	it	was	unrealistic	to	have	a	new,	two-story	house	at	the	age	of	23—
her
own
	brand-new,	two-story	house	that	she	lives	in	to	this	day.	Eventually	those
houses	will	be	passed	on	to	my	daughters	and	son,	who	will	become	second-
generation	millionaires.
I	was	never	upset	at	my	mother-in-law.	I	wasn’t	upset	at	the	doubt	she	was
throwing	at	me.	I	simply	didn’t	allow	her	vision	to	become	my	vision.	Because	it
was	my	responsibility	to	push	my	
vision	into	action.	I	had	to	participate	in	my
own	rescue.	That	goes	the	same	for	you.
The	point	that	I	want	you	to	take	away	from	the	story	is	that	even	people	who
love	you	will	try	to	limit	your	vision	to	protect	you.	They	are	not	necessarily
coming	from	a	place	of	ill	will.	They’re	coming	from	a	place	of	genuine	love.
You	cannot	allow	even	genuine	love	from	people	only	trying	to	protect	you	to
ultimately	hold	you	back	from	your	vision	that	you	have	for	yourself.	Never
allow	others	to	create	your	world	for	you	because	they	will	always	create	it	too
small.	It	is	your	responsibility	alone	to	know	how	great	your	vision	is,	and	it	is

--- Page 81 ---

small.	It	is	your	responsibility	alone	to	know	how	great	your	vision	is,	and	it	is
your	responsibility	to	bust	your	ass	until	it	becomes	a	true	manifestation.
You	are	going	to	run	into	a	lot	of	people	in	your	life	who	may	try	to	stop	you
from	doing	what	you	know	is	best	for	you.	They	will	try	and	say	that	you	are
reaching	too	high,	or	trying	too	hard,	or	that	you	will	fall	flat	on	your	face	and
end	up	lower	than	you	are	now.	It	is	going	to	be	hard	to	hear	that,	especially
from	people	you	love.
When	you	find	yourself	in	one	of	these	conversations,	I	want	you	to	do	the
following:
1.
			
Remember,	other	people’s	opinion	of	you	should	never	dictate	your
reality.
	Their	personal	beliefs	cannot	become	your	limited	realities.
Disqualify	anyone’s	words	that	contradict	your	personal	beliefs	and
where	you	are	headed.
2.
			
Don’t	make	them	the	enemy.	Make	their	words	your	fuel.
	I	believe
Frank	Sinatra	when	he	said	revenge	is	all	
out	massive	success.	Your
naysayers	should	be	
shut	up
	by	your	
moving	up,
	not	by	your	
speaking
up
.
3.
			
Establish	your	WHY	in	everything	you	set	out	to	do	and	accomplish.
Make	sure	that	your	WHY	is	greater	than	you.	When	the	purpose	is	a
greater	than	you	yourself,	it	is	more	likely	that	you	will	never	walk	away
from	it.	Someone’s	no	will	not	interrupt	your	WHY	if	your	WHY	is
rooted	in	greatness	and	a	purpose	that	benefits	others	beyond	you.	Attach
your	goals	to	a	purpose.
4.
			
Force	yourself	to	constantly	be	surrounded	around	empowering
information	(like	this	book).
	This	is	especially	important	when	you	are
in	the	midst	of	moving	toward	your	greatness.	The	music	determines	the
dance.	Any	person,	place,	or	thing	that	you	allow	to	interrupt	your	inner
music	can	be	catastrophic	to	your	purpose.	We	will	discuss	this	later	in
the	book	in	great	detail.
Saying,	doing,	and	thinking	these	things	will	ensure	that	the	others’	mentality
isn’t	changing	your	reality.	Focus	on	your	vision	and	purpose,	and	disqualify	any
voice	that	confuses	either.	All	your	creativity	and	energy	must	be	aimed	toward
your	purpose.	Shut	them	up	with	action	and	success,	not	a	response,	and	stand
firm	and	be	extremely	laser	focused	on	your	WHY.	Be	prepared	by	filling

--- Page 82 ---

yourself	up	with	positive	reinforcements	and	voices	that	empower	you	from	the
inside	out.	Empower	zero	voices	to	interrupt	your	destiny.	Make	sure	that	you
are	always	focused	on	your	vision	for	yourself,	not	on	what	others	may	see	when
they	
look	at	you.	It	is	the	only	way	you	will	continue	to	participate	in	your	own
rescue.	If	you	let	others	dictate	what	you	do,	you	have	already	strayed	from	your
path	forward.
Not	only	do	I	expect	this	mentality	for	myself,	I	expect	it	for	those	around	me.
Even	the	ones	I	look	up	to.	
Especially
	the	ones	I	look	up	to.	In	2018,	I	decided	I
wanted	to	expand	my	business.	In	late	June	2018,	I	launched	Wimbrey	Training
Systems	away	from	my	home	for	the	first	time	since	we	launched	in	2006.	I
already	had	created	multimillion-dollar	businesses,	but	I	wanted	to	create	a
legacy	company.	I	knew	it	was	time	to	set	up	shop	in	an	office,	hire	a	staff,	and
start	expanding	outward.
When	I	realized	that	this	was	what	I	wanted,	I	knew	I	didn’t	need	someone	to
just	run	my	team.	I	needed	someone	who	would	be	a	true	partner.	So	I	went	to
visit	my	friend	Derek	Williams.	Derek	and	I	have	known	each	other	for	decades.
I	have	gone	to	him	for	advice,	support,	and	comfort	more	times	than	I	can	even
remember.	I	knew	he	would	give	it	to	me	straight.
To	me,	Derek	has	always	been	the	picture	of	success.	He	was	an	executive	at
Johnson	&	Johnson	for	years.	When	I	was	a	teenager,	he	was	my	first	exposure
to	success—always	the	classic	sitcom	dad.	He	was	the	first	person	to	take	me	to
New	York	City.	He	was	the	first	person	to	take	me	to	Hawaii.	I	saw	my	first	bit
of	luxury	with	Derek.	I	looked	up	to	him.	When	we	were	teenagers,	my	friends
and	I	would	go	to	his	house	and	dream	build;	being	around	him	would	just
stretch	my	mind.	I	knew	talking	to	him	would	help	me	through	this	transition.
After	talking	about	what	I	wanted	to	do,	we	decided	to	work	together.	I	needed
Derek	as	my	right-hand	man.
Derek	and	I	chose	our	new	office	building	together.	He	was	nervous	about
going	so	big	right	off	the	bat,	but	I	had	faith	in	him,	and	us.	We	took	the	largest
office	in	the	entire	building,	and	within	our	first	two	weeks,	we	were	profitable.
Within	our	first	90	days,	we	were	profitable	beyond	a	year’s	worth	of
production.	Just	as	Derek	used	to	stretch	me—to	get	me	outside	of	my	comfort
zone,	forcing	me	to	see	beyond	my	abilities—now	I	had	the	chance	to	do	the
exact	same	thing	for	him.	I	didn’t	want	him	to	be	constrained	by	what	he	thought
was	“reasonable.”	I	wanted	him	to	be	fearful	of	the	risk	we	were	taking	when	we
signed	the	lease,	but	I	wanted	that	fear	to	motivate	him	to	take	more	risks—and

--- Page 83 ---

R
it	did.	
He	regrew	his	faith	muscle	the	day	we	agreed	to	take	that	office.	He
gained	faith	in	himself,	faith	in	my	company,	and	faith	that	creating	his	own
reality	outside	of	others’	mentalities	was	the	only	way	to	be	successful.
ACTION	STEP
emember	how	I	wanted	you	to	find	one	person	to	hold	you	accountable?
Here,	I	want	you	to	take	it	up	several	notches.	I	want	you	to	take	the	huge
step	and	the	enormous	risk	of	sharing	your	goal—sharing	your	vision—with	as
many	people	as	you	can.	Here’s	the	catch:	I	want	you	to	tell	enough	people	that
some	of	them	start	trying	to	discourage	you.	If	you’re	lucky,	the	people	who	love
you	the	most	and	are	closest	to	you	will	be	the	ones	who	cast	the	most	doubt	on
your	dreams.
“That’s	crazy,	Johnny,”	you	may	say.	“Why	would	you	want	that	for	me?”	I
don’t	want	you	to	suffer,	but	I	want	to	
piss	you	on
.	I	want	you	to	exercise	your
faith	muscle,	that	essential	key	in	
your	character	for	becoming	a	first-generation
millionaire.	I	need	someone	to	say,	“No,	it	won’t	work.”	I	need	people	you	care
about,	people	who	care	about	you,	to	try	to	destroy	your	vision.	Not	because
they	don’t	love	you;	in	fact,	they	are	likely	to	say	these	things	to	protect	you.	But
I	want	you	to	feel	that	pain	because	you	have	to	understand	on	a	personal	and
emotional	level	that	other	people’s	mentality	cannot	become	your	reality.	
You
cannot	handle	all	this	nay-saying	if	you	don’t	have	faith	in	your	dream.	Use
these	negative	opinions	to	build	up	that	faith	and	strengthen	your	character.
You	are	just	starting	out.	If	you	can’t	handle	the	doubt,	the	rejection,	and	the
naysayers	at	this	stage	in	the	game,	there	is	no	way	you	will	succeed	in
becoming	a	first-generation	millionaire.	You	will	hear	more	nos	all	the	way	to
the	top,	and	the	stakes	will	just	get	higher	and	higher.	
Now
	is	the	time	to	learn
how	to	make	sure	that	they	don’t	interfere	with	what	you	want	and	how	you
work	toward	your	goals.
PILLAR	8
REALIZING	SOMEONE	ELSE’S	MENTALITY
ISN’T	YOUR	REALITY

--- Page 84 ---

CREATE	OPPORTUNITIES
You	can	judge	the	size	of	your	
character
	by	the	size	of	the	
obstacles
	you
overcome.
Criticism
	is	part	of	the	job.	It’s	actually	an	important	part	too.	This	is
true	for	two	reasons:
1.			If	you	are	truly	on	a	path	toward	wealth,	you	need	to	develop	
grit
.
Become	a	fighter	for	your	ideas	and	instincts—don’t	let	external
opinions	derail	you.
2.			Goals	can’t	be	achieved	in	a	vacuum.	Sometimes	you	have	to	put
yourself	
out	there
	to	meet	the	right	people	and	brainstorm	solutions.
This	is	a	habit	of	a	visionary.
Your	Assignment
Show	me	you	can	handle	the	
heat
.	Select	an	idea	from	your	prioritized	list
from	
Pillar	4
,	and	
share	it
	with	two	of	the	new	connections	you	made	in
Pillar	2
.
The	goal	of	this	exercise	is	to	be	strategic	and	deliberate.	After	you
choose	the	idea	you	want	to	pursue,	
identify
	contacts	who	you	believe	can
provide	relevant	insight	or	partnership	opportunities.
Remember	your	
grit
.	Reach	out	to	as	many	contacts	as	needed	to
accomplish	your	two	discussions.	Some	may	reject	or	discourage	you.	Push
past	them.
Your	Goal	(from	
Pillar	4
)	______________________
•			Connection	1:	__________________________________
•			Connection	2:	__________________________________
Now	take	a	picture	with	the	book	and	your	filled-in	answers,	and	tag	me
on	Instagram	and	Twitter	(@wimbrey),	as	well	as	on	Facebook	and
LinkedIn.	Share	your	progress	and	cheer	on	others!
Be	sure	to	add	our	hashtags:
#BAMM
#WIMBREY

--- Page 85 ---

#WIMBREY
#CoachJohnny
