
--- Page 59 ---

#WIMBREY
#CoachJohnny

--- Page 60 ---

T
PILLAR	
5
Being	Busy	Versus	Being	Productive
he	biggest	lie	ever	told	is	this:	busy	means	productive.	The	truth	is	that	you
could	be	working	hard,	staying	up	nights,	getting	up	early,	putting	in	the
hours,	and	still	be	moving	in	the	wrong	direction.	You	can	feel	like	you	are
doing	all	the	right	things	when	in	fact,	you	are	moving	further	away	from	your
goal.	It’s	an	easy	trap	to	fall	into.	I’ve	done	it.	Countless	other	successful	people
have	done	it.
If	you	are	taking	care	of	others	besides	yourself,	you	know	how	busy	things
can	get.	But	just	being	busy	doesn’t	mean	you	are	being	productive.	For
example,	some	of	us	will	go	through	the	entire	house	to	pick	up	three	items	of
clothing	and	bring	them	to	the	laundry	room.	Instead,	we	can	choose	two	days
out	
of	the	week	to	focus	on	laundry.	A	lot	of	us	are	also	on	the	lookout	for	a
good	bargain.	We	keep	an	eye	on	what’s	on	sale	at	Walmart	and	know	what	days
are	best	to	hit	Target.	Because	of	this,	we	may	go	out	one	day	for	a	gallon	of
milk	and	then	make	a	completely	separate	trip	on	another	day	to	another	store	to
get	a	jar	of	peanut	butter.	Instead,	we	could	pick	one	day	out	of	the	week	to	do
all	the	food	shopping	rather	than	constantly	making	trips	to	the	store.	Making
multiple	trips	is	busy,	for	sure,	but	it’s	not	productive.	It	is	much	more
productive	to	have	full	days	of	activity	when	you	know	you	are	going	to	get
everything	on	your	list	done	in	one	fell	swoop.	In	this	pillar,	I	want	you	to
internalize	the	difference	between	busy	and	productive.
None	of	us	are	perfect.	We	are	all	going	to	have	to	learn	as	we	go.	Right	now,
I	want	you	to	focus	on	the	accomplishment,	not	the	activity.	Some	people	get
satisfaction	as	a	result	of	their	intentions.	They	listen	to	online	seminars	for	eight
hours	and	proudly	tell	everyone	that	they	worked	on	their	business	all	day.	They
make	list	after	list	after	list	and	call	it	a	day.	Those	are	not	accomplishments.
They	are	activities.	Don’t	get	lost	in	the	activity,	and	don’t	let	the	satisfaction
from	a	completed	activity	cloud	your	judgment.	Instead	of	making	to-do	lists,
focus	on	the	list	of	what	you	actually	did	all	day.	List	the	accomplishments	you

--- Page 61 ---

focus	on	the	list	of	what	you	actually	did	all	day.	List	the	accomplishments	you
have	already	completed,	and	focus	on	those.
Being	too	busy	to	be	productive	is	like	being	on	an	airplane	that	is	going	in
the	wrong	direction.	Think	about	it.	Even	though	it’s	one	of	the	most	amazing
inventions	ever—a	massively	productive	force—it	can	do	everything	it	is	meant
to	do	and	still	actually	be	unproductive.	How?	Its	engines	can	be	in	tip-top	shape
and	its	pilot	and	staff	can	be	top	notch,	but	if	it	is	going	in	the	wrong	direction,
all	that	effort	and	energy	and	
engineering	is	actually	taking	it	away	from	its
ultimate	goal.	Sure,	it’s	doing	what	it	was	designed	to	do,	but	it	is	not	actually
getting	you	to	where	you	need	to	be.
“What	does	this	have	to	do	with	me,	Johnny?”	you	might	ask.	Well.	I’ve	been
in	sales	my	entire	life.	At	18	and	19,	I	was	a	telemarketer	while	working	my	way
through	acting	school.	Then	I	became	a	licensed	insurance	agent	and	earned	my
license	to	sell	home	security	systems	for	the	state	of	Texas.	Then	I	started	my
own	business.	I	have	sold	books,	companies,	and	partnerships.	In	all	those	years
of	salesmanship,	here	is	what	I	have	learned:	just	because	people	look	busy,	it
doesn’t	mean	that	they	are	productive.	I	have	seen	so	many	people	in	the	home-
based	business	sector	lose	so	much	because	they	are	
too	busy
	to	actually	be
productive.	They	work	and	plan	and	work	and	plan,	but	they	don’t	actually	move
the	needle	in	the	right	direction.	It’s	heartbreaking	to	watch.
Take	the	people	who	do	sales	blitzes	as	an	example.	A	
blitz
	typically	means
you	are	going	to	go	all	out,	put	all	your	effort	into	selling,	selling,	selling—for	1
day,	for	7	days,	even	for	90	days.	It	sounds	impressive,	right?	But	here	is	the
problem:	just	because	people	are	busy	being	busy,	it	doesn’t	mean	they	are	doing
something	productive.	In	sales,	people	think	throwing	things	up	against	the	wall
to	see	what	sticks	is	being	productive.	But	it	is	not.	You	can’t	just	pick	up	the
phone	and	call	everyone	on	your	list.	You	need	to	make	sure	that	you	make	each
call	in	a	way	that	brings	you	closer	to	your	goal.	You	can’t	waste	time	trying
everything	to	see	if	even	half	the	things	work.	The	things	that	don’t	work	are	a
waste	of	your	time.	You	must	attack	all	of	your	calls	and	strategies	as	if	you
have	an	
emotional	connection
	to	each	and	every	one	of	those	attempts.
I’ve	seen	people	go	into	war	rooms,	just	dialing	and	making	calls,	but	they
don’t	know	
whom
	they	are	calling	or	
why
	they	are	calling	them.	What’s	the	most
effective	way	to	reach	out	to	this	person?	If	you	don’t	have	the	
who
,	
why
,	and
what
	answered	before	you	go	in,	you	run	the	risk	of	being	very	busy	but
unproductive.	Wayne	Gretzky	has	said	that	“100	percent	of	the	shots	you	don’t
take	never	go	in.”	But	Wayne	didn’t	take	his	hockey	stick	to	the	baseball	field
hoping	to	hit	a	home	run.	He	didn’t	take	it	to	the	golf	course	thinking	he	would
win	the	Stanley	Cup.	He	focused	his	attention	and	energy	on	hockey	and
