
--- Page 62 ---

T
succeeded.
I	want	you	to	swing,	I	want	you	to	be	aggressive,	I	want	you	to	charge	toward
your	passion—as	long	as	what	you	are	charging	toward	is	actually	part	of	your
target.
Value	your	time.	Value	your	experience.	And	value	your	education.	So	many
of	my	mentees	have	invested	so	much	in	themselves—through	seminars,	through
classes,	and	through	simply	doing	the	work.	When	they	start	to	rise,	however,
friends	and	acquaintances	flock	to	them	for	free	advice.	They	then	become	busy
helping	others	for	free,	which	is	the	opposite	of	productivity.	I	tell	them	that	in
order	to	turn	those	hours	of	help	they	are	giving	away	into	actual	productivity,
they	have	to	monetize	the	situations	they	are	already	in.	For	example,	giving
good	advice	over	a	cup	of	coffee.	Or	charging	for	your	products	instead	of
“helping	out	a	friend.”	Or	providing	concrete	feedback	on	a	product	or
marketing	idea.	Every	hour	you	help	someone	for	free	is	an	hour	away	from
your	kids	or	an	hour	you	could	have	been	charging	your	clients	or	business.	Stop
being	too	busy	being	helpful	because	if	you	don’t	stop,	you	will	be	helping
everyone	but	yourself.
Take	a	look	at	your	day-to-day	schedule.	Are	you	busy	but	not	productive?	If
so,	how?	Now	look	at	your	ideas	and	the	specific	steps	you	wrote	down	in	
Pillar
4
.	Are	the	activities	in	your	calendar	helping	you	move	toward	that	goal	or	not?
If	any	of	them	are	not	directly	contributing	to	your	goal,	they	need	to	go.
Remember,	one	of	the	character	traits	of	first-generation	millionaires	is	that
they	value	themselves.	Practice	that	characteristic	now	by	showing	yourself
that	you	value	your	time,	energy,	and	money.
	Don’t	waste	those	precious
commodities	on	simply	being	busy.	Be	productive.
ACTION	STEP
ake	a	look	at	your	calendar,	and	identify	the	good	but	unproductive	things
listed	there.	You	can	have	something	on	there	that	you	think	is	productive,
but	if	it	doesn’t	directly	help	you	reach	your	goal—if	it	doesn’t	contribute	to
your	success	in	a	linear	way—take	it	off	your	calendar	until	you	reach	your	goal.
It	
must
	come	off	the	calendar.
If	you	are	doing	things	that	keep	you	busy	but	don’t	help	you	reach	your	goal,
then	you	are	moving	away	from	that	very	goal	you	set.	Remember,	
you	need	to
prepare	for	your	ideas
,	but	it	only	counts	as	preparing	if	your	work,	time,	and
resources	contribute	
to	your	goal
.	If	you	don’t	need	to	do	it,	take	it	off	your
calendar.	It’s	as	simple	as	that.

--- Page 63 ---

PILLAR	5
BEING	BUSY	VERSUS	BEING	PRODUCTIVE
STREAMLINE	YOUR	CALENDAR
It’s	easy	to	
mistake
	a	busy	schedule	for	productivity.	Just	because	you	have
a	lot	of	meetings,	it	doesn’t	mean	you’re	getting	things	done.	Maintaining
priorities
	is	the	other	important	aspect	to	consider.	Even	if	you	have	checks
next	to	items	on	your	to-do	list,	you	need	to	make	sure	your	
actions
	line	up
with	your	priorities.
Being	mindful	of	how	you	spend	your	time	will	dramatically	increase	the
speed	with	which	you	meet	your	most	coveted	goals.
Your	Assignment
Task	1.	Go	into	your	calendar	right	now.	Review	all	of	your	meetings	for
the	next	seven	days.	If	there	are	any	meetings	or	tasks	that	
don’t
	align
with	your	primary	goals,	move	them	to	next	week.
Task	2.	Create	some	opportunity.	Identify	meetings	that	you’ve	been
putting	off	or	haven’t	pursued	that	
do
	align	with	your	primary	goals.
Schedule	them	immediately—within	the	next	seven	days.
Now	take	a	picture	with	the	book	and	your	filled-in	answers,	and	tag	me
on	Instagram	and	Twitter	(@wimbrey),	
as	well	as	on	Facebook	and
LinkedIn.	Share	your	progress	and	cheer	on	others!
Be	sure	to	add	our	hashtags:
#BAMM
#WIMBREY
#CoachJohnny

--- Page 64 ---

W
PILLAR	
6
Avoiding	Permanent	Solutions	for
Temporary	Situations
e’ve	already	talked	about	preparing,	staying	focused,	and	being
productive.	Now	I	want	to	turn	your	attention	to	a	moment	when
preparation	really	matters:	when	you	hear	the	word	“no.”	There	are	always	going
to	be	nos,	but	people	who	understand	wealth	and	are	prepared	for	everything
know	that	they	can’t	make	permanent	decisions	based	on	temporary	situations.
The	best	example	of	people	who	let	a	temporary	state	affect	their	permanent
state	are	those	who	give	up	at	the	first	sign	of	“no.”	That	“no”	is	a	temporary
situation,	but	giving	up	is	a	permanent	solution.	Coming	back	from	quitting	is
infinitely	more	work	than	if	you	just	keep	going,	work	through	the	no,	and	come
out	on	the	other	side.	Don’t	allow	the	temporary	to	rule	your	permanence.
You’re	going	to	get	nos	and	setbacks.	That’s	just	a	fact	of	life.	I	have	gotten
them.	The	highest-ranking	members	of	my	team	have	gotten	them.	Almost	all	of
the	most	successful	people	I	know	have	gotten	them.	But	those	successful	people
do	not	make	permanent	decisions	based	on	negative	emotions.	Take	me,	for
example.	At	35,	I	was	preparing	businesses	around	the	world.	I	was	on	almost
every	continent	and	in	multiple	countries	establishing	my	brand.	Then	Greece’s
economy	tanked,	which	was	a	major,	major	blow	to	my	business	there.	I	was
unhappy.	I	was	disappointed.	But	I	wasn’t	devastated.	I	didn’t	look	at	what	was
happening	in	Greece	and	decide	to	close	up	shop	everywhere	and	go	home.	I
was	prepared	for	something	like	this.	I	knew	that	if	one	country	gave	me	issues,
I	could	find	those	lost	numbers	elsewhere.	And	I	did.	If	I	hadn’t	been	prepared,	it
would	have	been	so	easy	to	get	upset,	to	give	up,	to	be	distracted	from	my	larger
goal.	That’s	no	way	to	live.
I	want	you	to	create	a	foundation	for	preparation	and	put	yourself	in	a	place
where	you	understand	that	the	good,	the	bad,	and	the	ugly	are	coming.	You	need
to	know	that	curve	balls	are	coming.	The	most	important	thing,	however,	is	not

--- Page 65 ---

to	know	that	curve	balls	are	coming.	The	most	important	thing,	however,	is	not
that	the	curve	ball	is	on	its	way.	It’s	the	fact	that	you	are	prepared	to	swing	and
hit	when	life	throws	the	unpredictable.
I	don’t	want	you	to	give	up	on	your	dreams	at	the	first	setback	because	you
are	not	mentally	prepared	and	because	you	don’t	have	an	action	plan	in	place	for
when	it	happens.	The	absolute	most	valuable	asset	of	the	millionaire	mindset	is
that	no	one	can	take	your	mind	unless	you	surrender	it.	Even	if	a	setback	or
investment	loss	takes	you	back	to	zero,	you	will	always	have	the	
power	to	get	it
back	because	your	mindset	is	your	greatest	asset,	not	your	bank	account.
Remember	the	millionaire	mindset	begins	within,	and	as	long	as	it’s	greater
within,	you	will	always	be	able	to	regain	and	sustain	generational	wealth.
Sometimes	those	setbacks	have	nothing	to	do	with	you.	Things	can	go	wrong
that	are	completely	out	of	your	power.	And	when	you	feel	wronged	or	lied	to	by
a	company,	it	is	so	easy	to	cut	ties	and	walk	away.	I’ve	seen	it	happen	many
times.	And	I	can	understand	why	people	do	that.	They	took	a	risk,	they	made	an
effort,	they	made	an	investment,	and	in	the	end,	they	felt	like	they	had	nothing
left.	It’s	so	easy	to	take	that	feeling	and	literally	run	with	it.	But	sometimes,
seeing	things	through,	giving	them	the	room	to	right	the	wrong,	can	be	worth	the
trouble.
I	understand	that	human	beings	make	mistakes.	If	I	had	given	up	on	everyone
who	I	felt	made	an	error	in	judgment	or	tone,	I	would	never	be	where	I	am
today.	Just	recently,	some	of	my	partners	and	I	were	forced	to	choose	between
making	a	permanent	decision	for	what	we	thought	was	going	to	be	a	temporary
situation.
You	never	know	when	disaster	will	strike.	Recently,	a	global	pandemic
derailed	so	many	dreams.	High	school	and	college	graduates	who	had	jobs
waiting	for	them	no	longer	did.	Small	businesses	closed	all	around	us.	Entire
industries	went	under.	It	can	be	really	hard	to	find	a	path	forward	when	you	see
so	many	obstacles	in	your	way.	Helping	yourself	and	saving	yourself	are	more
than	just	a	mindset.	They	are	about	looking	ahead	and	figuring	out	what	you	can
do	to	protect	yourself	if	the	worst	does	happen.
In	order	to	get	ahead	of	a	life-changing	disaster,	you	can	take	the	following
precautions:
1.
			
Be	prepared.
	Personal	development	is	always	better	used	as	preparation
than	as	a	last-minute	solution	in	times	of	panic.	Prepare	and	make	the
solutions	second	nature	before	you	need	to	use	them.	You	can’t	learn	to
swim	while	you	are	drowning.	The	same	goes	for	personal	development.
