
--- Page 34 ---

Embrace	that	
win
.	Enjoy	that	
success
.
Most	importantly,	believe	it’s	par	for	the	course.
Now	take	a	picture	with	the	book	and	your	filled-in	answers	and	tag	me
on	Instagram	and	Twitter	(@wimbrey),	as	well	as	Facebook	and	LinkedIn.
Share	your	progress	and	cheer	on	others!
Be	sure	to	add	our	hashtags:
#BAMM
#WIMBREY
#CoachJohnny

--- Page 35 ---

A
PILLAR	
2
Finding	a	Mentor
huge	part	of	my	secret	to	success	is	that	I	constantly	surround	myself	with
thinkers	who	outthink	me.	I	surround	myself	with	the	people	who
represent	where	I	
want	to	be
	in	life.	Without	question,	most	of	my	success	is	due
to	the	fact	that	I	have	
mentors
.	You	
must
	have	a	mentor;	you	
must
	submit
yourself	to	thinking	that	is	higher	than	your	own.	Without	a	mentor,	you	will
never	have	the	mindset	of	a	winner.	You	will	never	achieve	millionaire	status.
Unless	you	surround	yourself	with	successful	people,	you	can	never	truly	rise	to
success.
Winners	know	what	mentors	can	bring	to	them;	whiners	don’t	appreciate	that
value.	As	my	favorite	book—the	Bible—says,	“In	the	multitude	of	counsel,	there
is	safety.”	If	you	don’t	have	mentors—if	you	don’t	have	counsel,	if	you	don’t
have	people	speaking	into	your	life—you	can	never	be	safe.	It’s	that	simple.
Starting	this	very	second,	I	want	you	to	focus	your	efforts	
on	creating	the
lifestyle	of	someone	who	desires	and	understands	the	importance	of	having
mentors.
If	you	only	submit	to	your	own	thinking,	your	own	way	of	doing	things,	and
your	own	worldview,	then	you	will	never	grow	as	a	person,	and	you	will	never
be	a	first-generation	millionaire.	Having	a	mentor	is	absolutely	crucial.	The
question	is,	how	do	you	choose	one?
Remember,	you	pick	the	mentor.	Your	mentor	doesn’t	choose	you.	You	don’t
have	the	luxury	of	waiting	around	for	someone	to	notice	you	and	take	you	under
his	or	her	wing.	
You	must	participate	in	your	own	rescue.
	In	order	to	find	the
right	mentor,	you	have	to	find	someone	who	
already	has	what	you	value
.	Seek
out	someone	who	already	has	the	life	that	you	want.	Then	you	need	to	get	access
to	that	person,	to	that	way	of	thinking,	to	that	lifestyle.
I	don’t	follow	people	who	just	sound	good.	I	don’t	want	a	mentor	who	looks
good	on	paper.	I	only	look	up	to	people	who	have	proven	success.	When	I	was
starting	out	pursuing	a	path	in	professional	public	speaking,	I	wanted	someone

--- Page 36 ---

starting	out	pursuing	a	path	in	professional	public	speaking,	I	wanted	someone
who	I	thought	was	the	best	on	the	planet.	I	went	straight	to	the	top.	For	me,	it
was	the	number	one	motivational	speaker,	Les	Brown.	Let	me	be	very	clear:	Les
Brown	didn’t	choose	me.	I	chose	Les	Brown.	I	invested	extreme	amounts	of
time	and	money	that	I	did	not	have	because	I	knew	if	I	got	close	to	his	voice,	I
would	win.	No	one	told	me	this;	no	one	had	to.	I	only	had	to	hear	him	speak
once	to	come	to	this	crucial	decision.
I	heard	Les	Brown	speak	when	I	was	in	my	early	twenties,	and	I	immediately
knew	he	was	the	real	deal.	I	had	the	extreme	pleasure	and	honor	of	meeting	Les
Brown	for	the	first	time	when	I	was	26	years	old.	For	two	years,	I	called	him
constantly,	
asking	for	advice,	asking	to	meet,	asking	if	there	was	anything	I
could	do	to	help	him	whenever	he	was	in	town—carry	his	bag,	drive	him	to	the
airport,	
anything
.	I	was	relentless.	Finally,	after	two	years	of	nonstop	emails,	he
told	me	that	he	was	coming	to	speak	in	Dallas-Fort	Worth,	my	hometown,	and
that	I	was	welcome	to	visit	him	in	his	hotel	room	before	he	went	onstage.	I	was
beside	myself	when	I	got	that	call.	Les	Brown’s	hotel	room?	Me?	One-on-one
time	with	the	man	I’d	chosen	as	my	mentor?	This	was	it.	This	was	going	to	be
the	beginning	of	a	relationship	I	had	wanted	for	years.	I	put	on	my	best	suit	and
headed	over.
I	opened	the	door	to	his	suite	and	was	shocked	to	find	a	huge	group	of	people
already	there.	I	realized	that	this	wasn’t	going	to	be	the	fireside	chat	I	had
envisioned	on	my	way	over,	but	I	was	still	there.	Even	though	I	was	just	another
person	competing	desperately	for	his	attention,	I	was	still	doing	so	
in
	Les
Brown’s	hotel	room.	I	was	still	honored	to	be	there	and	soak	it	all	in.
Finally,	Les	came	over	to	me	and	started	asking	me	questions:	“How	serious
are	you?”
I	gave	him	everything	I	had:	“Very	serious.	Very	passionate.	I	went	from
being	a	teenager	with	a	felony	arrest	to	one	of	the	top	insurance	sales	reps	in	the
country	in	less	than	five	years.	I	have	an	incredible	story,	and	I	want	to	tell	it
right	away.	I	want	to	tell	it	to	as	many	people	as	I	can.”
“How	would	you	like	to	be	onstage	with	me	tonight?”	That	question	took	my
breath	away.	An	opportunity	like	that	would	change	my	life.	The	exposure,	the
proximity	to	all	these	amazing	speakers—it	was	the	chance	of	a	lifetime.	He
didn’t	even	wait	for	me	to	answer.	He	knew	I	wanted	it.	“My	buy-in	is	$20,000,
but	if	you	can	meet	me	tonight	with	$5,000,	I	will	put	you	onstage.”	Now,	I
knew	Les	Brown	didn’t	need	my	money.	This	was	
a	test,	a	challenge.	He	wanted
to	see	how	serious	I	was.	I	looked	him	right	in	the	eye	and	told	him	I	would	see
him	onstage	that	night.	I	left	immediately.	I	didn’t	need	to	stand	around	and
listen	to	him	talk	to	other	people.	I	had	my	assignment—my	mission—and	I

--- Page 37 ---

needed	to	find	$5,000	in	the	next	few	hours.
I	got	in	my	car	and	started	praying	to	God	to	make	this	happen.	I	hated	the
idea	of	asking	people	for	
anything
.	I	was	26	years	old	and	had	been	supporting
myself	since	I	was	16.	Even	though	I	lived	under	my	father’s	roof	in	high
school,	for	over	a	decade,	I	had	earned	every	dollar	I	had,	even	for	my	clothes
and	my	lunch	money.	I	took	pride	in	never	putting	my	hand	out	to	anyone.	But
this	was	different.	I	knew	I	needed	to	put	my	vanity	aside	and	pick	up	the	phone
and	start	asking.	By	doing	that—by	conquering	my	ego—I	was	participating	in
my	own	rescue.	I	knew	I	had	to	leave	my	comfort	zone	or	I	would	be	stuck
where	I	was	forever.
My	first	call	was	to	my	stepmother,	Joyce.	She	knew	me	better	than	just
about	anyone.	It	is	very	important	for	me	that	you	understand	that	this	was	the
absolute	hardest	phone	call	that	I	had	ever	made	in	my	adult	life	up	to	that	point.
Why?	Because	I	had	never	asked	anyone	in	my	family	for	anything	as	an	adult,
and	that	was	my	personal	trophy	to	myself.	Making	this	phone	call	would	be	me
destroying	my	personal	trophy	of	“self-accomplishment,”	but	I	knew	that	a	far
greater	trophy	would	present	itself	and	would	ultimately	set	me	on	a	new
trajectory	in	life	as	one	of	the	greatest	motivational	speakers	of	my	time	and
possibly	one	of	the	best	to	ever	live.	She	knew	that	if	I	was	asking	her	for
something,	that	something	was	incredibly	important	to	me.	I	told	her	about	this
opportunity.	I	told	her	it	would	change	my	life	forever.	I	told	her	I	needed
$5,000.
Her	exact	words	to	me	were,	“Where	are	you	now?”
I	told	her	I	was	driving	south	through	Dallas,	headed	back	to	my	home	in
South	Dallas.	She	told	me	to	meet	her	at	the	hospital	where	she	worked	so	she
could	give	me	half	of	it.	I	started	crying.	One	phone	call,	and	I	had	half	the
money.	My	prayers	were	being	answered.
As	I	drove	to	the	hospital,	my	friend	Tony	Hobbs	called	me.	I	had	known
Tony	for	years.	We	grew	up	on	the	streets	together,	and	we	had	done	what	no
teenagers	should	do	to	make	money.	He	knew	who	I	had	been	before	and	who	I
was	becoming	now.	I	loved	Tony,	but	I	knew	that	I	had	to	get	him	off	of	the
phone	and	start	my	other	calls	before	it	was	too	late.	“Tony.	I	want	to	talk,	but
let	me	hit	you	back.	I	have	the	chance	to	speak	on	the	same	stage	as	Les	Brown
tonight,	but	I	need	$2,500	to	get	up	there.”
“Wait,”	he	said.	“Les	Brown?	The	speaker?”	Now	I	was	floored.	How	did
Tony
	know	who	
Les	Brown
	was?	I	asked	him	as	much.	“He	came	and	spoke	at
my	church	the	other	day.	He	is	the	real	deal.”
“Wow,	that’s	great,	man,	but	I	still	need	to	call	you	back	later.	I	need	to	go
find	this	money.”

--- Page 38 ---

find	this	money.”
Tony’s	exact	words:	“Johnny.	Where	are	you?”	I	said	I	was	headed	south	on
loop	12	passing	the	Potters	House	Church	about	to	make	a	quick	stop	in
Arlington	to	pick	up	the	first	half	from	my	stepmother.	Tony’s	next	words	were,
“Can	you	meet	me	at	the	gas	station	that	is	on	the	way?	I	got	the	other	half	in
cash	on	me	right	now.”
As	soon	as	the	words	came	out	of	his	mouth,	I	was	in	tears.	Honestly,	I	was
so	emotional	I	probably	should	not	have	been	driving,	but	nothing	was	going	to
stop	me	now.	I	was	in	the	
midst	of	my	destiny.	When	I	saw	Tony	10	minutes
later,	he	put	$2,500	cash	in	my	hand.	Just	like	that.	I	was	in.
That	night	indeed	changed	my	life.	Les	became	my	mentor	and	a	huge	part	of
who	I	am	and	who	I	wanted	to	be	as	a	speaker	and	a	businessman.	In	less	than
five	minutes,	I	had	made	one	call	and	then	taken	another	call	that	came	to	me,
and	suddenly	that	incredible	chance	of	sharing	the	stage	with	the	world’s	number
one	motivational	speaker	was	mine	to	take.	If	I	had	let	my	pride	get	in	the	way,
there	is	no	way	I	would	have	found	the	money	I	needed.	There	is	no	way	I	would
have	become	what	I	am	today.	
I	participated	in	my	own	rescue	and	found	a
mentor	who	was	where	I	wanted	to	be	and	who	wanted	to	see	me	reach	my
goals.	Not	only	did	I	participate	in	my	own	rescue,	but	I	also	invested	time,
swallowed	my	pride,	and	humbled	myself	in	order	to	do	it.
It’s	OK	to	look	at	other	people	and	want	their	lifestyle.	It’s	OK	to	want	what
they	have.	It’s	OK	to	watch	what	they	are	doing	and	emulate	them.	It’s	okay	to
ultimately	surpass	them.	A	true	mentor	will	be	happy	for	you	when	you	do.	All
good	mentors	have	an	equal	desire	to	see	you	succeed.	Choose	someone	who
won’t	put	you	down,	rub	your	failures	in	your	face,	or	make	you	feel	less	than
your	true	value.
Finding	your	own	mentor	doesn’t	have	to	be	an	insurmountable	step.	Anyone
can	be	your	mentor.	You	don’t	have	to	go	looking	for	the	titan	of	industry,	a
published	author,	or	someone	on	television	or	the	radio.	It	can	be	an	esteemed
coworker,	a	friend	you	look	up	to,	a	teacher	you	trust,	or	even	an	older	family
member.
No	matter	where	you	find	your	mentors,	they	should	have	the	following
qualities:
1.
			They	have	a	lifestyle	you	desire	and	respect.
2.
			They	have	a	genuine	desire	to	see	you	win.

--- Page 39 ---

3.
			They	are	supportive	of	your	surpassing	them	in	business	and	at
potentially	no	longer	needing	their	mentorship.
4.
			They	are	firm,	yet	fair	and	friendly.
Once	you	have	decided	that	you	would	like	someone	to	be	your	mentor,	you
will	need	to	actually	ask	that	person	if	he	or	she	would	be	willing	to	dedicate	his
or	her	time,	knowledge,	and	energy	to	helping	you	grow.	Here	are	a	few	ways	to
approach	a	possible	mentor	for	current	or	for	future	possibilities:
1.
			
Offer	to	serve	and	volunteer	in	any	capacity	possible.
	When	you	do
this,	be	sure	your	eyes	and	ears	are	at	full	attention	100	percent	of	the
time.	And	only	speak	when	spoken	to.	(Examples	of	how	you	can	serve
include	airport	pickups,	carrying	the	luggage,	and	providing	personal
security	if	needed.)	By	volunteering	and	articulating	your	reasons	for
wanting	to	be	close	and	soak	up	as	much	wisdom	as	possible,	you	will
show	transparency,	which	leads	to	trust.	You’ll	be	amazed	by	how	far
volunteering	can	get	you.	And	when	the	right	door	opens,	it’s	because
there	is	something	about	
you
	that	your	mentor	likes.
2.
			
Find	a	way	to	become	beneficial	to	the	mentor’s	mission.
	Offer	your
personal	expertise	without	compensation	or	motive.	A	true	mentor	will
know	your	motive,	so	there	is	no	need	to	explain	unless	asked.
3.
			
Let	the	mentor	know	how	much	his	or	her	work	has	affected	your
life.
	With	confidence	and	transparency,	let	the	mentor	know	you	want	to
be	an	ambassador	of	the	mentor’s	cause	or	mission	because	of	how	that
work	has	affected	you	personally.	Know	the	mentor’s	works,
publications,	accomplishments,	and	achievements.
4.
			
Anticipate	the	mentor’s	needs.
	Your	mentor’s	inner	circle	will	open	up
based	on	your	ability	to	know	what	the	mentor	needs	or	wants	before	the
mentor	asks.	When	my	mentors	licked	their	lips	or	coughed,	I	would
approach	with	water,	a	cough	drop,	or	a	tissue.	I	was	already	prepared.	I
didn’t	wait	to	be	asked	for	things.	Be	ready	all	the	time	when	you	are	near
your	mentor;	you	never	know	when	it	will	be	your	time	to	step	up.	Stay
ready,	so	you	never	have	to	get	ready.
If	the	mentor	you	want	to	work	with	says	he	or	she	can’t	take	on	a	mentee
right	now,	that’s	OK.	You	can	always	set	yourself	up	for	a	future	possibility.	Let
the	mentor	know	that	regardless	of	time,	distance,	or	convenience,	the	mentor

--- Page 40 ---

should	add	you	to	the	top	of	his	or	her	list	the	next	time	the	mentor	needs	any
service.	Make	a	verbal	confession	that	you	have	a	burning	desire	to	be	close	to
greatness.	For	example,	you	could	say:	“My	desire	is	to	
not
	be	seen	or	heard.	My
desire	is	to	serve	so	as	to	be	close	to	your	wisdom.”
And	remember,	you	don’t	always	need	to	be	in	personal	contact	to	have	a
mentor.	You	can	also	get	what	you	need	from	your	mentor	even	if	you	never
meet	in	person.	You	can	be	mentored	from	afar,	by	reading	what	the	mentor
writes,	subscribing	to	the	mentor’s	newsletters,	podcasts,	and	shows,	and
attending	the	mentor’s	speaking	engagements.
While	my	friend	Holton	Buggs	was	in	college	at	Texas	Southern	University	in
Houston,	he	started	working	in	network	marketing	to	make	some	money	on	the
side.	At	one	of	the	first	seminars	Holton	attended,	the	main	speaker	was	Bill
Britt,	a	man	who	had	earned	billions	in	the	industry.	It	was	then	and	there	that
Holton	decided	that	this	was	the	man	he	was	going	to	follow	in	order	to	find	the
success	he	wanted	so	much.
Yet,	in	all	the	years	he	has	followed	Bill	Britt,	Holton	has	never	actually	
met
him	or	even	shaken	his	hand.	But	what	he	has	done	is	listen	to	every	word	Bill
has	said	publicly.	And	he	followed	every	piece	of	advice	he	heard.	In	the	end,
Holton	realized	that	he	didn’t	need	to	meet	Bill	in	person.	He	just	needed	to
follow	and	adopt	Bill’s	philosophy.	Bill	never	knew	who	Holton	was,	but	Bill
still	mentored	him.	And	as	a	result,	he	changed	Holton’s	life	because	Holton
started	to	have	more	confidence	and	to	speak	in	terms	of	goals.
Winners	understand	and	realize	that	they	need	someone	in	their	court,
someone	who	will	be	a	role	model	and	an	advisor.	Whiners	do	not.	A	whiner
says,	“I	am	my	own	person.	I	don’t	need	anyone	to	tell	me	what	to	do.	I	can	do
this	by	myself.”	Those	words	may	sound	like	strength,	but	they	actually	come
from	someone	who	is	too	weak	to	reach	out	and	ask	others	for	guidance	and
help.	Don’t	be	that	person.
Just	as	Holton	and	I	have	done,	look	outside	your	bubble,	and	discover	things
that	you	never	even	knew	you	wanted.	If	you	think	there	is	only	
one
	way	to
become	a	first-generation	millionaire,	you	will	fail.	Be	open	to	other
possibilities,	other	paths,	and	other	points	of	view.	A	mentor	will	be	your	guide
on	this	journey.	Find	one	you	trust	before	you	walk	too	far	down	this	path.	You
want	to	find	a	mentor	who	has	every	desire	for	you	to	pass	him	or	her.	A	true
mentor	will	never	hold	you	down	and	will	never	be	intimidated	by	your	rise	to
success.

--- Page 41 ---

I	used	to	be	someone	who	tried	to	do	it	all	on	my	own.	When	I	wrote	my	first
book,	I	wanted	complete	ownership.	And	I	had	it.	I	spent	tens	of	thousands	of
dollars	on	printers	and	distribution	and	storage.	I	had	to	learn	how	to	navigate
the	publishing	world	on	my	own.	I	had	to	take	responsibility	for	the	decision	to
write	and	publish	my	book.	I	don’t	regret	it,	but	I	also	know	that	resisting	that
lone-ranger	mindset	and	thinking	outside	the	box	would	have	done	me	a	world
of	good.	What	if	I	had	reached	out	to	some	authors	to	ask	them	for	advice?	What
if	I	had	tried	to	work	with	a	publisher	instead	of	striking	out	on	my	own?	The
book	went	on	to	become	my	bestselling	book—I	printed	over	250,000	copies,
and	it	has	been	read	around	the	world—but	I	still	tucked	those	lessons	away	for
the	future.
Now,	I	can	pass	those	lessons	on	to	my	mentees.	Instead	of	encouraging	each
of	them	to	write	a	book	and	navigate	the	same	hurdles	I	experienced,	I	have
worked	out	a	system	that	allows	them	to	write	a	chapter	in	a	book	that	I
spearhead,	market,	
and	publish.	Ten	up-and-coming	speakers	and	entrepreneurs
write	one	chapter	each,	all	contributing	to	an	impressive,	jaw-dropping	book	that
they	can	use	to	make	connections,	build	their	brand,	and	sell	on	their	own.	They
don’t	have	to	spend	their	own	money,	time,	and	resources	to	write	and	publish	a
book	they	can	be	proud	of.
When	these	writers	open	themselves	up	to	my	mentorship,	they	are	getting
my	decades	of	experiences,	my	guidance,	and	the	lessons	of	my	past.	I	want
more	for	them	than	what	I	have,	and	showing	them	an	easier	way	to	succeed
makes	me	a	good	mentor.
Look	for	this	type	of	selflessness,	benevolence,	and	empathy	in	your	own
mentor.	You	don’t	want	someone	who	wants	to	punish	you,	to	make	sure	you
pay	your	dues	and	go	through	everything	the	mentor	went	through	on	his	or	her
way	up.	The	whole	idea	of	having	a	mentor	is	to	avoid	pitfalls	and	skip	the
mistakes	that	take	up	too	much	of	your	time	and	energy.
Showing	you	the	right	path	and	making	sure	you	learn	from	their	mistakes
should	be	the	mission	of	all	mentors.	They	should	want	to	accelerate	you	while
keeping	you	safe.	You	want	mentors	who	will	gift	you	with	their	experience	and
show	you	the	best	way	forward.	Once	you	find	those	mentors,	build	those
relationships	from	the	ground	up.	They	will	help	you	for	the	rest	of	your	life.
Finding	a	mentor	comes	down	to	commitment.	
Do	you	have	the	tenacity
and	commitment	to	find	someone	you	deserve?
	I	never	said	this	was	going	to
be	easy.	Not	everyone	has	the	stomach	to	leave	their	comfort	zone.	If	this	is	not
you,	then	give	this	book	to	someone	else.	But	if	it	is	you,	go	all	in.	This	is	a	hard

--- Page 42 ---

G
journey,	and	you	need	someone	in	your	court	who	has	been	there	before.	Choose
someone,	and	then	put	in	that	
whole	dollar
	exactly	as	we	discussed	in	the
introduction.	You	will	be	pleasantly	
surprised	by	your	return	on	that	investment.
Holton	did	this	with	Bill	Britt,	and	it	had	an	enormous	impact	on	his	life.
ACTION	STEP
et	on	social	media	and	find	someone—local	or	international,	man	or
woman,	in	your	field	or	not—whom	you	want	to	have	access	to.	Read
everything	that	person	has	written.	Listen	to	every	podcast.	Watch	every	video.
And	then,	even	though	all	of	that	could	be	enough,	I	want	you	to	take	it	to	the
next	level.
Once	you	know	that	this	is	the	person	for	you—and	here	is	the	hardest	part—
reach	out	to	him	or	her.	Email	that	person.	Message	him	or	her	on	social	media.
Call	and	leave	messages.	Stop	by	that	person’s	offices	if	you	can.	The	absolute
most	respectful	and	beneficial	way	is	to	offer	any	value	or	services	that	you	can
bring	to	that	person	instantly.	Offer	to	be	an	airport	shuttle.	Offer	to	carry	his	or
her	bags,	and	be	willing	to	serve	in	any	capacity	just	to	be	in	his	or	her	presence.
I	would	
never
	have	gotten	access	to	Les	Brown	if	I	hadn’t	kicked	the	door
open.	I	am	giving	you	permission	to	beat	on	some	doors.	Find	10	people	whose
lifestyles	you	desire.	Get	in	touch	with	the	top	3.	Then	get	in	touch	with	the	next
3.	Keep	going.	
Participate	in	your	own	rescue.
A	whiner	will	ask,	“What	if	they	ignore	me?	What	if	I	can’t	get	access	to
them?	What	if	I	embarrass	myself?”	A	winner	will	ask,	“What	if	I	
can
?	What	if
they	answer	me?	What	if	it	
does
	work?”	Be	a	winner.	Participate	in	your	own
rescue,	and	choose	mentors	who	will	get	you	to	where	you	want	to	be	in	life.
PILLAR	2
FINDING	A	MENTOR
BECOME	A	PROFESSIONAL	STALKER
Success	is	
contagious
.
Start	surrounding	yourself	with	people	who	have	already	achieved	the

--- Page 43 ---

things	you	want,	and	I	guarantee	you’ll	reach	your	goals	
10	times	faster
.
I	want	you	to	get	
closer
	to	people	who	have	what	you	desire.
Your	Assignment
Using	social	media,	find	
10	people
	who	are	doing	what	you’re	doing.
Follow	them.	Become	a	professional	stalker.
Then,	
contact
	and	
connect	with	them
.	Mark	the	date	in	the	Connected
column	only	
after
	you’re	in	touch.
Now	take	a	picture	with	the	book	and	your	filled-in	answers,	and	tag	me
on	Instagram	and	Twitter	(@wimbrey),	as	well	as	on	Facebook	and
LinkedIn	(feel	free	to	black	out	the	names	if	you	want	to	keep	them
private).	Share	your	progress	and	cheer	on	others!
Be	sure	to	add	our	hashtags:
#BAMM
#WIMBREY
