
--- Page 108 ---

much	I	needed	that	lesson.	You	see,	I	was	never	taught	self-control	as	a	child.	I
was	taught	fear	and	consequences,	but	not	the	benefits	of	self-control.	Whenever
I	lost	self-control	as	an	adult,	I	felt	the	old	Johnny	surfacing.	Feeling	him	again
made	me	feel	like	I	was	not	exactly	where	I	thought	I	should	be	when	it	came	to
personal	maturity.	Now	I	know	that	is	not	the	case.	Instead,	it	just	means	that	I
have	accessed	something	from	my	past	that	I	put	away,	but	I	have	the	power	to
put	it	back	where	I	found	it—and	by	“it”	I	mean	reacting	instead	of	being
responsible.	I	am	sharing	this	with	you	because	this	is	a	personal	place	of
struggle	for	me	even	to	this	day.
Life	will	throw	you	lots	of	curve	balls,	no	matter	how	successful	you	are.	I
want	you	to	practice	swinging	at	them.	I	want	you	to	know	exactly	how	you	are
going	to	act.	It’s	not	the	curve	ball	itself	but	how	you	respond	to	the	curve	ball
that	comes	your	way.
Every	time	I	find	myself	reacting	with	emotion,	I	simply	know	that	the	old
Johnny	has	slipped	off	the	shelf,	and	if	I	want	to	truly	continue	to	master	the	art
of	the	millionaire	mindset,	it	is	my	responsibility	to	clean	up	any	mess	and	put
him	back	on	the	shelf	as	fast	as	possible.	
Responsibility
	simply	means	the	ability
to	respond.	The	hidden	word	is	
able
,	which	means	it’s	possible	for	all	of	us	to
respond	instead	of	reacting.	Reactions	are	the	ways	of	a	fool.	Responsibilities	are
the	ways	of	the	wise.	Wisdom	
is	the	application	of	knowledge.	The	opposite	of
wisdom	is	foolishness,	which	means	you	have	knowledge	but	refuse	to	apply	it.
Prisons	are	full	of	people	who	reacted	instead	of	responding.	The	more	you	have
to	lose,	the	less	you	can	react.
When	you	find	yourself	
at	the	start
	of	a	confrontation,	remember	these	three
things:
1.
			
Ask	yourself	the	question,	“What	do	I	gain	by	being	right?”
	If	the
answer	
only
	feeds	your	ego,	just	walk	away.	It	is	more	self-empowering
to	exercise	the	ability	to	experience	a	victory	that	only	
you
	realize	than	it
is	to	publicly	prove	you	are	right.	This	is	a	mental	muscle	that	is	so
rewarding	once	you	give	it	a	shot.
2.
			
Ask	yourself	the	question,	“What	does	this	person	have	to	gain,	and
what	do	I	have	to	lose?”
	If	your	loss	potential	is	greater	than	his	or	her
gain	potential,	that	is	evidence	that	you	are	in	a	no-win	situation.	Never
argue	with	anyone	who	has	nothing	to	lose.	The	loss	exposure	should	be
equal	or	greater	for	the	opposing	party.
3.
			
Ask	yourself	the	question,	“Am	I	strong	enough	to	take	control	of	my
reactions?”
	The	answer	is	always	yes.	Remember,	arguing	with	a	fool	in

--- Page 109 ---

public	will	only	force	the	public	to	determine	who	the	fool	is.	Staying	in	a
position	of	self-control	will	lead	other	powerful	leaders	to	invite	you	into
their	circles.
Take	a	deep	breath,	and	let	those	three	items	run	through	your	mind,	even	if
you	have	to	step	back	and	take	a	minute.	It	
will	be	worth	it	in	the	long	run.	Your
future	self	will	thank	you	for	not	getting	into	this	particular	fight.	It	may	be	hard
in	the	moment,	but	your	thoughtfulness	and	poise	will	pay	off	in	the	long	run.
Now,	when	you	are	actually	
in	the	middle
	of	a	heated	confrontation,	I	want
you	to	pause	and	do	the	following:
4.
			
Ask	yourself,	“What	will	being	right	profit	me	in	this	situation?”
What	does	their	being	right	profit	them?	If	they	are	in	a	position	to	gain
more	by	proving	you	are	wrong	than	you	will	profit	for	proving	you	are
right,	remove	yourself	from	this	risk	exposure	immediately.
5.
			
Ask	yourself,	“Am	I	the	one	who	has	the	most	to	risk?”
	If	the	answer
is	yes,	leave	immediately.	Never	stick	around	to	feed	your	ego.	Feeding
your	ego	publicly	is	reserved	for	those	on	the	path	to	nowhere.
6.
			
Ask	yourself,	“What	is	the	absolute	best	end	result	that	can	come
from	this?”
	If	the	best	result	is	showing	your	ability	to	walk	away,	then
exercise	that	option.	The	weak-minded	naysayers	don’t	matter,	but	the
few	in	power	that	may	witness	your	strength	could	open	future	doors	of
possibilities	down	the	road.	No	one	in	power	wants	to	partner	with	or
give	control	to	someone	who	lacks	self-control.
The	following	two	principles	have	probably	saved	me	from	losing	millions:
1.
			Never	argue	with	the	fool	in	public	because	the	public	will	never	know
which	one	is	the	fool.
2.
			The	fools	will	always	expose	themselves	so	never	interrupt	them.
Whenever	I	think	of	responding	versus	reacting,	I	think	of	my	25-year-old
self,	driving	down	the	street	in	my	BMW	convertible.	I	had	just	listened	to	a
Tony	Robbins	audio	recording	about	staying	in	control	when—and	you	can’t
make	this	stuff	up—someone	in	the	next	lane	over	flipped	me	off,	cut	me	off,
and	drove	off.	In	that	moment,	I	realized	that	by	doing	this	to	me,	he	was
elevating	
my
	importance	in	
his
	life.	He	was	making	me	number	one.	When	he
did	that	to	me,	I	didn’t	do	anything.	I	let	him	drive	off	and	went	about	my	day.	I
was	being	responsive	and	not	reactive.	If	I	had	reacted	and	raced	after	him,	I

--- Page 110 ---

would	have	been	telling	
him
	that	he	was	number	one	in	
my
	life.	I	would	have
been	elevating	him.	And	no	matter	what	I	did	that	day,	I	would	have	been
responsible	for	my	actions.
Remember,	it’s	not	what	happens	
to
	us.	It’s	what	happens	
in
	us	when
something	happens	
to
	us.	
It’s	how	we	interpret	what	happens	to	us	and	how
we	allow	ourselves	to	react.
	When	adversity	comes	our	way,	do	we	inspect
what	we	expect?	Are	we	a	friend	or	foe	to	our	future	selves?	Are	we
participating	in	our	own	rescues?	Are	we	thinking	about	the	consequences	of
reacting	over	responding?	No	matter	what	you	do,	you	either	have	to	be
responsible,	or	you	react	and	then	take	responsibility	for	your	actions.	You	might
as	well	be	responsible	from	the	get-go.	Learn	how	to	be	responsible	now	so	you
don’t	have	to	face	the	consequences	of	your	actions	when	you	have	everything
on	the	line.
“This	is	all	well	and	good,	Johnny,”	you	may	say,	“but	what	does	this	have	to
do	with	
becoming	a	millionaire?”	It	doesn’t	have	anything	to	do	with	it.	But	it
has	everything	to	do	with	
staying
	a	millionaire.	I	don’t	want	you	to	just	
be
successful.	I	want	you	to	
maintain
	that	success	for	decades	to	come.	I	want	you
to	be	able	to	pass	it	along	to	your	children.	If	you	work	your	tail	off,	get	the
business,	earn	the	money,	and	achieve	the	success	just	to	lose	it	all	because	of	a
reaction	to	adversity,	all	that	work	will	have	been	for	nothing.	I	want	you	to
know	how	to	respond	to	a	problem	before	you	ever	even	face	it.	I	want	you	to
act	like	everything	is	on	the	line	because	one	day	it	very	well	could	be,	and	the
last	thing	you	and	I	both	want	is	for	you	to	lose	everything	because	you	didn’t
prepare	yourself	to	respond.	You	need	to	exercise	this	mental	muscle	now	so	it	is
ready	for	you	to	use	down	the	road.
Think	of	your	future	self.	How	will	you	handle	a	day	of	disappointing
meetings	if	you	cannot	handle	someone	cutting	in	line	at	Starbucks?	Every	day,	I
seek	out	small	instances	of	adversity	so	that	I	can	work	my	
response	muscles
	for
when	I	see	a	real,	consequential	curve	ball	coming	my	way.	If	I	stamp	my	feet
and	yell	when	someone	is	rude	in	the	grocery	store,	how	will	I	possibly	be	able
to	stop	myself	from	doing	that	in	the	boardroom?	I	have	trained	(and	continue	to
train)	myself	to	act	as	if	I	have	everything	to	lose	all	the	time.	Before	you	can
achieve	the	massive	successes	you	desire,	you	have	to	internalize	the	idea	of
responsibility	and	manage	how	you	react	to	the	world	around	you.	Reactions	are
emotions;	responsibility	is	power.
When	someone	writes	a	bad	review	or	starts	bad	mouthing	you	to	clients	and
business	partners,	I	want	you	to	respond	
as	if
	you	had	dozens	of	employees	who
depended	on	you	for	a	paycheck.	How	would	you	respond	to	disgruntled

--- Page 111 ---

customers?	I	want	you	to	take	a	measured	approach	and	figure	out	why	they	are
saying	what	they	are	saying.	Don’t	just	lash	back	at	them.	That	may	feel	good
now
,	but	it	will	definitely	not	help	you	down	
the	line.	When	someone	trashes
you	or	your	business	on	social	media,	I	want	you	to	respond	
as	if
	you	already
had	achieved	all	the	success	you	set	out	to	achieve.	
I	want	you	to	stand	firm,
master	self-control,	and	choose	your	fights	wisely.
When	my	friend	Holton	Buggs	first	started	making	it	big,	he	also	started
getting	a	lot	of	negative	reactions	on	social	media.	His	first	reaction	was	to	fight
back	online,	to	stand	his	ground.	But	as	he	kept	doing	this,	he	realized	that	the
old	Holton	was	calling	the	shots,	not	the	new	businessman	he	knew	that	he	had
to	be.	He	stopped	in	his	tracks	and	made	a	decision	then	and	there:	that	he	would
never	react	from	a	place	of	anger.	By	changing	how	he	reacted,	he	began
practicing	using	those	mental	muscles,	so	the	next	times	it	happened,	not	only
did	he	know	exactly	what	he	needed	to	do	but	it	also	got	easier	and	easier	for
him	to	do	it.
If	people	do	bring	you	negative	confrontation,	I	want	you	to	be	seen	as	the
authority	in	control	because	that	is	how	millionaires	with	much	to	lose	act.	They
know	how	to	pick	their	fights	and	walk	away	a	winner	every	time.	Learning	how
to	pick	my	fights	was	something	Les	Brown	taught	me	firsthand.
Years	ago,	a	young	lady	in	my	field	was	approved	to	coauthor	a	book	with
me.	She	went	through	the	process,	and	I	invested	in	her	chapter.	We	even	printed
the	books.	But	then	she	pulled	out	of	the	deal	at	the	last	minute	and	wanted	her
money	back.	Well,	I	wasn’t	going	to	make	any	money	on	the	book,	but	I	wasn’t
ready	to	lose	money,	so	I	told	her	no.	I	had	no	problem	doing	this	because	I
knew	I	was	in	the	right.	She	had	backed	out.	There	was	
no	way
	my	stance	was
going	to	backfire	on	me.	Not	when	I	was	
this
	right	about	something.	Well,	she
called	her	lawyers,	and	I	called	my	mentor	Les	Brown.
It	was	in	my	nature	to	seek	wisdom	from	my	mentors,	but	in	this	case,	I
almost	didn’t	because	I	was	so	sure	that	I	was	in	the	right.	I	didn’t	feel	like	I
needed	any	advice.	Boy,	was	I	wrong.
“Johnny,	you	have	to	give	her	her	money	back”	was	the	first	thing	Les	said	to
me	after	I	explained	what	happened.
“No	way.	I	am	not	wrong	here!	She	is!”
“It	doesn’t	matter	if	you	are	wrong.	If	you	fight	her	on	this	publicly,	everyone
will	think	that	you	need	her	money.	That	will	be	the	perception.	No	matter	what
she	says	you	did	or	didn’t	do	or	said	or	didn’t	say,	you	will	be	left	defending
yourself.	That	defense	will	take	energy	away	from	something	good,	something
productive,	something	that	could	help	you.”

--- Page 112 ---

I	knew	in	that	moment	that	I	needed	to	end	this	no	matter	the	cost.	I	got	her
on	the	phone,	and	Les	put	it	on	speakerphone:	“You	are	talking	to	Les	Brown.
Go	ahead,	Miss.”	As	he	was	being	nice	to	her	and	praising	her	speaking,	my
collar	was	getting	hotter	and	hotter.	How	dare	he	be	nice	to	her?	How	dare	he
give	her	things!	But	when	it	was	all	said	and	done,	he	said,	“OK,	we	are	going	to
give	you	your	money	back.”	And	just	like	that,	it	went	from	me	against	her	to	us
against	her.	Les	used	his	credibility	as	currency	because	he	was	in	the	position	to
do	so.	After	we	hung	up	the	phone,	he	told	me,	“It	doesn’t	matter	if	you	did	it	or
not.	If	you	can	get	rid	of	something	based	on	your	value,	do	it.	Pick	your	fight.”
I	was	so	focused	on	being	right	that	I	wasn’t	focused	on	the	energy	I	would	have
spent	fighting	with	her	for	that	$2,500.	Over	the	10	years	that	followed,	picking
my	fights	saved	me	millions.	
When	things	go	wrong,	don’t	go	with	them.
Take	the	higher	road.
From	this	moment	forward,	I	want	you	to	operate	in	
as-if	mode
.	I	want	you	to
walk	around,	conduct	business,	and	live	your	
life	
as	if
	you	already	had	a	global
business	that	was	worth	millions.	
As	if
	you	had	already	reached	your	goals.	
As	if
you	were	already	successful.	Then,	when	you	finally	have	success,	you	will
already	be	a	master	at	responding,	not	reacting.	You	will	have	the	power	and	the
ability	to	control	your	emotions	and	your	behavior,	allowing	you	to	be	a	friend
to	your	goals.	When	you	react,	you	risk	losing	everything.	
You	cannot	respond
until	you	have	faith	in	yourself	and	your	ability	to	succeed.	Success	should
be	a	foregone	conclusion.	Be	faithful	to	your	future	self	in	your	actions
today.
Before	reading	on,	I	want	you	to	take	a	pause	and	do	something	for	me.	I	want
you	to	think	about	a	time	when	you	absolutely	lost	it—possibly	in	a	very
regrettable	moment	in	your	life.	Write	it	down.	Relive	the	emotion.	Don’t	hold
back.	Now	that	you’ve	done	that,	I	want	you	to	write	about	a	moment	when	you
stayed	in	control.	Maybe	your	kids	were	around.	Maybe	your	boss	was	around.
Regardless	of	the	situation,	I	bet	you	kept	your	cool	because	you	had	something
to	lose,	whether	it	was	the	respect	of	your	children	or	your	job	or	whatever	else
you	valued	at	the	time.
Now	take	it	a	step	further.	Write	down	two	more	instances	of	when	you
reacted	to	something	and	two	more	instances	of	when	you	responded	to
something.
I	want	you	to	feel	the	reward	of	responsibility.	I	want	you	to	exercise	those
mental	muscles	before	the	deals,	money,	and	success	start	rolling	in.	Now	is	the
time	to	position	yourself	for	the	future,	when	you	will	have	everything	to	lose.

--- Page 113 ---

time	to	position	yourself	for	the	future,	when	you	will	have	everything	to	lose.
Don’t	read	any	more	until	you	have	done	this.	Your	experience	will	be	so
much	richer	if	you	take	the	time	to	think	about	
these	two	types	of	instances
carefully	and	why	you	reacted	the	way	you	did.
My	good	friend	and	international	motivational	speaker	Gary	Eby	always	said,
“Change	is	a	door	that	can	be	opened	only	from	the	inside.”	People	who	react
are	trying	to	change	other	people	through	their	actions.	Do	you	think	telling	off
the	woman	who	doesn’t	pick	up	after	her	dog	will	make	her	change	her	actions?
Probably	not.	You	don’t	have	that	power.	147You	have	power	over	only	your
own	actions.
In	order	to	drive	the	idea	home,	I	want	you	to	think	about	an	athlete	on	the
field.	A	300-pound	American	football	player.	A	huge	guy,	full	of	contained
power,	ready	to	give	his	all.	At	the	sound	of	a	whistle—at	the	command	of	a
“hike”—he	will	slam	into	the	opposing	team	with	every	ounce	of	energy	in	his
body.	He	is	close	enough	to	his	opponent	that	they	can	spit	on	each	other,	close
enough	to	insult	family	members	and	loved	ones.	He	is	doing	everything	he	can
to	get	into	the	heads	of	his	opponents.	His	goal	is	to	get	the	other	team	so	riled
up	that	they	step	out	of	line	and	get	a	penalty	or	are	thrown	out	of	the	game.	And
they	are	doing	the	same	thing	to	him.
The	only	thing	that	prevents	him,	his	teammates,	and	the	other	team	from
completely	losing	control—the	only	thing	that	causes	them	to	walk	away	in	a
split	second—is	a	whistle.	At	the	sound	of	the	whistle,	everyone	steps	back,	self-
control	intact.	Is	it	the	power	of	the	whistle?	Is	it	the	power	of	the	referee	who
blows	it?	Or	is	it	the	power	of	the	penalty?
The	penalty	is	the	only	reason	the	player	has	the	maturity	and	discipline	to	get
up	and	walk	away.	If	he	doesn’t	keep	his	
temper,	energy,	and	anger	under
control,	he	is	putting	himself	in	jeopardy,	and	he	is	putting	his	team	in	jeopardy.
How	does	the	sound	of	the	whistle	keep	him	in	check	on	the	field?	After	years	of
conditioning,	he	knows	that	when	he	hears	that	whistle,	he	has	to	walk	away
from	whatever	insults	are	being	thrown	his	way	and	get	back	into	formation,	or
he	will	pay	the	price.
Now,	that	exact	same	player	could	be	on	the	elevator	with	his	girlfriend,	lose
control,	and	knock	her	out.	That	exact	same	player	could	feel	someone	step	on
his	shoes	in	the	club,	lose	his	temper,	and	pull	out	a	gun.	It’s	the	whistle	that
creates	discipline.	Without	that	whistle,	he	has	a	much	harder	time	keeping	that
energy	in	check.
Football	players	have	coaches	on	the	field	to	help	them	control	themselves,

--- Page 114 ---

but	very	few	have	those	same	types	of	coaches	in	everyday	life.	A	coach	is
meant	to	protect	their	players,	even	from	themselves.	You	can’t	tell	me	these
guys	don’t	have	discipline.	They	do.	They	just	don’t	always	know	how	to
transfer	that	discipline	to	their	everyday	lives.	Let	me	ask	you:	What	are	you
allowing	to	condition	you	in	
your
	game	of	life?	Can	you	condition	yourself	to
live	by	the	whistle	and	walk	away	from	a	situation	that	could	cause	you	to	be
thrown	out	of	the	game,	or	do	you	start	the	brawl,	take	the	bait,	and	be	the	one	to
get	your	whole	team	disqualified?
Every	first-generation	millionaire	needs	to	prioritize	learning	to	live	by	the
whistle	in	every	aspect	of	their	lives.	Remember,	as	Les	Brown	always	says:	“It
is	always	better	to	be	prepared	and	not	called	than	it	is	to	be	called	and	not
prepared.”	Success	requires	preparation	with	the	hope	of	never	having	to
exercise	this	extreme	discipline,	which	in	turn	prevents	extreme	losses	through
penalties,	whatever	they	may	be.
I	knew	that	I	had	to	be	ready	when	it	was	my	time	to	face	adversity.	One	of
my	biggest	challenges	came	to	me	when	I	least	expected	it.	It	was	not	when	I
was	in	the	boardroom	or	onstage	or	in	the	middle	of	negotiating	a	new
partnership.	It	was	when	I	was	out	for	dinner	with	my	wife.
My	wife	and	I	had	just	participated	in	an	event	in	Plano,	Texas,	for	the	show
Black	Love
,	which	was	about	successful	couples	in	the	African-American
community.	It	had	been	featured	on	the	Oprah	Winfrey	Network	(OWN).	We
had	been	personally	invited	to	attend	the	event	by	the	multi-platinum-earning,
Grammy-winning	artist	Kirk	Franklin	and	his	wife,	Tammy.	After	the	event,	we
happened	to	be	across	the	street	from	Sambuca	360,	a	restaurant	that	Crystal	and
I	both	like	and	where	I	had	hosted	a	few	large	events	over	the	past	several	years.
It	occasionally	had	live	jazz	music,	and	since	we	both	love	jazz,	we	went	in	to
see	who	was	performing	that	night.	When	we	walked	in,	we	saw	that	all	the	best
seats	around	the	stage	were	reserved.	I	had	started	looking	in	the	back	when	my
wife	called	me	over.	She	had	found	a	high-top	that	was	right	in	the	action	and
didn’t	have	a	“reserved”	sign	on	it.	We	sat	down,	ordered	drinks	from	the
waitress,	and	watched	the	musicians	get	ready	for	their	set.	After	about	20
minutes,	we	were	ready	to	order	our	second	round	of	drinks	and	started	looking
at	the	menu.
Before	we	could	even	order	our	food,	however,	a	man	walked	over.	He
explained	that	no	one	should	have	seated	us	there,	that	it	was	reserved	for
someone	else,	and	that	he	would	be	happy	to	move	us	to	another	table.	I	listened
to	him	calmly	and	then	told	him	that	we	were	good	where	we	were.	Neither	of	us
wanted	to	give	up	our	great	seats,	and	we	had	already	gotten	our	drinks.	As	soon
