RESPECT THEM EVEN IF
FROM EXCLUSION TO INCLUSION
He drew a circle that shut me out—
Heretic, rebel, a thing to flout.
But love and I had the wit to win:
We drew a circle that took him in!
—
EDWIN MARKHAM
The atmosphere was tense. There were sixty people in the room, forty from
management and twenty from the union about to start a labor contract
negotiation. Relations had been strained for decades with many protracted
strikes and court fights. This time around promised to be no different. “Let’s be
clear. We are only here because the law requires it,” the chief representative
from management began. “We 
don’t trust you and we don’t like what you are
doing.” His tone was cold, antagonistic, and demeaning. On the other side of
the table, the union representatives were boiling with rage.
Dennis Williams, the union leader, felt like counterattacking, but instead he
controlled his temper and replied in a calm and respectful tone: “I hear you
and I will tell you why 
we
 are here. We’re here to see if we can work with you
so that together we can do the best for your employees, the tens of thousands of
--- PAGE 76 ---
people who make your business successful.”
As Dennis told me some years later:
Even though I felt hotter than hell and my instinct was to fire back, I realized it would get us
nowhere. My people were mad at me for not firing back, but eventually they understood we had to
take this approach. And I can tell you, that one opening response set the tone for the rest of the
negotiation. Later many people from the other side came up to me and told me that they
appreciated what I had said. That little bit of respect really changed the course of how the
negotiation went. It was one of only three times in over sixty years that we succeeded in reaching
agreement on a contract without a big fight.
In my negotiation experience, I’ve long noticed that the cheapest
concession you can make, the one that costs you the least and yields the most,
is to give respect. To respect simply means to give positive attention and to
treat the other with the dignity with which you would like to be treated. The
word 
respect
 comes from Latin roots that mean “re” as in 
repeat
 and “spect”
as in 
spectacles
. In this sense, respect means to “look again.” It is to see the
other person with new eyes as a human being worthy of positive regard. If we
want to get to yes with others, there can be no more important way to begin
than to give them basic human respect.
Yet, as beneficial as it can be, giving respect is often a difficult concession
for people to make. In a problematic situation or relationship, respect may be
the last thing we feel like giving. We may think that they do not 
deserve
 our
respect and that they need to earn it. They may not be respecting us, so why
should we respect them? If we feel rejected, as the union leader did, we
naturally reject back. If we feel excluded, we naturally exclude back. If we
feel attacked, we attack back. Out of pain, we cause pain. It is a mutually
destructive cycle that has no end as I have witnessed countless times from
families to businesses to communities to entire societies. The usual results are
losses all around.
But, as the story of the tense negotiation between union and management
suggests, it often only takes one person to change his or her attitude toward the
other—from antagonism and rejection to respect—in order to change the tone
and outcome of a difficult conversation. That person could be us. Once we
show respect to the other party, he or she is more likely to show us respect.
--- PAGE 77 ---
Respect can breed respect, inclusion can lead to inclusion, and acceptance can
foster acceptance. Just as the union leader did, we can reverse the destructive
cycle and make it a constructive one.
To offer respect, we don’t need to approve of the other person’s behavior,
nor do we need to like that individual. We just need to make the conscious
choice to treat each person with the dignity that is every human being’s
birthright, as difficult as this may be for us. Respect shows up as a 
behavior
but it originates inside of us as an 
attitude
. Respect is essentially a 
yes
 to
others, not to their demands, but rather to their basic humanity. In this sense,
respect is indivisible. When we give respect to others, we are honoring the
very same humanity that exists in us. When we acknowledge the dignity of
others, we are acknowledging our own dignity. We cannot truly respect others
without respecting ourselves at the same time.
So how in difficult situations do we change our internal attitude from
antagonism to respect? It is a natural process 
that cannot be forced, only
nurtured. Indeed, an attitude of respect begins to emerge organically from
within in the process of getting to yes with ourselves: if we have already given
ourselves respect through putting ourselves in our shoes, we will find it much
easier to respect others. If we have chosen to take responsibility for our lives
and actions, we are not likely to blame others. If we say yes to life, we will
tend naturally to extend respect to others.
Still it can be difficult to give our respect, particularly in conflicts. Three
specific actions can help you strengthen your attitude of respect: Put yourself in
the other person’s shoes. Expand your circle of respect. And, as the opening
poem suggests, respect even those who at first may reject you.
PUT YOURSELF IN THEIR SHOES
While I was writing this book, I spent some days on the Turkish-Syrian border
helping to conduct intensive interviews with Syrian rebel leaders in order to
explore possible openings for an end to the raging civil war. My colleagues
--- PAGE 78 ---
and I began by asking each leader how and why they got involved in the fight.
It was one thing to read or see the news, but dramatically different to hear 
the
tales firsthand from people living the story.
These leaders had once been pediatricians, dentists, lawyers,
businesspeople, and students. Almost to a person, they had begun with peaceful
protest and had suffered horrendous torture at the hands of the security
services. Many of their loved ones had been killed, in some cases as recently
as the day before we interviewed them. They were literally stepping out of a
hellish experience in order to speak with us, and then going immediately back
into the hell of war. The emotions were palpable in the air. My colleagues and
I found ourselves moved and shaken as we imagined ourselves in the place of
those to whom we were listening. To a greater extent than any of us had
anticipated, we were feeling the others’ sorrow.
Our last interview was with a young heavyset bearded man in his late
twenties, a Muslim of ultraconservative Salafi belief, the commander of three
thousand fighters. He looked like the Western stereotype of a fundamentalist
terrorist. But any preconceptions we might have had changed as we listened to
his story. We asked him how he had joined the fight. “I was in university,” he
replied.
“What were you studying?”
“Poetry.” The young man, who came from a family of poets, had won first
prize for his poetry in a national contest. When he was seventeen, he had been
arrested for 
writing a poem that the security services found subversive. Jailed
and tortured on three occasions, he joined the fight after his fellow peaceful
protesters were slaughtered. He was in love with a young woman in Egypt
whom he was wistfully hoping to see again if he survived.
When we asked him what his biggest concern was if his side won, we
were surprised to hear him say it was religious extremism. While he believed
that Islamic Sharia law was a good thing, he did not believe it should be
imposed on anyone. “I’m not going to pull a gun and force my views on
anyone.” When at the end of the interview I asked if he had any message he
would like us to convey back in our own countries, he said: “Yes, as people
watch this conflict from afar, they may think we are just numbers. Please put
yourself here and imagine that your child or wife is one of the numbers. Every
single number has a life and a soul.”
--- PAGE 79 ---
It was yet another confirmation for me of the wisdom of setting
prejudgment aside and, instead, putting myself in the place of another person
with dreams, loves, and grief. In the words of the poet H. W. Longfellow, 
“If
we could read the secret history of our enemies, we should find in each man’s
life sorrow and suffering enough to disarm all hostility.” Perhaps the easiest
way to change our attitude from antagonism to respect is to put ourselves in the
shoes of other people.
To show respect for those we interviewed, we set aside three hours for
each interview so that the leaders would have ample time to tell their stories
and feel heard. And the gesture was noticed. A number of our interviewees
told us, “You are the first ones to come from abroad and actually listen to us.”
In that atmosphere of mutual respect, not only did we come to understand the
conflict better, but we also laid the groundwork for future work on a Syrian-led
solution for the Syrian conflict.
The best way to listen to others is to bring an attitude of respect, in other
words, full positive attention and regard. Typically, I have observed in my
negotiation work, we listen to others from within 
our
 frame of reference,
judging what they say from our point of view. With an attitude of genuine
respect, we can practice the art of listening to others from within 
their
 frame of
reference, from their own points of view. We can listen not just to the words,
but also to the feelings and unspoken thoughts that lie behind the words. We can
listen not just to the content of what is being said, but also to the human being
behind the content.
In my negotiation experience, I find that the simple act of imagining myself
in the shoes of another person is a more powerful tool than it may seem. What
does the world look like through that individual’s eyes? What does it feel like
to be that person? If I had lived his or her life, how would I act and react? I
may not be wholly accurate in my understanding of the other person, but it
never ceases to surprise me just how accurate I, or indeed anyone, often can
be, simply by dint of sharing a common humanity. Our ability to empathize is a
talent that is vastly underused. And, if we truly understand the other person and
what he or she wants, it will naturally be a lot easier to reach agreement with
that person.
Paradoxically, if we wish to become more aware of others and their
concerns, there is perhaps no better work we can do than developing self-
--- PAGE 80 ---
awareness. Consider the findings of a team of psychologists led by Professor
David DeSteno, who recruited thirty-nine people from the Boston area for an
unusual experiment. Twenty people were assigned to take a weekly meditation
class for eight weeks and then to practice at home, while the remaining
nineteen were informed that they were on a waiting list.
At the end of the eight-week period, the participants were invited, one by
one, to come to the lab for an experiment. As each participant entered the
waiting area, he or she found three chairs, two of them already occupied. As
the participant took a seat and waited, a fourth person entered the room on
crutches, wearing a boot for a broken 
foot, sighing audibly in pain as she
leaned uncomfortably against the wall. Neither of the other two sitting people,
who worked for the experimenters, gave up their seats. Researchers wanted to
find out whether the participants in the experiment would give up their chair to
the injured patient or not.
The results: 50 percent of those who had practiced meditation gave up their
chair, compared to 16 percent of those who hadn’t meditated—a threefold
difference! DeSteno explains this dramatic difference by pointing to the
documented ability of meditation to enhance attention—our ability to see
others—as well as to foster a view that all beings are connected. 
“The
increased compassion of meditators, then, might stem directly from
meditation’s ability to dissolve the artificial social distinctions—ethnicity,
religion, ideology and the like—that divide us,” DeSteno writes. It all comes
down then to elementary respect—the ability to 
see
 another human being.
Having given ourselves a “second look” through meditation, we are better able
to give others a second look too.
The paradox reflected in this research is striking. By paying attention
inside
 themselves through the practice of meditation, people were better able
to pay attention 
outside
 themselves by showing kindness. 
The deeper we go
inside ourselves, the farther we can go outside
.
EXPAND YOUR CIRCLE OF RESPECT
--- PAGE 81 ---
Larry married a Mexican American woman and became the first non-Hispanic
in her family, which provoked unspoken tensions among her in-laws,
particularly with his brother-in-law Jose. Ten years later, Jose called Larry up
to invite him out for a drink. After some small talk, Jose took a deep breath and
went straight to the point. “He apologized,” Larry remembers. “He said that he
hadn’t wanted an Anglo in the family. He’d lobbied behind the scenes to get his
sister to break up with me. He said he’d felt bad about it for all these years. He
decided it was finally time to make it right.” Jose changed his attitude toward
Larry from rejection to respect. He finally accepted Larry in his family and in
the process resolved years of felt but unspoken conflict.
We have all probably felt rejected and excluded at some point in our lives.
As children, we’ve felt the pain of being ignored or left out by our parents,
teased or bullied by classmates, or even just picked last for games in gym
class. As adults, we’ve all probably felt anger at being excluded, whether it is
being left out of an important meeting by a boss or forgotten from an invitation
to get together after work with colleagues, or simply having our ideas or needs
ignored by fellow members of groups we belong to—book 
clubs, volunteer
organizations, school meetings, you name it.
More seriously, we may get excluded from opportunities, denied rights or
privileges, or treated dismissively by others or even society at large because
of the color of our skin or our physical appearance, our gender or sexual
preference, our nationality or ethnic heritage, or our religion, or a host of other
reasons. Feeling excluded, seeing our interests and voices and basic humanity
ignored, can leave deep wounds.
These painful feelings of exclusion are at the core of the great majority of
the conflicts I have witnessed in my work. Israelis and Palestinians, Irish
Protestants and Catholics, Serbs and Croats—I have listened at length to their
stories of feeling discriminated against and humiliated, stories that often go
back many generations or even centuries. These feelings fuel conflict and often
trigger acts of violence. In business, I have also seen relationships break down
and conflicts break out because of perceived slights such as excluding a key
business partner from an important corporate meeting. And, of course, family
feuds are frequently fed by feelings of being treated as less than another family
member: Why did the father pick the younger brother to run the family business
rather than the older brother, or the sister rather than the brother?
--- PAGE 82 ---
The only remedy I know for the wound of rejection and exclusion is the
balm of recognition and acceptance—in 
other words, inclusion. Whether it is a
family feud or an ethnic conflict or workplace tension, the way we can begin to
resolve the conflict is to change our attitude and consciously expand our circle
of respect to encompass others whom at first we might not want or think to
include.
While I was writing this chapter, I had the chance to walk the floor of a
large factory that had experienced a lot of strife and to interview workers
about how they felt under the new ownership of a company called Barry-
Wehmiller. Big machines were whirring away noisily. One worker tending a
large machine stepped away for a moment to speak, taking off his goggles and
protective earmuffs. I asked him if he had felt any difference since the change
in ownership. “Yup,” he replied. “The difference is that they 
listen
 to us.” That
was the essence of the change. The previous management had treated
employees pretty much as paid automatons and excluded them from key
decisions. The new management made real and sustained efforts to recognize
them as human beings with dignity and talent and to welcome their ideas and
suggestions for improving the factory. Each employee was treated as if he or
she mattered, with respect.
The new attitude from management was not just talk but was reflected in
their actions. Many workers at the plant recalled their experience in the midst
of the 2008 financial 
crisis, when companies, including their competitors,
were laying off employees to cut costs. The workers had expected a layoff as
the previous owners had resorted to layoffs many times before. But this time,
to their surprise, the CEO Robert Chapman suggested that everyone from the
top down take a six-week unpaid leave so that no one would need to be laid
off. It was a telling example of the principle of inclusion and the recognition of
the importance of all employees and their families. Before and after the
financial crisis, many factories like this one had shut down under the pressure
of global competition and clashes between labor and management. Both
employees and management attributed the turnaround in the business in good
measure to the new attitude of respect, which inspired people to perform at
their best.
Few political leaders have developed the ability to expand their circle of
respect more than Abraham Lincoln. A man of great heart, he had the tragic
--- PAGE 83 ---
responsibility of leading the United States during its darkest hour, the
devastating and fratricidal Civil War. During the waning months of the war,
Lincoln spoke publicly about the need to bind the wounds of the nation and to
treat the defeated South with generosity. On one occasion in the White House
when Lincoln was speaking sympathetically of the plight of the South, a Yankee
patriot took him to task. “Mr. President,” 
she decried, “how dare you speak
kindly of our enemies when you ought to be thinking of destroying them?”
Lincoln paused and addressed the angry patriot: “Madam,” he asked, “do I not
destroy my enemies when I turn them into my friends?”
Taking a lesson from Lincoln, we might look around and ask ourselves if
there are any “enemies” in our lives whom we can “destroy” by turning them
into our friends.
RESPECT THEM EVEN IF THEY REJECT YOU
What if the person on the other side of the table rejects us, as happens so often
in conflict situations? When we feel rejected—our point of view dismissed or
attacked, our needs and interests ignored—our every instinct is to protect
ourselves: to pull back and reject back. It is only human to build defensive
walls around ourselves if we feel attacked. Yet, when we counterattack with
more rejection and disrespect, we only perpetuate the destructive cycle and
render agreement impossible.
My friend Landrum Bolling, a noted peacemaker, remembers how, as a boy
in school in Tennessee in the 1930s, he heard the well-known poet Edwin
Markham, with a shock of white hair, declaim the poem that begins 
this
chapter. The poet dramatically drew with his finger in the air the circle that
shut him out—and then, equally dramatically, drew a much larger circle that
took the other person in. That is the radical contrarian response to being
excluded by others. It is a form of psychological jujitsu. In the face of
rejection, do the opposite of what you at first feel like doing. Instead of
rejecting others, surprise them with respect. Take the lead and change the cycle
--- PAGE 84 ---
of mutual rejection into a cycle of mutual respect. That is what the union leader
did in the opening story of this chapter.
Few situations are as challenging as hostage negotiations. I have had the
opportunity to learn from and train police hostage negotiators, professionals
who confront situations on a daily basis in big cities where people have been
taken hostage, whether by bank robbers or emotionally distraught individuals.
Police SWAT teams surround the place where the hostage is being held. All the
weapons are drawn and everyone is on edge ready to fire. A generation ago,
the standard next step was to pull out a bullhorn and shout: “You’ve got three
minutes to come out with your hands up!” When the deadline elapsed, in would
go the SWAT team with tear gas and guns. As often as not, someone was hurt or
dead—the hostage, the hostage taker, or a member of the SWAT team, or all
three.
Today, the police forces of major cities where hostage 
incidents happen
regularly have adopted a wholly different approach. Now when a hostage is
taken, a professional hostage negotiation team is called in to deal with the
crisis alongside the SWAT team. What is their first rule? Be polite. Give the
hostage taker a hearing. Listen with close attention and acknowledge his or her
point of view. Don’t react, even if, as often happens, the hostage taker goes on
the verbal attack. Stay cool and courteous, patient and persistent. In other
words, respect and accept the very person who is attacking and rejecting. Meet
exclusion with inclusion.
In the overwhelming majority of these hostage situations, the strategy of
treating hostage takers with basic human respect works. It gives the hostage
takers a face-saving way out. The process may take many hours, but in the end,
the hostage taker usually surrenders and the hostages go free and unharmed.
The parties get to yes.
As the hostage negotiators demonstrate, accepting people who reject or
attack us doesn’t mean ignoring injustice or evil, but rather giving respect to
their humanity even as we confront their wrongful actions. Accepting those
who reject us doesn’t mean saying 
yes
 to their demands; as the hostage
negotiators show, it can often mean saying 
no,
 but in a 
positive
 manner that
acknowledges the other person’s inherent dignity. Even where we may draw
clear limits for 
the sake of protecting ourselves and others, accepting those
who reject us means treating them as human beings just like ourselves.
--- PAGE 85 ---
It can be difficult to extend our respect to those who attack us or attack
those we care about, but it is possible. I think of the story of Azim Khamisa, an
American businessman I once had the privilege to meet, whose twenty-year-
old son, Tariq, was killed by a young gang member. Studying during the day,
Tariq worked at night delivering pizzas. One night, he came to the door of an
apartment and was met by a fourteen-year-old boy named Tony who took the
pizza and shot Tariq. It was a gang initiation. 
“When I got the phone call saying
that Tariq was dead, I kind of left my body, because the pain was too much to
bear,” Azim said in an interview describing how he felt when he heard the
news. “It was like a nuclear bomb going off inside my heart. . . . For the next
few weeks I survived through prayer and was quickly given the blessing of
forgiveness, reaching the conclusion there were victims at both ends of the
gun.”
Victims at both ends of the gun—that was Azim’s astonishing and
compassionate insight about his son’s tragic death. Through prayer, he began to
let go of the dark feelings and painful thoughts that threatened to sweep his
sanity away. He was able to reframe the situation and come 
to see Tony through
new eyes. By putting himself in the shoes of his own son’s killer, he was able
to forgive him—although not to forget.
Azim reached out to Tony’s grandfather and guardian, Ples Felix. Deeply
moved by Azim’s gesture, Ples accepted Azim’s offer of forgiveness. “I urged
Tony to take responsibility for his actions; to minimize the pain and harm he’d
done to the Khamisa family,” Ples explained. “He broke down and cried. ‘I’m
so sorry, Daddy,’ he sobbed. I held him and tried to console him. The next day
everyone was expecting a plea of ‘not guilty,’ but Tony gave a very remorseful
and emotional speech in which he pleaded guilty and asked for Mr. Khamisa’s
forgiveness.”
Azim’s courageous choice to forgive opened the possibility for Tony, the
young perpetrator, to take responsibility for his actions and feel the pain of
guilt and remorse rather than numb it. Azim’s healing process deepened as it
spread to include Tony and Ples too. Together Azim and Ples began to give
talks in schools to encourage students to stop using violence against each other.
They formed a foundation to advance the cause of nonviolence in schools.
Azim was invited to speak around the nation, including at the White House.
Five years after the killing, Azim visited Tony in jail and invited him to work
--- PAGE 86 ---
at the foundation after his release. Tony told his grandfather Ples, “That is a
very 
special man. I shot and killed his one and only son and yet he can sit with
me, encourage me, and then offer me a job.”
Azim’s remarkable story offers us some clues about how to change our
attitude from rejection to respect. Even when faced with an extreme violation,
the murder of his child, Azim chose not to pursue the path of revenge but to
respond by respecting Tony, his son’s murderer, as a human being. Without
condoning the crime in any way, he chose to forgive Tony and to include both
him and his grandfather in a common effort to stop the youth violence that had
claimed his son’s life. Azim found a new mission in life and a deep sense of
personal fulfillment. When I met him, he was on fire, an alive and contented
man. Just as in the opening poem, Azim drew a larger circle and took them in.
If this strategy of meeting rejection with respect can be applied in more
extreme situations like hostage taking or tragedies like Azim’s, it is far easier
to consider in ordinary daily situations. The next time your boss or your spouse
or a colleague says or does something that makes you feel rejected and you feel
the natural impulse to react, try going to the balcony instead to observe your
feelings and thoughts. Put yourself in your own shoes and remember your inner
BATNA, your commitment to take care of your deepest needs. If you feel more
confident in your ability to 
make your own happiness, you will be less reactive
to the other person’s offensive behavior. Having given yourself respect, it will
be easier for you to give others respect and to accept them even if at first they
reject you. It is not easy, of course, but with practice and courage you can often
turn the cycle of mutual rejection into mutual respect.
FROM EXCLUSION TO INCLUSION
The Abraham Path is a path of cultural tourism in the Middle East that retraces
the ancient footsteps of Abraham, who is revered as a forefather by over half
of humanity—including Christians, Muslims, and Jews. Helping to recreate the
Abraham Path has been one of my great passions. On the inaugural journey, I
--- PAGE 87 ---
traveled with twenty-three companions by bus across five countries, all the
way from Harran in northern Mesopotamia, where Abraham set off on 
his
journey four thousand years ago, to Hebron in the heart of the West Bank,
where he is buried. At Harvard, my colleagues and I had been studying for
years the possibility of re-creating this ancient trail as a way to inspire greater
understanding among clashing cultures and faiths around the world. We
encountered a lot of skepticism from those who said it would be impossible to
traverse this region of 
roiling conflict, but we were determined to show the
world that it could be done.
After twelve days of travel by bus, stopping here and there to visit places
associated with Abraham and to consult with local civil, religious, and
political leaders about the possibility of reestablishing this ancient path as a
long-distance walking trail, we crossed the Jordan River and arrived in the
city of Bethlehem in the Palestinian West Bank. The atmosphere was tense, as
it happened to be the second anniversary of the death of Palestinian president
Yasser Arafat. Demonstrations were expected—and who knew what else?
We visited the ancient church that sits atop the traditional birthplace of
Jesus and then walked across the street to the Peace Center in Manger Square.
There we sat down around a huge rectangular table for a meeting with forty or
so Palestinian leaders from nonprofits, religious institutions, and government
departments to present the Abraham Path project and to listen to their
feedback. The minister of tourism was present as were the governor of
Hebron, the chief justice of Palestine, and the imam of the Ibrahimi Mosque,
the site of Abraham’s traditional burial place.
My colleague Elias opened the meeting with some remarks and then turned
to me to present the project. Afterward, we opened the floor for questions and
suggestions 
from our Palestinian colleagues, giving each a chance to speak and
reserving our response for the very end. While some of their comments were
positive, others were cautious and critical, and still others were suspicious
and hostile, even aggressive.
“The idea is unclear and ambiguous,” declared one leader. “What is the
Global Negotiation Project that incubated this? Who is behind this project?
Does it have any links with foreign intelligence agencies or governments?” As
he brought up the question of intelligence agencies, gunshots could be heard in
the square outside. I could feel a tremor of nervousness pass through the room.
--- PAGE 88 ---
Then another leader spoke up: “I call on the initiators to respond to the
heartbeat of the Palestinian street. We fear conspiracies based on our
experience. Who is participating? What is the Israeli role?” And yet another:
“How many Palestinians will be on the board? You must take a clear political
stand for Palestine. For us, peace is a life and death issue.” The level of
tension in the room escalated as each speaker sought to outdo the previous one
in being tough. Finally, after two hours of often harshly critical comments, all
eyes turned back to us, and Elias asked me to respond.
I didn’t know quite what to say. Under attack, I had started questioning
myself: 
Was the Abraham Path just a pipe dream, born from naive outsiders,
destined to fail like so 
many other well-intentioned projects?
 I felt this
cherished dream of mine beginning to slip away as it was exposed to hard cold
reality. But then I managed to go to the balcony, observe my thoughts and
feelings, reassure myself that all was okay, and turn to the challenge facing me.
Many skeptical questions had been raised, hard conditions set, and red lines
drawn. How could I diminish the distrust and win the support of the critics
while still keeping the project strictly nonpolitical? I realized that, if I tried to
address each of their issues judiciously, I would appear defensive and only
increase their suspicions. No matter what I could say, it would not be enough
to satisfy them.
I tried to look at the skeptical leaders with new eyes, putting myself in their
shoes. Underneath the suspicious and critical comments, I was hearing the
wound of exclusion, understandably strong for people in their circumstances.
The only remedy I knew for that wound was inclusion. I decided there was
only one thing I could do: to step to their side.
“I am grateful for your comments. Friends are those who tell you the truth,
even if it is hard to hear,” I told the group of Palestinian leaders. “I understand
your distrust—it is born through painful experience. You are right to have these
questions and concerns. Here is the key point: you refer to us as the leaders of
the project but that is not how we see 
ourselves. Yes, we have been studying
the social and economic potential of this path. The true leaders, however, can
only be the peoples in the region and here in this place the leaders must be
Palestinians. We can study the possibilities and we can lend our support to
overcome obstacles, but the leadership role belongs to you. And there is no
rush. 
We can wait
 until you tell us you are ready. Tell us what 
you
 would like
--- PAGE 89 ---
to do.”
Instead of rejecting their criticism or defending the project, I accepted their
concerns and invited them to take the lead. It was a calculated risk of course—
the project could have ended there—but it was a risk I felt it was necessary to
take.
The atmosphere shifted perceptibly. Suddenly the ball was in their court.
They began to talk among themselves about what to do. One pronounced it a
good thing for the people of Palestine. Gradually they began to take ownership
of the idea and, in the end, one of the harshest critics declared that he was
optimistic about the initiative. Both the minister of tourism and the imam were
genuinely enthusiastic. Everyone began to relax as we adjourned for a dinner
downstairs. It was a turnaround from the earlier confrontational conversation.
At that moment, we began to get to yes.
At dinner, a colleague asked me: “It felt like there were 
forty rifles firing at
us. How did you dodge all those bullets?” The truth is that I had not tried to
dodge any bullets. I had simply sought to respond to rejection with respect, to
exclusion with inclusion or, in other words, to 
no
 with 
yes
.
During that meeting, the Abraham Path was born. The West Bank, the place
that we had imagined might be the most challenging area for the Abraham Path,
would over the following years become the place of greatest local ownership,
of most communities involved, and of most travelers walking. 
Since that
opening journey, the Abraham Path has become an established cultural walking
trail in a number of countries across the Middle East, receiving thousands of
walkers from around the world, and being recognized in 
National Geographic
Traveller
 magazine as the world’s best new walking trail. It is still in its early
years, but its long-term promise in a region where there is a lot of pain and
despair is to build understanding, prosperity, and hope.
It may not be easy to change the dynamic of a difficult interaction or
relationship from antagonism and rejection to respect, particularly when you
feel under attack, but the rewards are great. By showing respect, we are more
likely to receive respect. By accepting, we are more likely to be accepted. By
including, we are more likely to be included. If we can say 
yes
 to the basic
dignity of others, getting to yes becomes a lot easier and our relationships at
home, at 
work, and in the world become far more productive and satisfying.
One final challenge remains in the process of getting to yes with yourself:
--- PAGE 90 ---
to change the win-lose mindset that so often prevents us from arriving at
mutually satisfying solutions.
--- PAGE 91 ---
[No text extracted]

--- PAGE 92 ---
 
 
6
