DEVELOP YOUR INNER BATNA
FROM BLAME TO SELF-RESPONSIBILITY
I saw too many people give away their last morsel
of food, their last sip of water to others in need
to know that no one can take away the last of
our human freedoms—the freedom to choose our
own way, in whatever the circumstances.
—
DR. VIKTOR FRANKL
, 
MAN’S SEARCH FOR MEANING
,
 
ON HIS EXPERIENCES
IN NAZI CONCENTRATION CAMPS
In the mid-1980s, I helped facilitate a series of conferences between top
Soviet and American policy advisers on the question of how to prevent a
nuclear war. The times were tense and the accusations were flying back and
forth between the two superpowers. Each time we held a meeting, the first
session began with a long laundry 
list of attacks and defensive arguments. It
poisoned the atmosphere and took up a lot of valuable time. By the third or
fourth such conference, my colleagues and I tried a different tack. On the
printed agenda, we labeled the subject of the first meeting “Mutual
Accusations” and scheduled it before breakfast for anyone who wanted to
show up. Everyone got the point.
--- PAGE 31 ---
The blame game is the core pattern of almost every destructive conflict I
have ever witnessed. The husband blames the wife and vice versa.
Management blames the union and vice versa. One political enemy blames the
other and vice versa. Blaming usually triggers feelings of anger or shame in the
other, which provokes counterblame. And on it goes.
It is so tempting to blame those with whom we are in conflict. Who started
the argument, after all, if it wasn’t the other person? Blaming makes us feel
innocent. We are the ones who were wronged. We get to feel righteous and
even superior. And blaming also nicely deflects any residual guilt we might
feel. The emotional benefits are clear.
But, as I have witnessed in countless conflicts over the years, the costs of
the blame game are huge. It escalates disputes needlessly and prevents us from
resolving them. It poisons relationships and wastes valuable time and energy.
Perhaps most insidiously, it undermines our 
power: when we blame others for
what is wrong in the relationship—whether it is a marital dispute, an office
spat, or a superpower clash—we are dwelling on their power and our
victimhood. We are overlooking whatever part we may have played in the
conflict and are ignoring our freedom to choose how to respond. We are giving
our power away.
If we want to get to yes with others, particularly in the more difficult
situations we face every day, we need to find a way to get past the blame game.
We need to reclaim our power to change the situation for the better. While I
was working on the problem of preventing nuclear crises between the United
States and the Soviet Union, I studied crisis management in other areas of life
such as business. At the time, the most striking example of a successful
response to a dire situation was the way the pharmaceutical company Johnson
and Johnson responded to 
the Tylenol crisis in 1982. Today, Johnson and
Johnson’s response has become a classic case study, but back when it took
place, the company’s approach was truly eye-opening. The top news story in
the nation day after day, week after week, was the deaths by poisoning of six
adults and one child who had ingested Tylenol laced with cyanide in the
Chicago area. No one knew who had taken the capsules and injected them with
poison. CEO James Burke was faced with the dilemma of how to respond.
Tylenol was the company’s most profitable 
product, commanding 37 percent of
the market in over-the-counter painkillers.
--- PAGE 32 ---
Many experts cautioned against a nationwide recall, arguing that the
incidents were limited to the Chicago area and that the poisoning was not the
fault of Johnson and Johnson. But Burke and his colleagues chose not to take
the easy way out by placing the responsibility for their customers’ safety
elsewhere. Instead, they assumed full responsibility, ordered the product
withdrawn from the shelves of drugstores across the country, and offered to
exchange all the existing Tylenol capsules in people’s homes for Tylenol
tablets. This one decision, made almost immediately after the deaths were
reported, cost the company an estimated hundred million dollars.
The result? Contrary to conventional wisdom at the time, which held that
there was no way the Tylenol brand could possibly recover from such a widely
publicized disaster, Tylenol was relaunched within months under the same
name in a new tamper-resistant bottle and went on to achieve an astonishing
recovery in sales and market share. What could easily have turned into a
devastating crisis in public confidence became a confirmation in the public’s
eyes of Johnson and Johnson’s integrity and credibility.
The opposite of the blame game is to take responsibility. By responsibility,
I mean “response-ability”—the ability to 
respond constructively to a situation
facing us, treating it as ours to handle. That is what James Burke and his
colleagues at Johnson and Johnson did. No matter how challenging or costly it
might be, taking responsibility, they knew, lies at the heart of genuine
leadership. And the rewards were great: taking responsibility made it possible
to get to a 
yes
 in the form of restored confidence with doctors, nurses, patients,
and other stakeholders.
Once you get past the blame game and take responsibility, it becomes much
easier for you to get to 
yes
 with others. The real work starts from within.
Taking responsibility means taking responsibility for your 
life
 and your
relationships
. And, perhaps most important, it means making an unconditional
commitment to take care of your 
needs
.
OWN YOUR LIFE
--- PAGE 33 ---
It seems like a simple question—Who is really responsible for our lives?—but
somehow the answer eludes us more frequently than we would like. Even
though intellectually we know that 
we
 are responsible for our words, our
actions, and even our reactions, we often look at our lives, wondering how we
got where we are and typically find the answer in external factors: “I’m not
where I want to be 
in my career because my boss hates me and has blocked my
advancement.” “I can’t travel because I don’t have the money.” “I live here
instead of the city where I really want to live because my family pressured me
to stay.” In other words, it was not our decision; someone else or some
external circumstance is to blame.
I recall the story of Sam, a young friend of mine who kept getting into car
accidents. First, he destroyed the family van beyond repair . . . then the family
jeep . . . then his own car. Thankfully, he was not injured nor was anyone else.
Each time, he would get angry and blame the accident on circumstances beyond
his control—the other driver, the conditions on the road, a poorly lit sign. 
He
was not responsible, that was very clear to him. The string of accidents
combined with his lack of responsibility alarmed Sam’s parents and led to
tension and conflict in the family.
Finally, after a process of observing himself closely and listening to his
underlying feelings, Sam came to the realization that the repetitive pattern of
accidents might be related to his aggressive driving. Probing more deeply, he
came to understand how this aggressive tendency arose from suppressed
feelings of insecurity and anger. He came to accept those feelings, which led
him to take full responsibility for his driving as well as for the accidents, even
those that seemed like genuine ones. Perhaps most important, he 
finally
understood that 
he
—and he alone—was responsible for his life and what
happened in it. Once he was able to get to yes with himself in this way, he was
able to get to yes with his parents. And, perhaps not surprisingly, the pattern of
automobile accidents utterly ceased.
That is the power of self-responsibility when twinned with self-
understanding. Self-understanding without self-responsibility runs the risk of
dissolving into self-pity. Self-responsibility without self-understanding can
deteriorate into self-blame. To get to yes with yourself, you need both. As
Sam’s story makes clear, the work of putting yourself in your shoes gives you
the understanding to then take responsibility for your life and your actions.
--- PAGE 34 ---
Taking responsibility for your life means owning your failures and faults as
well as your successes and strengths. It takes honesty and courage to do so, but
only then will you be able to say that you have put yourself genuinely in your
own shoes. You can then occupy your shoes fully—holes and all. Whereas
self-responsibility is often confused with self-blame, it is, in fact, quite the
opposite. Self-blame looks backward, judging what is past: “What a failure I
have been at work!” Self-responsibility looks essentially forward, figuring out
how to address the problem. “What can I do to make my work successful?”
If our life is a play, we may not be the playwright, but 
we can choose to be
the director. We can interpret the play as we choose, able to portray ourselves
either as victims of destiny or as the captains of our fate. Whether what
happens to us is pure accident or not, we are the decisive factor in our life: we
may not always be able to choose our circumstances, but we are able to choose
our responses to them.
When my friend Jerry White was a college student studying abroad in
Jerusalem, he went on a camping trip in the Golan Heights and stepped on a
land mine left behind from the Six-Day War. He lost his leg—and almost his
life. As he lay in bed in a hospital for months on end, with alternating feelings
of grief, anger, bitterness, and self-pity, a soldier lying in a bed next to him
said: “Jerry, this will be the worst thing that ever happened to you or the best
thing. You decide.”
Jerry took the soldier’s advice and chose 
not
 to settle into the role of a
victim blaming others and life itself for his difficulties. Instead Jerry chose to
take responsibility for his life and to change his circumstances. 
“I didn’t like
that image of myself—bitter, whiny Jerry who let a bad thing take over the rest
of his life,” Jerry wrote in his inspiring book 
I Will Not Be Broken
. “There is a
life to be lived—my life—and if I had to hop, roll, or whatever, I was going to
get back to it.” In effect, Jerry said 
yes
 to himself and his life.
It was not always easy for him, of course, but Jerry responded to his
accident by giving his life to service. Eventually he cofounded Survivor Corps,
a global network of land-mine survivors who help victims of war and terror,
which played a leading role in the Nobel Prize–winning International
Campaign to Ban Landmines. From there, Jerry went into public service,
working on resolving conflicts around the world. Getting to yes with himself
helped him get to yes with others—and indeed his lifework turned to helping
--- PAGE 35 ---
entire societies get to yes.
Jerry shifted how he saw himself in the play—from the role of powerless
victim to the role of leader. Like Jerry, each of us has the ability to reframe the
guiding question from “Who is to blame?” to “What do we have to learn?”
When faced with adversity, we can either blame others or life for our current
circumstances or we can become curious and ask ourselves what lesson life is
bringing us. Instead of resisting our current circumstances we can take
responsibility for our lives as they are right now. Even if we would prefer not
to face a particular challenge, we can choose the challenge anyway simply
because it is what is in front of us. Instead of lamenting our fate, we can, like
Jerry, choose to embrace it.
Even if, objectively speaking, we are only partly in control of our
circumstances, we still have considerable control over 
our 
experiences
. Like
Jerry, we can choose how we interpret what happens to us, no matter how bad,
which will directly influence how we continue to feel about it and how we
respond. If a business deal turns sour, we can choose to blame others and stew
in our resentment and anger, or we can choose to see it as an occasion to learn
and move on to a new deal. If a spouse or partner leaves, we can blame him or
her and let that decision define our experience, or we can listen to our feelings,
accept them, take ownership of our lives, and move forward.
Perhaps no one has expressed the truth of our power to choose more
vividly than Dr. Viktor Frankl in 
Man’s Search for Meaning,
 his wrenching
and poignant account of his own experiences as an inmate for three years in
Auschwitz, Dachau, and other Nazi concentration camps. As he learned in the
hardest way, even when we are utterly deprived of freedom, we remain free in
the end to give our experience the meaning that we choose. In the midst of
unimaginable suffering, he chose to take responsibility for his life and his
experience. He reached out and helped people in need, giving them solace and
whatever little nourishment he could spare. In a situation where seemingly he
had no power, he reclaimed the power to govern his own life.
Taking responsibility for our lives may seem heavy at times, but in fact it
can be liberating. It can free up enormous 
energies that have long been trapped
in the drama of blaming others as well as ourselves. It is the blame game, the
absence of responsibility, which keeps us imprisoned as victims. The moment
we recognize that we are in a prison of our own making, the walls begin to
--- PAGE 36 ---
crumble and we are free. By owning our lives, we can start living them to the
full.
OWN YOUR RELATIONSHIPS
If the blame game lies at the root of most of the conflicts I have ever witnessed,
taking responsibility for the relationship lies at the root of most of the truly
successful resolutions I have ever seen.
Think of your relationship with someone at home, at work, or in the
community that has been problematic for you. Have you ever felt tempted to
blame the other person and to cast yourself in the role of victim? It is all too
common to blame others for negative aspects of a relationship with them. But,
as we all know, every relationship—and every conflict—has at least two
parties.
In his insightful book 
Passionate Marriage,
 psychologist Dr. David
Schnarch presents the case of a client named Susan, a woman with a strong
need for communicating 
and connecting with others, who was unhappily
married to Frank. As she saw it, she and Frank rarely, if ever, really talked.
For years, Susan had criticized and nagged Frank into talking with her but, the
more she did, the more he retreated into his shell. She felt it was his fault that
they couldn’t move forward on this challenge in their relationship. She was
angry and frustrated because she could not get to the yes she wanted with her
husband.
With the help of her therapist, Susan was able to put herself in her own
shoes and learned to understand and accept herself as she was—someone who
wanted to connect deeply with others by talking and sharing feelings. Then she
learned to understand her husband—someone who did not like talking and
sharing feelings. She finally realized how she contributed to their negative
dynamic, recognizing that her nagging only accentuated Frank’s withdrawal.
Frank had suffered a lot of trauma in his childhood, so he did not feel safe
opening up. In fact, the more Susan criticized him, the less safe he felt and the
--- PAGE 37 ---
more he would clam up.
In the end, others’ shortcomings must be considered 
their
 problem, not
yours. Your challenge is how to respond. You can choose to acknowledge your
contribution to the problematic relationship, as Susan did. Even if your
contribution seems relatively small in your eyes, especially when compared 
to
the other person’s, it is still a contribution. And if you look truly honestly at the
situation, as Susan was able to do, you may see that your contribution is not so
small after all. There is an old saying that when you point your finger at
someone, three fingers point back at you. It is not about blaming yourself, but
simply realizing that you have a part in the relationship and the problem.
Rather than get lost in the blame game, it is more useful to realize that it takes
two to create the mess—and only one to begin to transform the relationship. By
taking responsibility for your relationship, you reclaim your power to change
it.
Taking responsibility for the state of your relationship also means
recognizing when your words or actions have caused harm or distress. In my
work as a mediator in conflicts ranging from business battles to ethnic wars, I
have seen the power of a sincere apology to help heal a rift in the relationship.
I recall one occasion when I was facilitating a confidential meeting in Europe
between Turkish and Kurdish opinion leaders at a time when a civil war was
raging in Turkey. A retired Turkish general asked to speak: “As a former leader
of the armed forces of Turkey, I want to acknowledge the suffering of countless
Kurdish villagers during the course of this terrible war. I know that many
innocents have died and been injured. And, personally, I want to say that I am
profoundly sorry.” The tension in the 
meetings had been great but this one
sincere statement dramatically changed the atmosphere and opened the way for
an eventual agreement to work together to end the war. What makes an apology
successful is the invisible work beforehand, in this case, the general coming to
own his actions and the role he played in the conflict before offering the
apology. The success of the apology depends critically on the work inside.
OWN YOUR NEEDS
--- PAGE 38 ---
In 
Getting to Yes,
 Roger Fisher and I argued that your greatest source of power
in a negotiation is your BATNA—your Best Alternative To a Negotiated
Agreement. Your BATNA is your best course of action for satisfying your
interests if you cannot reach agreement with the other side. If you are
negotiating a new job offer, for example, your best alternative might be to seek
another job offer. In the case of a contractual dispute, your best alternative to
negotiation might be to resort to a mediator or take the matter to court. If you
cannot agree on a price with one car dealer, you can find another dealer. Your
BATNA gives you the confidence that, no matter what happens in the
negotiation, you have a good alternative. It makes you less dependent on the
other 
side to satisfy your needs. It gives you a sense of freedom as well as
power and confidence.
For thirty-five years, I have been teaching people to identify and develop
their BATNAs. Yet, as I have seen, it is often challenging for people as they
discover that their alternatives are not at all obvious or are quite unattractive:
“I can’t find another job.” “Going to court will cost a lot of time and money.”
Faced with a negotiating counterpart who appears more powerful, many
people struggle to equalize the power balance.
We can, however, increase our power from within in a way that is always
available to us, no matter what our outer situations might be. In a negotiation or
conflict, well before we develop an 
external
 alternative to a negotiated
agreement, we can create an 
internal
 alternative to a negotiated agreement. We
can make a strong unconditional commitment to ourselves to take care of our
deepest needs, 
no matter what
 other people do or don’t do. That commitment
is our inner BATNA. Genuine power starts inside of us.
In the example of a job offer negotiation, while your outer BATNA might
be to seek and accept another job offer, your inner BATNA is your commitment
to yourself that, regardless of whether you successfully negotiate this job offer
(or another job offer, for that matter), 
you
 will take 
care of your needs for
satisfaction and fulfillment in your work no matter what.
The key phrase is 
no matter what
. Your inner BATNA is your commitment
to stop blaming yourself, others, and life itself for your dissatisfactions 
no
matter what
. It is your commitment to remove the responsibility for meeting
your true needs from the other person’s shoulders—and to assume it yourself
no matter what
. This unconditional commitment gives you the motivation and
--- PAGE 39 ---
the power to change your circumstances, especially in a difficult situation or
conflict. Your inner BATNA is, in effect, the foundation for your outer BATNA.
In Susan’s case, which I described in the previous section, she realized that
she was choosing to stay in this deeply unsatisfying relationship 
and
 that she
could choose to leave. Leaving was a last resort, of course, something she very
much preferred not to do. Leaving was, in negotiation terms, her outer BATNA,
her best course of action for satisfying her needs 
if
 she could not reach
agreement with her husband, Frank. Having taken responsibility for her role in
the dynamics of the relationship, Susan took responsibility for her needs. She
developed her inner BATNA, making an unconditional commitment to herself
to take care of her needs no matter what. She was thus able to approach her
husband in an entirely new way. She calmly informed Frank:
I’m no longer willing to accept how rarely we talk, and I’m no longer willing to push you to do it.
But don’t assume I’m accepting things the way they are because I won’t be nagging or criticizing
you anymore. For myself, I don’t want to be pathetically grateful just because my partner talks to
me. . . . And for you, I don’t want you feeling pressured all the time by a screeching wife. I’ll
interpret what you do from here on as indicating your decision about how you really want to live.
I’ll make my decision about my life accordingly.
Susan gave up trying to control her husband’s behavior, which was having
the opposite effect she intended. Instead, she took responsibility for her needs
and chose how 
she
 would act. She committed herself to living a more
connected and satisfying way of life, regardless of how Frank continued to
behave. She showed respect to Frank, allowing him to make his own
decisions, and at the same time, she showed respect to herself, reclaiming her
autonomy.
Although on the surface, Susan’s approach might appear to have threatened
her marriage, it actually had the opposite effect. Assuming responsibility for
her actions and her future enabled Susan to stop her destructive habit of
criticizing Frank. And when the criticism stopped, Frank felt 
safe and was
willing to open up and talk more about his feelings and needs. Their marriage
was not only saved, but transformed. Susan got to yes—with herself and with
Frank.
The more we need another person to satisfy our needs, the more power that
--- PAGE 40 ---
individual has over us, the more dependent and needy we are likely to behave.
Taking responsibility for our needs not only helps us, but can also, as Susan’s
story illustrates, facilitate the process of getting to yes with the other person.
Whereas our outer BATNA is subject to change, our inner BATNA, that
commitment to take care of ourselves, is always there and can never be taken
from us. In my years of teaching about negotiation, what I have come to realize
is that the best BATNA of all, the one that can give us the most confidence and
power in a conflict situation, is the one that starts inside. It is a missing key to
success in negotiation.
In life, we are destined to deal with many difficult situations. A
domineering boss insists we work nights and weekends; we acquiesce, telling
ourselves we need the job. An ornery client constantly demands last-minute
changes and concessions; we give in, telling ourselves we need that business.
A teenage daughter refuses to listen to our admonitions and disrespects us; we
ignore her behavior, telling ourselves we need her love. In these difficult
situations, 
we may see no alternative but to accept ill treatment from others. It
is all too easy to fall into the trap of making ourselves emotional prisoners of
others.
In the end, each of us must answer the question “
Who
 is responsible for
meeting my core psychological needs?” If we answer, “someone else,” we
will give our power away to them. But, if we answer, “ourselves,” we can
reclaim the power to change our life and our future.
FROM BLAME TO SELF-RESPONSIBILITY
I learned the lesson of self-responsibility in perhaps the most personally
challenging situation and set of negotiations I have ever had to face, which was
with the doctors and nurses on whom the life and health of my daughter,
Gabriela, depended. Gabi, as we call her, was born with a series of congenital
anomalies called VATER syndrome that affected her spine, her spinal cord, her
feet, and some of her organs. She required urgent medical attention from the
--- PAGE 41 ---
day she was born and over the years went through fourteen major surgeries. It
was not clear in the beginning whether she would ever walk or even live. What
was hardest, naturally, for my wife, Lizanne, and me was to watch her suffer.
We feared for her life, her health, and her well-being.
We were tempted to find something to blame for Gabi’s suffering and the
ordeal we were going through—ourselves, unresponsive or insensitive
doctors, or even life itself. But, as we learned, there was no use in blaming
anyone or anything. The only healthy way forward was to take responsibility
for our life just as it was, for our relationships with doctors and nurses, and for
our own psychological needs.
With the help of a friend who was a therapist, we first learned to put
ourselves in our shoes. Both Lizanne and I have a tendency to act strong and to
skirt the places of inner pain. But, as we went first to the balcony and then
listened to ourselves, we let ourselves feel our emotions of fear, dread,
anxiety, guilt, shame, and anger, emotions that I at least had numbed. We
learned to give ourselves and each other empathy and compassion, especially
when facing a difficult and dangerous surgery. We found that by deliberately
facing our pain, imagining our worst fears of losing Gabi, entering the fear
rather than steering around it, we were able to go through it and ultimately
experience emotional relief and healing. Although every protective instinct
urged us to go around the pain, the key lesson we learned is that 
the way
forward is through
.
The work of self-understanding helped us to take responsibility for our
circumstances. We learned to accept life the way it was, not to resist it or to
lose time and energy wishing 
it were different. We took response-ability and
sought to do the best we could to help Gabi, the family, and ourselves. We
looked for every occasion to lead a normal, healthy family life with lots of
laughter and love. We treated Gabi like her brothers and encouraged her to live
life as fully as possible, going out for sports she liked, even if they were more
challenging for her given her physical condition. Here Gabi was our best
teacher since she never saw herself as a victim, never indulged in self-pity, but
sought to make each day fun for herself. Although we would never have
voluntarily chosen such an ordeal for Gabi and for us, we said 
yes
 to the
situation rather than 
no
. In this way, we took back our life, our initiative, and
our power to change the situation for the better.
--- PAGE 42 ---
We also learned to take responsibility for our relationships with doctors
and nurses. Even if medical specialists were insensitive, we learned not to
blame them but to take the initiative to address the problem. Just before Gabi’s
spinal cord surgery, for example, one doctor casually announced to his students
in front of Lizanne, who was cradling five-month-old Gabi in her arms: “I’ve
seen many kids go into this surgery and come out paraplegic.” We were
shocked by his callousness. Not long thereafter, we were referred to this same
doctor as the most skilled surgeon in town for another of Gabi’s surgeries.
Although we might 
easily have dismissed him because of our first encounter
with him, we went to the balcony and focused on what was best for Gabi. In
the end, we created a good relationship with him and he eventually became a
friend, offering us hours and hours of free consultation about numerous
surgeries, and taking close care of Gabi.
What helped us conduct these critical relationships was our commitment to
ourselves to take care of our own psychological needs. Doing so allowed us to
control our levels of anxiety around Gabi’s surgeries. The less anxious we
were, the more trusting, calm, and confident Gabi also became since she was
very much relying on us to see whether she should be afraid or not and whether
she should trust or not. The less anxious Gabi and we became, the easier we
found it to deal nonreactively with doctors and nurses who were sometimes
brusque and unresponsive.
It was a big lesson for us. We had thought we were wholly dependent on
the medical system, but the more responsibility we took and the more
confidence we developed in ourselves and in life, the more relaxed we could
be and therefore the more effectively we could serve as Gabi’s advocates.
Everyone benefited. Getting to yes with ourselves helped us get to yes with the
people on whom Gabi’s life depended.
As Lizanne and I learned, taking responsibility for meeting 
your needs is
fundamentally about 
self-leadership
. All too often, the inner judge, the constant
critic, tries to take charge, using fear and blame, guilt and shame as instruments
of control. Taking responsibility allows you to carry out an inner revolution of
sorts. You can displace the judge and assume your rightful place as leader of
your own life.
The key lesson is that responsibility equals power, power to meet your
deepest needs. In the end, each of us is faced with a basic choice of attitude. If
--- PAGE 43 ---
blaming essentially means giving away your power and thus saying 
no
 to
yourself, taking responsibility means reclaiming your power and thus saying
yes
 to yourself. By giving up the blame game and assuming responsibility for
your relationships and your needs, you can go right to the root of conflict and
take the lead in transforming your negotiations and your life.
This brings us to the next challenge in getting to yes with ourselves. While
we can choose to take responsibility for our needs, the question remains:
Where can we find a source of satisfaction to meet our deepest needs for
connection and protection? For that, we turn to the next major attitudinal shift:
to say 
yes
 to the life that sustains us. Having said 
yes
 to ourselves, we are now
ready to say 
yes
 to life.
--- PAGE 44 ---
[No text extracted]

--- PAGE 45 ---
 
 
3
