STAY IN THE ZONE
FROM RESISTANCE TO ACCEPTANCE
He who lives not in time, but in the present, is happy.
—
LUDWIG VON WITTGENSTEIN
The pressure was on. At the invitation of the United Nations and the Carter
Center, I had been working as a third party in the acute political crisis
afflicting Venezuela. Millions of people were on the streets of the capital city,
Caracas, calling for the downfall of President Hugo Chavez. Millions of others
were on the streets supporting him. People were arming themselves, rumors
were circulating about imminent attacks, and international observers were
seriously concerned about the possible outbreak of a civil war.
I had received a call from former president Jimmy Carter 
asking me to
meet with President Chavez to discuss how to avert a serious escalation. A
meeting was set and I wanted to make the most of this perhaps onetime
opportunity to influence the country’s leader. I was preparing the most
intelligent advice I could offer. But why, I asked myself, would he even listen
to me, a “yanqui professor”?
As was my habit, I went for a walk in the park to seek clarity. I suspected
that I would be given only a few minutes with the president, so I was outlining
--- PAGE 60 ---
in my head a brief set of recommendations to make. But what occurred to me
on the walk was to do the exact 
opposite
 of what I had been planning: don’t
offer advice, unless of course requested to do so. Just listen, stay focused on
the present moment, and look for openings. The risk, of course, was that the
meeting would end very soon and I would lose my one chance to influence him
with my advice, but I decided to take it.
When the day of the meeting came, tensions were high and protesters were
agitating outside the presidential palace. When my colleague Francisco Diez
and I arrived, we were asked to wait and then taken to a large ornate receiving
room where we were greeted by President Chavez. He invited us to take sofa
chairs beside his. I thanked him for the meeting, gave him President Carter’s
regards, and asked him about his four-year-old daughter, who was 
the same
age as mine. And I let the conversation unfold naturally.
Soon Chavez was talking freely about his story. He had been a colonel in
the military. He had resigned in outrage that he and his troops had been ordered
to shoot to kill civilians to quell a riot over food prices in Caracas. He had
subsequently launched a coup d’etat and had gone to prison. When released, he
ran for president. He talked of his fervent admiration for Simon Bolivar, the
liberator of Latin America from Spanish rule in the early 1800s. I listened
closely, trying to understand what it was like to be in his shoes.
When he finished his story, he turned to me, and asked, “Okay, Professor
Ury, what do you think of the conflict here in Venezuela?”
“Señor Presidente, I have worked as a third party in many civil wars. Once
the bloodshed starts, it is very difficult to end. I believe that you have a great
opportunity now to prevent a war before it happens.”
“How?” he asked.
“Open up a dialogue with the opposition.”
“
Negotiate
 with them?” He reacted with visible anger. “They are traitors
who tried to mount a coup against me and kill me less than a year ago right
here in this very room!”
I paused for a moment, going to the balcony. Rather than argue with him, I
decided to follow his train of thought.
“I understand. Since you can’t trust them at all, what’s the use of talking
with them?”
“Exactly,” he responded.
--- PAGE 61 ---
I was just focused on the present moment, looking for an opening, and a
question occurred to me: “Since you don’t trust them, understandably given
what happened to you, let me ask you: What action if any could they possibly
take tomorrow morning that would send you a credible signal that they were
ready to change?”
“
Señales?
 Signals?” he asked as he paused to consider the unexpected
question.
I said yes.
“Well, for one, they could stop calling me a 
mono
 [monkey] on their TV
stations.” He gave a bitter laugh. “And they could stop putting uniformed
generals on television calling for the overthrow of the government. That’s
treason!”
Within minutes, the president agreed to designate his minister of the
interior to work with Francisco and me to develop a list of possible practical
actions that each party could take to build trust and de-escalate the crisis. The
president asked us to come back to meet with him the very next day to report
on our progress. A constructive process for beginning to defuse the grave
political crisis had unexpectedly opened up.
As Francisco and I said good-bye to President Chavez, 
I glanced at my
watch. I had lost track of time and a full two and a half hours had passed. I am
convinced that, if I had followed my first thought to begin the meeting by
reciting my recommendations, the president would have cut the meeting short
after a few minutes. After all, he had a long line of people waiting to see him.
Instead, because I had deliberately let go of trying to give advice and instead
just stayed present and attentive to possible openings, the meeting had become
highly productive.
If we want to get to yes in a sensitive situation, the key is to look for the
present opportunity,
 the chance to steer the conversation toward a yes, as
happened with President Chavez. In most situations, I find, there is an opening
if we are attentive enough to see it. But it is all too easy for us to miss. I have
been in so many negotiations where one party signals an opening or even
makes a concession and the other party does not notice it. Whether it is a
marital argument or a budget disagreement in the office, it is so easy for us to
be distracted, to be thinking about the past or worrying about the future. Yet it
is only in the present moment when we can intentionally change the direction of
--- PAGE 62 ---
the conversation toward an agreement.
I learned this lesson of looking for the present opportunity many years ago
from my mentor and colleague Roger Fisher. While the other university
professors I knew focused 
on either understanding the history of a particular
conflict or predicting its future, Roger focused on the present opportunity for
constructive action. “
Who
 can do 
what
 today to move this conflict toward
resolution?” was the question he always liked to ask. Roger knew that, as
interesting and informative as the past or future might be, the power to
transform the conflict lay in the present moment. His focus on the ever-
available opportunity to move toward a yes was an eye-opening lesson for me.
But what I did not fully appreciate at that time is the prior step that makes it
possible for us to focus on the present opportunity in our interactions with
others. If we are to spot the present opportunity, our internal focus naturally
needs to be in the present moment. Our best performance comes from being in
a state of relaxed alertness, paying attention to the here and now. 
Research
psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi called this state “flow” in his celebrated
book about the psychological state of high performance and inner satisfaction.
Athletes sometimes call this state the “zone.” If tennis players, for example, get
preoccupied with their last point or the next point, they will not perform well.
Being fully present—being in the zone—they can surrender to the moment and
play their best. Former sprinter Mark Richardson, talking about his experience
of being in the zone as a runner, explains:
It’s a very strange feeling. It’s as if time slows down and you see everything so clearly. You just
know that everything about your technique is spot on. It just feels so effortless; it’s almost as if
you’re floating across the track. Every muscle, every fiber, every sinew is working in complete
harmony and the end product is that you run fantastically well.
Just as it is valuable for tennis players, runners, and other athletes to stay in
the zone, so it is for us when we are trying to get to yes with others, whether
with a spouse or partner, a work colleague, or a client. As I discovered in my
meeting with President Chavez, being fully attentive in the present moment
makes us less likely to react, helps us pay attention to possible openings, and
accesses our natural creativity so that we can more easily reach mutually
satisfying agreements. In addition to its positive effects on our performance,
--- PAGE 63 ---
the “zone” is also where we tend to experience the greatest inner satisfaction
and enjoyment.
It is not easy at all, however, to stay focused on the present moment.
Perhaps the biggest obstacle is an internal 
resistance
 or 
no
 to life as it is: we
regret the past, worry about the future, and reject our present circumstances.
The key to staying in the zone is to let go of this internal resistance 
and accept
the past, trust the future, and embrace the present, just as they are. The key, in
other words, is to say 
yes
 to life.
LEARN TO LET GO
Relaxing our tight grip on life may be harder than it seems. I am reminded of
my adventures as a mountain climber in my teens and twenties. After my friend
Dusty and I had climbed up to the very top of a peak, we would descend by
rappelling, using a rope to lower ourselves down the precipice. To rappel, we
would walk backward off a ledge and then walk down the cliff face,
sometimes over a thousand feet high, holding ourselves perpendicular to the
surface. At first, it was unnerving and frightening to rappel down; every
instinct in my body told me not to let go and let myself fall off the precipice.
But if I did not loosen my grip on the rope, I would get stuck, unable to
descend the mountain. My desire to control the situation—and fear of what
might happen if I didn’t—stood starkly in the way of making any progress and
getting what I wanted: to get back down.
Sometimes we don’t really want to let go of our controlling 
grip on life—
just as I didn’t want to let go of the rope when I first learned to rappel. We may
believe that worrying incessantly about the future will keep us out of danger.
We may enjoy brooding over the past, blaming others because it makes us feel
righteous and superior, or more alive through the anger. We may want to
control and even fight our present circumstances when they don’t fit our
expectations or our plans. As George Bernard Shaw once observed: “People
become attached to their burdens sometimes more than the burdens are attached
--- PAGE 64 ---
to them.”
For all these reasons, overcoming our resistance to letting go is a slow
process. To learn to rappel, I started by relaxing my grip on the rope for a few
seconds, feeling that I was safe, and then loosening my grip a little more,
followed by holding on again, and so on until eventually I became fully
comfortable and accustomed to walking backward off a cliff. Once I did let go
of the rope, there was nothing to do except to enjoy the view. We need the same
mixture of patience and persistence to meet the challenge of letting go and
staying in the zone. After a while, it gets easier until we don’t even give it a
moment’s thought.
One time, I remember vividly, Dusty and I had to rappel down from a high
alpine peak in a storm with pouring rain whipping into our faces amid distant
claps of thunder 
and occasional flashes of lightning. We found ourselves on a
small rock ledge and the only thing that seemed available to serve as an anchor
for the rope was a small slender pine tree clinging to the cliff. In a hurry, we
wrapped the rope around the tree, tugged on the tree to test it, and proceeded.
As I began to lower myself over the lip of the high precipice and entrusted
my full weight to the rope, the pine tree shivered and then—as if in slow
motion—came uprooted. I grasped for the edge of the ledge and caught myself
just in time. Dusty and I looked at each other, speechless, shocked by what
might have happened. We stopped, looked around with some diligence, and
finally found a more reliable anchor, a boulder. This time we were able to
rappel safely down the mountain. Needless to say, Dusty and I learned to
appreciate keenly the value of anchoring ourselves to something solid before
letting go.
I find that the same lesson holds true for letting go of our tight grip on life.
Our ability to relax and let life flow naturally depends on how solidly
anchored we feel in a friendly world. If we can reframe our picture of life and
find satisfaction from within, then we will be more willing to let go of our
resentments about the past and our anxieties about the future. Reframing allows
us to relax and to accept life just as it is.
--- PAGE 65 ---
ACCEPT THE PAST
“When I think of what Craig has done to me, I feel furious,” said one client of
mine enmeshed in a business dispute to me during a moment of candor. “So it
gives me pleasure to attack him. If I settle our dispute, what will my life be
like without my private war?” He was so focused on the past and on the
pleasure of revenge that he had lost sight of his true objectives in the
negotiation and in life.
As a mediator in family feuds, labor strikes, and civil wars, I have
witnessed the heavy shadow of the past and how it can create bitterness,
resentment, and hatred. I have listened for days to blame and recriminations
and who did what to whom. I have observed how easily the human mind gets
bogged down in the past and forgets the present opportunity to end the conflict
and the suffering.
Holding on to the past is not only self-destructive because it distracts us
from reaching a mutually satisfying agreement, but it also takes away our joy
and even harms our health. And it affects those around us who are our biggest
supporters in life. Watching us hold on to the past and poison our present takes
away 
their
 joy and well-being. It is a loss for everyone. If we truly realized
how much it costs us to hold on to the past, how self-destructive it ultimately
is, we might not wait so long to let go.
In the dispute above, once my client was able to let go of his temptation to
dwell on the past and to settle his differences with his adversary, he told me he
was a different man, feeling much lighter. Even his young children had noticed
—and probably worried about—how much their father had been consumed by
the conflict. When it ended, they saw, clearly relieved, a noticeable change in
their father: “Daddy is not on the cell phone all the time,” they told their
mother.
Letting go of the past can be truly liberating. In a speech at the UN, former
U.S. president Bill Clinton recalled a question he once asked Nelson Mandela:
“Tell me the truth: when you were walking down the road that last time [as
Mandela was released from prison], didn’t you hate them?” Mandela replied:
“I did. I am old enough to tell the truth. I felt hatred and fear but I said to
myself, if you hate them when you get in that car, you will still be their
--- PAGE 66 ---
prisoner. I wanted to be free and so I let it go.”
Here was a man who had spent twenty-seven years in prison and had every
reason to be bitter and angry. The great and unexpected gift he gave to his
compatriots was to help them let go of the heavy burden of the past so that they
could get to yes and begin to build a free South Africa for all. By learning to
accept and forgive his former jailers, Mandela inspired thousands of others to
forgive too. One 
was a young fellow prisoner at Robben Island, Vusumzi
Mcongo, who had been severely tortured in detention for his role in leading a
student boycott. 
“We cannot live with broken hearts,” Mcongo said. “In time
we have to accept that these things have happened to us, that those years have
been wasted. To stay with the past will only bring you into turmoil.”
Forgiving those who have wronged us does not mean condoning or
forgetting what they did. It means accepting what happened and freeing
ourselves from its weight. The first beneficiary of forgiveness, after all, is
ourselves. Resentment and anger tend to consume us and hurt us perhaps much
more even than they hurt the other. Holding on to old resentments makes about
as much sense as carrying our bags while traveling on a train; it only tires us
out needlessly.
As important as it is to forgive others, perhaps the most important person to
forgive is oneself. Without doubt, at some point each of us has felt regret, guilt,
shame, self-hatred, and self-blame for all the ways in which we have broken
promises to ourselves and hurt ourselves as well as others. These feelings
naturally tend to fester and take our attention away from the present moment.
That’s why the poet Maya Angelou urged that forgiving ourselves is crucial:
If you live, you will make mistakes—it is inevitable. But once you do and you see the mistake, then
you forgive yourself . . . If we all hold on to the mistake, we can’t see our own glory in the mirror
because we have the mistake between our faces and the mirror.
Accepting the past is not only about letting go of accusations toward others
and ourselves; it’s also about accepting the experiences life has given us,
however challenging these might be. If we don’t let go of our resentment and
regret, we become prisoners of the past. To accept our past, it helps to reframe
our stories and give a positive meaning to even the most difficult life events.
We may have no power to change the past, but we do have the power to change
--- PAGE 67 ---
the meaning we assign to it.
If I did not believe before in the power of reframing our stories, certainly
the experience with my daughter Gabi’s medical challenges has persuaded me
of it. In the early years after Gabi’s birth, my wife, Lizanne, told me she felt
she was in a dark tunnel out of which she would never emerge. But over time
she and I learned to paint a different picture of the experience. The truth was
that, as painful and difficult as it was to watch our daughter undergo medical
procedure after medical procedure, it challenged Lizanne and me to grow as
human beings and to draw on 
our inner resources. We can only be grateful for
the valuable life lessons Gabi’s journey brought to us—lessons reflected in
this book. I personally deepened my ability to observe my thoughts and
feelings, to put myself in my shoes, to see life as an ally and friend. Looking
back, Lizanne and I have come to appreciate the entire experience as a
“blessed shock,” one that paradoxically woke us up to life’s potential for
experiencing joy in the present. While we would not have voluntarily chosen
this path, I can say without a doubt that each of us is happier and more fulfilled
today because of all we learned as a result. In fact, I do not believe I would be
writing this book were it not for these experiences.
TRUST THE FUTURE
Once when I was speaking to a group of businesspeople about the critical
importance of developing your BATNA—your Best Alternative To a
Negotiated Agreement—a man came up to me and said, “Yes, that’s true. But I
also like to think about my WATNA—my 
Worst
 Alternative To a Negotiated
Agreement.”
“Why is that?” I asked, my curiosity piqued.
“Because I worry a lot about what’s going to happen if things go wrong in
the negotiation,” he replied. “It helps me 
to think about the worst thing that
could happen because then I can say to myself: ‘If they’re not going to kill me,
then I will probably survive.’ And I laugh it off.”
--- PAGE 68 ---
There is a lot of truth in that man’s comment. We do tend to worry a lot in
negotiation and in life, in general, about all the bad things that could happen.
While keeping an eye on the future can be useful, worrying about it continually
only takes us away from the present moment so that we no longer operate at our
best.
I am well acquainted with fear from my work in dangerous conflicts. I have
often watched fear take hold of me and of others. But what I’ve learned over
the years is that the vast majority of our fears are baseless. As the French
philosopher Michel de Montaigne noted four centuries ago: 
“My life has been
full of terrible misfortunes most of which never happened.” In the end, fear
ends up doing more damage to us than the very danger it imagines. “He who
fears he shall suffer,” Montaigne concluded, “already suffers what he fears.”
The alternative to fear is trust. By trust, I don’t mean the belief that there
will be no challenges or painful experiences. Rather, I mean the confidence
that you will be able to deal with the challenges that come your way. That trust
is what enabled me to have the productive conversation with President Chavez
described at the beginning of this 
chapter. If I had listened to my fear of failure,
I would never have let the conversation flow naturally into what became a real
opening in the negotiation.
Trust is not a onetime shift in attitude, but rather a conscious choice we
face many times a day. In every interaction with others, a client or a boss, a
spouse or partner, we can choose between fear and trust. Will we obey the 
no
voice that counsels us not to look foolish or ridiculous? Or will we listen to
the 
yes
 voice that encourages us to take a chance and follow our intuition?
Winston Churchill once quipped, “The pessimist sees the difficulty in
every opportunity. The optimist sees the opportunity in every difficulty.” He
went on to say, “I am an optimist. It does not seem much use being anything
else.” Trust in the future, as he knew well from the horrors of war, does not
mean ignoring life’s problems. On the contrary, trust is an attitude with which
we can actively deal with our problems. Why not try out this attitude and see if
trusting—that you can handle whatever life brings you—works better for you
than continually worrying about the future?
A number of practical methods can help us let go of our fear of the future.
You can observe the fear when it shows up and then consciously release it,
shaking it off a bit like a dog shakes off the water after plunging into a lake.
--- PAGE 69 ---
You can take a deep breath or two, bringing oxygen into your 
brain so you can
see things more clearly. Or like the businessman I cited earlier, you can also
ask yourself a simple but powerful reality-testing question when you are
anxious about a particular future outcome: 
What is the worst thing that can
happen here?
 By facing your fears from a place of clarity, you’ll be better able
to relax and to stay in the zone. Our bodies do not distinguish between real
threats and imagined threats as they gear up for fight or flight, so in the great
majority of situations, a little bit of perspective can go a long way in helping us
let go of fear.
In the end, perhaps the surest way to free yourself from unnecessary fears
is to remember your inner BATNA and your 
yes
 to life. Your commitment to
take care of your needs and your confidence that life is on your side will give
you a sense that, no matter what happens in the future, everything will be okay
in the end.
An old Chinese proverb counsels: “That the birds of worry and care fly
over your head, this you cannot change, but that they build nests in your hair,
this you can prevent.”
EMBRACE THE PRESENT
Once we release ourselves from the burden of the past and from the shadow of
the future, then we are freer to live 
and act in the present. We can visit the past
from time to time to learn from it and we can visit the future to plan and take
necessary precautions, but we make our home in the only place where we can
make positive change happen: in the present moment. It is by being present and
spotting the present opportunities in our negotiations that we can most easily
get to yes with others.
It is all too easy in today’s world of cell phones, texts, and e-mail to get
distracted from the present moment. Underlying our tendency to distract
ourselves is a resistance to the way that life is for us right now. We tend to
have idealized expectations of how life 
should
 or 
should not
 be, and our inner
--- PAGE 70 ---
judge is constantly comparing our reality to that expectation. We keep score. “I
should
 have made the sale by now.” “I 
should not
 have just spoken that way to
my boss.” “My spouse 
should
 be nicer to me.” A telltale sign of expectations
are the words 
should
 and 
should not
.
Accepting life as it is does not mean resigning ourselves to the way things
are. In fact, constructive change starts from accepting reality regardless of how
painful it might be—not from losing time and energy resisting it. 
My friend
Judith had a very difficult time when her son Ben went through a phase of
rebellion that had started when he was nine and reached a peak of intensity
when he was thirteen. Ben would repeatedly—and harshly—reject her and her
attempts to connect with him. Judith was on a roller coaster of hurt and anger,
helplessness and determination, grief and tears. She felt as though she was
falling apart.
“
I would not let go.
 I felt like I was fighting for my life and for that of my
son,” Judith explained. “My husband was running up and down the stairs to the
basement family room where Ben had moved, like a frantic mediator
attempting to carry messages between the rebel forces and the crumbling
government.”
Judith was expressing a loud 
no
 to Ben’s behavior, essentially a 
no
 to life
as it showed up in the present moment. No matter how much she struggled and
resisted, however, she was unable to force Ben to accept her at that point. It is
not easy to let go of trying to control life, particularly when the stakes seem
high.
Behind our fear of letting go may be the false assumption that if we don’t
control all the circumstances around us, then everything will fall apart and our
lives will be destroyed. Our instinct is to protect our idealized version of how
life ought to be. The irony, of course, is that resisting our present reality is
destructive not only to us, but also to those around us. In Judith’s case, her
relationship with her husband was severely strained by their mutual judgment,
blame, hurt, and helplessness.
So how do we, in fact, let go?
Judith learned to let go by testing her assumptions about the future, which
motivated much of her need to control her relationship with her son. One day,
while walking on the trail behind her home, she asked herself: 
What is the
worst thing that could happen here?
 “Other than my child dying,” Judith
--- PAGE 71 ---
realized, “the worst thing I could imagine was that I would end up having
active relationships with only two of my three children.” In negotiation terms,
she was asking herself a reality-testing question, a question about her best
alternative if she was not able to get to yes with her son.
Suddenly Judith’s situation didn’t seem so dire. She asked herself: 
Can I
live with this? Can I be happy even if I never have a good relationship with
my son?
 And the answer was clear—she could. “It wasn’t what I wanted,”
Judith clarifies, “but I could live with it. I still had the capacity to find joy and
satisfaction in my life. My well-being was not dependent on this child’s love
or approval.” In that brief moment, Judith felt liberated from the tyranny of her
fears.
“Gradually, I 
let go,
” Judith explains. “I let go of needing his
acknowledgment, of needing him to love me or even needing him to like me. I
let go of needing him to call or talk to me. I let go of needing him to feel the
same way about me as he did about his father. And ultimately, I let go of
needing any relationship with him at all. As I faced my life as it was, rather
than life as I had hoped it would be, my pictures of myself as 
a mother, a wife,
of being anyone I had previously thought I was, fell away. In place of this came
freedom.”
Once Judith was able to let go of her expectations of how life should be,
then paradoxically healthy change unfolded—naturally. Letting go turned out to
be the unexpected key to transforming the conflict between mother and son, a
relationship that healed slowly over the years. Precisely because Judith was
able to let go of her neediness and accept her son just as he was, he was able
after some time to come closer to her, apologize for hurting her, and tell her
how much he loved her. By choosing to face life as it was, by getting to yes
with herself, she was able to get to yes with her son as well as with her
husband.
As Judith’s case shows, it is hard to get to a mutually acceptable solution
to a conflict if we have not first accepted the situation as it is. Accepting the
present, I have learned, means accepting a gift from life. The present moment,
as much as we might feel aversion to it—as Judith felt aversion to her
contentious relationship with her son—is indeed a present. We might imagine
that we were supposed to get another gift, but the present is what it is.
In this matter, perhaps my greatest teacher is my daughter, Gabi. Here she
--- PAGE 72 ---
is, having undergone fourteen major surgeries, yet she doesn’t lose any time
looking back with resentment or regret or feeling sorry for herself. She shakes
it off. She has a zest for life and finds enjoyment and excitement every day. If I
find my mind wandering to her past or worrying about her future, I simply
remember her laser-like focus on the present—and I let go. If she can relax and
stay in the zone, then I can do the same.
As Lizanne and I learned from watching Gabi go through so many
surgeries, pain happens. It is part of life. But when we resist life and its pain,
we start to suffer. As the saying goes, pain may be inevitable but suffering is
optional. We may think that it is the suffering that causes us to resist, but
paradoxically it is the resistance that causes us to suffer. We get trapped in
disappointment and endless wishing that this was not happening to us.
Resisting our current circumstances often prolongs the misery, sometimes
indefinitely. It is not easy, of course, but we can choose to limit our suffering
through gradually learning to let go of our 
no
—our resistance—and saying 
yes
—learning to accept life as it is.
If there is a single lesson I have learned, it is this: in life, we are destined
to lose many things. That is the nature of life. Never mind. Just don’t lose the
present. Nothing is worth it. There is nothing more important than “this,” the
fullness of life right now.
A key to staying in the present moment, I have learned, is to be able to
focus on what lasts while accepting what 
passes. It is to stay anchored in our
essential connection to life while we say yes to situations that pass us by—
some good, some painful. Let the passing pass, let the lasting last. By focusing
on what is lasting—life itself, nature, the universe—we become more aware of
what is passing, more appreciative of the preciousness and temporary nature of
every experience. In turn, as we become more aware that these experiences
won’t last forever, we become less reactive in situations of conflict—after all,
whatever the conflict is, this too shall pass—and we find it easier to look for
the present opportunity to get to yes with others.
FROM RESISTANCE TO ACCEPTANCE
--- PAGE 73 ---
If the first step in saying 
yes
 to life is to reframe our picture of life as friendly,
the second step is to stay in the zone—a place of high performance and
satisfaction. Accepting life means saying 
yes
 to the past, letting go of lingering
resentments and grievances. It means saying 
yes
 to the future, letting go of
needless worries and replacing fear with trust. And it means saying 
yes
 to the
present, letting go of our expectations and appreciating what we have in the
moment. It is not always easy, of course. It takes strength to forgive the past,
courage to trust the future, and disciplined focus 
to stay present in the midst of
life’s constant problems and distractions. But, however great the challenge, the
rewards of inner contentment, satisfying agreements, and healthy relationships
are much greater.
Having examined our attitude toward life, it is time to examine our attitude
toward others. Saying 
yes
 to life prepares us for the next challenge, which is to
say 
yes
 to others.
--- PAGE 74 ---
[No text extracted]

--- PAGE 75 ---
 
 
5
