PUT YOURSELF IN 
YOUR
 SHOES
FROM SELF-JUDGMENT TO SELF-UNDERSTANDING
Know thyself? If I knew myself, I’d run away.
—
JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE
While I was writing this book, I was approached for help by the wife and
daughter of Abilio Diniz, a highly successful and prominent businessman from
Brazil. Abilio was involved in a complex and protracted dispute with his
French business partner, fighting over control of Brazil’s leading supermarket
retailer, a company that Abilio and his father had built up from a single bakery.
While Abilio had sold controlling shares to the French, he remained 
as chair
and major shareholder. A partnership that had started well years earlier had
turned bitter. Two major international arbitration cases were in process as was
a big lawsuit. The battle was the subject of constant speculation in the media.
Who was winning? 
The 
Financial Times
 called the dispute “one of the biggest
cross-continental boardroom showdowns in history.”
Trapped in a conflict from which he could see no way out—a fight that
consumed his time and resources—Abilio felt angry and frustrated. The
general expectation was that the fierce battle, which had lasted for two and a
half years, would go on for another eight years, by which point he would be
--- PAGE 15 ---
well into his eighties.
After studying the case carefully, I had a chance to talk extensively with
Abilio and his family at his home in São Paulo. As complicated and difficult as
the conflict with the French partner seemed, I sensed that the first and
fundamental obstacle lay within Abilio himself. A man of dignity, he felt very
disrespected and ill-treated by his business partner. He did not know what he
really wanted most, to fight or to settle. In and out of the boardroom, he often
found himself reacting out of anger in ways that went contrary to his interests.
Like most of us, he was his own worthiest opponent.
The first step in resolving the dispute, it seemed to me, 
was for Abilio to
figure out his true priorities. So I asked him, “What do you 
really
 want?” His
first response was to give me a list: he wanted to sell his stock at a certain
price; he wanted the elimination of a three-year noncompete clause that
prevented him from acquiring other supermarket companies; and he wanted a
number of other items including real estate. I pressed him again. “I understand
you want these concrete items. But what will these things give you, a man who
seems to have everything? What do you 
most
 want right now in your life?” He
paused for a moment, looked away, then turned back to me and said with a
sigh: “Freedom. I want my freedom.” “And what does freedom give you?” I
asked. “Time with my family, which is the most important thing in my life,” he
replied. “And freedom to pursue my business dreams.”
Freedom then was his deepest need. Freedom is important to all of us but it
had special resonance for Abilio because of a harrowing experience in his
past. Years earlier, while leaving his home, he had been kidnapped by a band
of urban guerrillas. Confined in a tiny cubicle with two pin-size holes for air
and assaulted by intensely loud music, Abilio thought he would be killed at any
moment. Fortunately, he was rescued in a surprise police raid after a week in
captivity.
Once Abilio and I had clarity on his deepest need, freedom 
became the
“north star” for our work together, orienting all our actions. When my
colleague David Lax and I were able to sit down to negotiate with the other
side, we were able to resolve within just four days this bitter and protracted
dispute that had gone on for years. The solution was surprisingly satisfying for
everyone, as I will recount later in this book.
We all wish to get what we want in life. But the problem is that, like
--- PAGE 16 ---
Abilio, what we 
really
 want is often not clear to us. We may want to satisfy
others in our lives too: our spouse or partner, colleagues, clients, even our
negotiating opponents. But the problem is that what 
they
 really want is also
often not clear to us.
When people ask me what is the most important skill for a negotiator, I
usually respond that, if I had to pick just one, it would be the ability to put
yourself in the other person’s shoes. Negotiation, after all, is an exercise in
influence, in trying to change someone else’s mind. The first step in changing
someone’s mind is to know where that mind is. It can be very difficult,
however, to put ourselves in the other person’s shoes, particularly in a conflict
or negotiation. We tend to be so focused on our own problems and on what 
we
want that we have little or no mental space to devote to the other side’s
problem and what 
they
 want. If we are asking our boss for a raise, for
instance, we may be so 
preoccupied with solving our problem that we don’t
focus on the boss’s problem, the tight budget. Yet unless we can help the boss
solve that problem, the boss is unlikely to be able to offer us a raise.
There is one key prior move, often overlooked, that can help us clarify both
what we want and, indirectly, what the other person wants. That move is to put
yourself in 
your own
 shoes first. Listening to yourself can reveal what you
really want. At the same time, it can clear your mind so that you have mental
and emotional space to be able to listen to the other person and understand
what he or she really wants. In the example of the raise, hearing yourself out
first can help you listen to your boss and understand the problem of the tight
budget.
Putting yourself in 
your
 shoes may sound odd at first because, after all, are
you not already in your own shoes? But to do it properly is not nearly as easy
as it might appear. Our natural tendency is to judge ourselves critically and to
ignore or reject parts of ourselves. If we look too closely, we may feel, as
Goethe says, like running away. How many of us can honestly say that we have
plumbed the depths of our minds and hearts? How many of us regularly listen
to ourselves with empathy and understanding—in the supportive way that a
trusted friend can?
Three actions can help. First, see yourself from the 
“balcony.” Second, go
deeper and listen with empathy to your underlying feelings for what they are
really telling you. Third, go even deeper and uncover your underlying needs.
--- PAGE 17 ---
SEE YOURSELF FROM THE BALCONY
Benjamin Franklin, known as a highly practical and scientific man, reflected in
Poor Richard’s Almanack
 more than two and a half centuries ago, “There are
three things extremely hard: steel, a diamond, and to know one’s self.” His
advice was: “Observe all men; thyself most.”
If you observe yourself and others in moments of stress during negotiation
and conflict, you will notice how easily people become triggered by the other
person’s words, tone of voice, and actions. In virtually every dispute I have
ever mediated—whether it is a marital spat, an argument in the office, or a
civil war—the pattern is reaction followed by reaction followed by yet
another reaction. “Why did you attack him?” “Because he attacked me.” And
on it goes.
When we react, we typically fall into what I call the “3A trap”: we 
attack,
we 
accommodate
 (in other words, give in), or we 
avoid
 altogether, which
often only makes the problem grow. Or we use a combination of all three
approaches. We may start off avoiding or accommodating, but soon enough, 
we
can’t stand it anymore and we go on the attack. When that backfires, we lapse
into avoiding or accommodating.
None of these three common reactions serves our true interests. Once the
fight-or-flight reaction gets triggered, the blood flows from our brain to our
limbs, and our ability to think clearly diminishes. We forget our purpose and
often act exactly contrary to our interests. When we react, we give away our
power—our power to influence the other person constructively and to change
the situation for the better. When we react, we are, in effect, saying 
no
 to our
interests, 
no
 to ourselves.
But we have a choice. We don’t need to react. We can learn to observe
ourselves instead. In my teaching and writing, I emphasize the concept of 
going
to the balcony
. The balcony is a metaphor for a mental and emotional place of
perspective, calm, and self-control. If life is a stage and we are all actors on
that stage, then the balcony is a place from which we can see the entire play
unfolding with greater clarity. To observe our selves, it is valuable to go to the
balcony at all times, and especially before, during, and after any problematic
conversation or negotiation.
--- PAGE 18 ---
I recall one tense political mediation session when the president of a
country was shouting angrily at me for almost thirty minutes, accusing me of not
seeing the tricks of the political opposition. What helped me keep calm was to
silently take note of my sensations, emotions, and thoughts: 
Isn’t it interesting?
My jaw feels clenched. I notice some fear showing up. My cheeks feel
flushed. Am I feeling embarrassed?
 Being able to recognize what I was
feeling helped me to neutralize the emotional effect that the president’s
shouting had on me. I could watch the scene from the balcony as if it were a
play. Having recovered myself, I was then able to recover the conversation
with the president.
This is the point: whenever you feel yourself triggered by a passing
thought, emotion, or sensation, you have a simple choice: 
to identify
 or 
get
identified
. You can observe the thought and “identify” it. Or you can let
yourself get caught up in the thought, in other words, “get identified” with it.
Naming helps you identify so that you don’t get identified. As you observe your
passing thoughts, emotions, and sensations, naming them—
Oh, that is my old
friend Fear; there goes the Inner Critic
—neutralizes their effect on you and
helps you to maintain your state of balance and calm. My friend Donna even
likes to give humorous names to her reactive emotions such as “Freddy Fear,”
“Judge Judy,” and “Anger Annie.” (Humor, incidentally, can be a great ally in
helping you regain perspective from the balcony.) As soon as you name the
character in the play, you distance yourself from him or her.
Observing ourselves so that we don’t react may seem easy, 
but it is often
tough to do, particularly in the heat of a difficult conversation or negotiation.
As one business executive recently said to me, “I think of myself as a calm,
cool person. And I am that way at work. But then sometimes, I find myself
snapping at my wife. Why can’t I stay calm like I am at work?” Like this
husband, when our emotions get triggered, we all too often “fall off the
balcony.” If we want to be able to consistently rely on self-observation to keep
us from reacting, it helps greatly to exercise it like a muscle on a daily basis.
Recently, I came across 
a mother’s account of witnessing her own growing
frustration in dealing with her four-year-old. Charlotte, the mother, wants to
have a close and trusting relationship with her son, but his refusal to go to bed
night after night triggers powerful reactions in her. Her account illustrates how
difficult it is to resist the temptation to react and how practicing self-
--- PAGE 19 ---
observation can help us make better choices. Charlotte writes:
Being both fascinated by and fearful of my new-found emotionality, I began to watch more closely
what anger really felt like. The first thing I noticed was its seduction, its sexiness. There were
times I could almost see myself at the emotional crossroads where one path led to calm, open-
hearted resolution, the other to explosive anger. And it was hard, very 
hard at times, not to plunge
down the latter. At the moment, giving expression to my anger felt like the thing I most wanted to
do; its allure was profoundly powerful and overwhelmingly convincing.
Charlotte investigates with curiosity the strong temptation to explode at her
child and gets a glimpse of the “crossroads,” the point at which she can either
give in to the anger or approach the situation in a calm way. If she gives in to
her anger, her son will distance himself out of self-protection. If she remains
calm, she can advance her core interest in a close and trusting relationship
with him. What helps her maintain her state of balance is her ability to
recognize the reactive pattern night after night, and to see that she actually has a
choice 
not
 to react. As Charlotte realizes, self-observation is the foundation of
self-mastery.
Try this yourself if you like. Investigate the feelings and reactive patterns
that are triggered in you by a problematic relationship at home or at work.
Notice the anger, fear, and other disturbing emotions that arise in you as you
interact with the other person. Like Charlotte, learn to go to the balcony and
observe these emotions and how they make you feel. See if you can spot your
own crossroads, the moment in which you can choose between an impulsive
reaction and a considered response that advances your true interests.
To develop a habit of self-observation, it helps to cultivate your 
inner
scientist
. You are the investigator, and the subject of your investigation is
yourself. Psychologists even have a name for this: they call it “me-search.”
Approaching your thoughts and feelings with a spirit of inquiry—as Charlotte
does when she examines the feelings triggered by her son’s behavior—will
help you keep your balance and calm. Mastering the skill of observation
requires, moreover, that, like a good scientist, you observe the phenomenon
with detachment and an open mind. It requires that you suspend self-judgment
to the extent possible.
It is all too easy to judge our thoughts and emotions, to see them as wrong
--- PAGE 20 ---
or right, bad or good. But in a psychological sense, there is nothing really
wrong that we can feel or think. Actions can be wrong, but not thoughts or
feelings. As inner scientists, we simply treat even the darker thoughts and
emotions as interesting research material. I find a simple but powerful question
to keep asking myself is: “Isn’t that 
curious
?” The question creates distance
and opens the way to inquiry rather than judgment. As I have cultivated my
own practice of self-observation over the years, I have come increasingly to
appreciate the dictum of the Indian philosopher Jiddu Krishnamurti: 
“To
observe without evaluating is the highest form of intelligence.”
One way to train yourself to observe without judgment 
is to reserve a
period of time once a day—it could be as little as five or ten minutes—to sit
quietly in a comfortable position, close your eyes, and simply watch your
passing thoughts and feelings, almost as if the sky were observing the passing
clouds. If you get caught up in a thought or feeling, or even if a harsh self-
judgment shows up, treat it as perfectly fine. Simply notice that you were
caught up and go back to observing. The more you engage in this exercise of
mindfulness, the easier it becomes. Bit by bit, you familiarize yourself with the
workings of your mind.
Imagine a glass of water that you have just filled from the faucet. It is full
of fizz and you cannot see through it. If you wait a moment and let the water
settle, however, the bubbles slowly dissipate and the water turns crystal clear.
That is what we are trying to do here with our minds: to let the fizz settle so we
can see clearly what is happening inside ourselves. Before a challenging phone
call or meeting, I find benefit in taking even a single minute of silence to
myself. One minute alone with my eyes closed helps me to observe my
thoughts, feelings, and sensations and to quiet my mind so I can focus better in
the conversation. It is an easy technique available to us at any time.
Learning to observe yourself is simple, but not easy, particularly in
conflicts. With practice, you get better and better. Ideally, the balcony is not
just a place to visit from time 
to time, but rather a home base. In your
interactions with others, you can learn to be on the stage enacting the drama
while at the same time watching it from the balcony. That takes practice, of
course, but the more you can live your life with clarity and calm, the more
effectively you will be able to deal with others and to pursue your interests
with ease and success. The inner yes method is designed to help you go to the
--- PAGE 21 ---
balcony when you like, stay on the balcony for as long as you like, and
negotiate from a balcony perspective.
LISTEN WITH EMPATHY
Psychologists have estimated that we have anywhere between twelve thousand
and sixty thousand thoughts a day. The majority of those—as high as 80 percent
—are thought to be negative: obsessing about mistakes, battling guilt, or
thinking about inadequacies. For some, the harsh critical voice of our inner
judge is stronger, for others weaker, but perhaps no one escapes it. “You said
the wrong thing!” “How could you have been so blind?” “You did a terrible
job!” Each negative thought is a 
no
 to yourself. There is a saying that goes, 
“If
you talked to your friends the way you talk to yourself, you wouldn’t have any.”
Self-judgment may be the greatest barrier to self-understanding. 
If we want
to understand other human beings, there is no better way than to listen to them
with empathy like a close friend would. If you wish to understand yourself, the
same rule applies: listen with empathy. Instead of talking negatively to
yourself, try to listen to yourself with respect and positive attention. Instead of
judging yourself, accept yourself just as you are.
Empathy is often confused with sympathy, but it is different. Sympathy
means “to feel 
with
.” It means to feel sorry for a person’s predicament, but
without necessarily understanding it. Empathy, in contrast, means “to feel
into
.” It means to 
understand
 what it is like to be in that situation.
Listening to yourself with empathy goes one level deeper than observing.
To observe is to 
see from the outside,
 whereas to listen is to 
feel from the
inside
. Observing offers you a detached view, whereas listening gives you an
intimate understanding. Observation gives us the understanding of a scientist
studying what a beetle looks like under a microscope, whereas listening gives
you the understanding of what it feels like to be a beetle. You can benefit from
both modalities together. Anthropologists have found that the best way to
understand a foreign culture is to participate in it actively 
and
 at the same time
--- PAGE 22 ---
to maintain an outside observer’s perspective. I find this method, called
participant observation, is equally useful when it comes to understanding
ourselves.
As I listen to myself, I notice that the majority of my 
problematic emotions
are the same every day. For example, one anxiety that pops up regularly
concerns the daily to-do list that only seems to expand: 
Will I be able to get
through it?
 To understand and reduce the intensity of these recurring feelings, I
have come up with a daily exercise: In the morning, I imagine sitting at a
kitchen table. As each familiar thought or emotion such as anxiety or fear,
shame or pride shows up, I offer it an imaginary seat. I have learned to
welcome all customers, no one excluded. I seek to treat them as the old friends
or acquaintances that they are. As the kitchen table fills up, I listen to the free-
flowing conversation of feelings and thoughts.
What about the inner judge? I make a place for him at the kitchen table too.
If I try to suppress or exclude him, he simply goes underground and continues
to judge from a hiding place. The best approach, I find, is to simply accept him
as one of the regular characters in my life. I have even come to appreciate him
as being like an old uncle who thinks he is trying to protect me but is often just
getting in the way. Accepting him, I find, is the best way to tame him.
If nothing else, I find this kitchen table exercise helps me remain aware of
these regulars so that they are less likely to catch me by surprise and sweep me
away. I have learned, especially, to listen for any dark feelings or thoughts that
I may normally disown or stigmatize. Anger is one of them. I have found that, if
I don’t recognize when I’m feeling angry 
and then listen for what is behind that
feeling, it can leak out in a destructive way when I least expect it, for example,
in a sensitive conversation with my wife.
Jamil Mahuad, former president of Ecuador and a Harvard colleague, once
shared how he gradually learned to deal with his painful feelings by putting
these feelings in the spotlight. 
“Sadness . . . was not well received by males in
my family. When some of my ancestors were really sad, they averted that
emotion by expressing anger,” he explained. “I had the same difficulty. Still it
is not easy for me to connect with pain, with grief. But by recognizing and
bringing this shadow to light, you start incorporating that ‘new’ part into what
you are.” By bringing his painful emotions “to light,” Jamil was able to control
his anger and operate with a balcony perspective as he conducted a difficult
--- PAGE 23 ---
peace negotiation with the president of Peru, thereby putting an end to the
longest-running war in the hemisphere.
Keep in mind that listening is not just an intellectual exercise but an
emotional and physical one as well. For example, when you are afraid, try to
feel the fear in your body. What does it feel like? Icy? Does it feel like a pit in
your stomach? Does your throat feel parched? Recognize its familiar feeling
and just stay with it for a moment without pushing it away. Try to relax and feel
your way into the fear. Breathe into it if you can. That way, you can slowly
begin to release it.
If this kind of deeper listening to yourself seems awkward or too
challenging, consider asking a friend—or even a professional counselor or
therapist—to listen to you until you are able to make a habit of listening to
yourself. Or consider keeping a daily journal. I find that writing down my
feelings and thoughts, even if only for a few minutes, keeps me on the balcony
and helps me uncover patterns that I would not see in the rush of life. Try it out
and you will begin to see and listen to yourself more clearly and understand
yourself better.
One of the great benefits of listening to yourself before you enter into a
problematic conversation or negotiation is that it clears your mind so that you
can then listen far more easily to others. I have long taught listening as one of
the central skills of negotiation and have noticed how difficult it is for people
to listen to others, particularly in conflict situations. Could it be that the main
obstacle is all the unheard emotions and thoughts that are clamoring for
attention and cluttering up our minds? Could it be that the secret to listening to
others is to listen to ourselves first?
UNCOVER YOUR NEEDS
If you listen to your feelings, particularly recurrent ones of dissatisfaction, you
will find that they point you in the 
direction of unmet concerns and interests.
Properly interpreted, they can help you uncover your deepest needs.
--- PAGE 24 ---
In the old story of King Arthur, a young knight from the court sets out with
enthusiasm to find the Holy Grail. Within the first months of searching, he sees
in the woods an apparition of a great castle. Entering, he finds an old injured
king seated with his knights and on the banquet table a silver chalice, the very
Grail itself. The young knight is tongue-tied, however, and while he wrestles
with what to say to the king, the castle suddenly disappears and he is left alone
in the forest, disconsolate.
The knight continues to search for many decades without success until one
day there springs up in front of him the very same castle in the woods. The
knight enters and sees the king and on the table the Grail. This time, much older
and wiser, the knight instinctively finds the right words. He asks the old king a
simple but powerful question: “What ails thee?” As the knight listens to the
king’s woes and uncovers his deepest needs, a human connection of friendship
grows between the two and, out of that friendship, the king gives the knight the
Grail, sought after by so many.
That is the power of asking the right question. We can each take a lesson
from the knight and ask ourselves about what is not going well for us. In what
areas of your life are you not happy or fully satisfied? Is it work or money,
family 
or relationship, or health or general well-being? Feelings of
dissatisfaction are the language that your needs use to communicate with you.
When your needs are frustrated or unfulfilled, it is only natural to feel anxiety,
fear, anger, or sadness. What, then, are these underlying needs? What do you
most want? What are your deepest motivations? The better you understand your
needs, the more likely you will be able to satisfy them.
I was once involved as a third party in a bitter civil war that had been
going on in the jungles of Sumatra for twenty-five years. In a meeting with the
leaders of the rebel movement, I asked them what they 
really
 wanted. “I know
your 
position
 in this conflict. You want independence,” I clarified. “But tell me
more about what your 
interests
 are. 
Why
 do you want independence?” I still
remember the uncomfortable silence that ensued as they struggled to answer
this fundamental question.
Were they fighting chiefly for political reasons such as self-rule? Or
economic reasons such as control over their natural resources? Or security
reasons such as being able to defend themselves against a physical threat? Or
cultural reasons such as the right to education in their own language? If they
--- PAGE 25 ---
were fighting for more than one reason, what was their order of priority? The
truth, as it emerged, was that, while they were crystal clear about their position
—independence—they 
were not as clear about the deeper motivations behind
their fight for independence. Thousands had died in the struggle, but their
leaders had not systematically articulated the underlying “why.”
In my negotiation experience, I find that people usually know their
position:
 “I want a 15 percent raise in salary.” Often, however, they haven’t
thought deeply about their 
interests
—their underlying needs, desires, concerns,
fears, and aspirations: Do they want a raise because they are interested in
recognition, or in fairness, or in career development, or in the satisfaction of
some material need, or in a combination of these?
In negotiation, the magic question to uncover your true interests and needs
is: “Why?” “
Why
 do I want this?” One valuable practice is to keep asking
yourself 
why
—as many times as necessary—until you get down to your
bedrock need. The deeper you go in uncovering your underlying needs and
interests, the more likely you are to invent creative options that can satisfy your
interests. In the case of the raise, for example, if your interest is in recognition,
then even if budgetary constraints prevent your boss from giving you as high a
raise as you had hoped, you might still be able to meet your interest by
obtaining a new title or a prestigious assignment. Uncovering interests opens
up new possibilities that you might not have thought of before.
In the case of the civil war, my colleagues and I delved deeply behind the
rebels’ position of independence and into their underlying interests. Using a
flipchart, I started writing down their answers to the 
why
 question: self-rule,
control over their economic resources, preservation of their culture and
language, and so on. The next question I asked was: “What strategy will best
serve these interests?” Would it be to continue to wage war? The rebel
commanders readily acknowledged that, because the government army was
strong, the war could not be won even in ten years. Or would the best strategy
be to form a political party and run for office?
It took some years for the rebel movement to debate and eventually choose
the second political route. When they did, they negotiated a peace agreement
with the government that gave them self-rule, control over their resources, and
cultural rights. When the provincial elections were held, rebel commanders
became the governor and vice-governor. While they did not obtain
--- PAGE 26 ---
independence, they nonetheless advanced their strategic interests. That is the
power of uncovering and focusing on your true interests.
The deeper we go in probing for our own underlying needs, the more
universal those needs tend to become:
“Why do you want the raise?”
“To have more money.”
“Why do you want more money?”
“So I can get married.”
“Why do you want to get married?”
“Because it will bring me love.”
“Why do you want to be loved?”
“To be happy, of course.”
The bedrock desire then, is a universal one: to be loved and happy. This
may seem utterly obvious, but uncovering this universal desire can actually
open up a new line of internal inquiry. If you don’t get the raise at the level you
want, can you still be happy? Does your happiness depend on the raise—or
even on the marriage—or does it come from you, from inside? It is not an idle
question. To the extent that you can find a way to experience love and
happiness from the inside, you will be more likely to find love and happiness
if you get married 
or
 if you don’t, if you get the raise 
or
 if you don’t.
Among our basic psychological needs, two universal ones stand out in
particular. One is 
protection,
 or safety, which promises the absence of pain.
Another is 
connection,
 or love, which promises the presence of pleasure. How
can we protect and connect? Since life is, by nature, insecure and since love
often feels insufficient, it is not always easy for us to meet these needs fully.
But we can begin the process.
FROM SELF-JUDGMENT TO SELF-
UNDERSTANDING
--- PAGE 27 ---
As straightforward and natural as it sounds, it is often not that easy to put
yourself in your own shoes—to see yourself from the balcony, to listen to
yourself with empathy, and to uncover your underlying needs. The journey from
self-judgment to self-understanding takes hard and continual work.
To return to the earlier example I gave of my client Abilio Diniz, even once
he had uncovered his deepest need—freedom—he encountered many internal
difficulties in his way. Shortly after our conversation, Abilio gave a major and
lengthy magazine interview in which he emphasized that he was moving
beyond the battle with his former business partner in order to live his life. In
the introduction to the article, however, the interviewer noted that, in the
course of the conversation, Abilio mentioned his adversary by his full name
thirty-eight times, hardly an indication of moving ahead. The following week,
Abilio was in a board meeting of his organization and, despite his expressed
intention to keep his cool, felt provoked and repeatedly called his opponents
cowards. However much he tried, he found it hard to stay on the balcony.
When I next spoke with Abilio, who was becoming a friend in the process
of our work together, he told me: 
“The truth is that I am still furious. What can I
do? I don’t know what I really want. Sometimes it is to finish the dispute and
sometimes it is to carry on the fight. I may have no choice anyway but to
continue to fight. Maybe I should just enjoy it.”
The process of getting to yes with yourself can often be difficult just as it
was for Abilio. In the problematic situations we face at work, at home, or in
the larger world, it is common to be torn and undecided and it is easy to
continue to react. That is why the patient and courageous practice of putting
yourself in your shoes is so vital. Abilio persisted. He had long intimate talks
about his dilemma with his wife and family. He went every week to see a
therapist to uncover his darkest feelings. He talked with me. He wrestled with
his temper; and with dedication and discipline, he learned to spend more time
on the balcony. By understanding and accepting himself just as he was, he
became his own ally rather than his own worst opponent.
However challenging it was for Abilio to engage in this psychological
work of figuring out what he really wanted and then reaching an inner
agreement with himself, in the end the rewards were immensely greater: he
received his life back. Even before we approached his opponent at the
negotiation table, Abilio took concrete actions to pursue his freedom. He
--- PAGE 28 ---
became chair of the board of another major 
company, he found a new office
outside of the company headquarters, he went on a prolonged holiday with his
family, and he began to explore a new business deal. In other words, he said
yes
 to his needs. This 
yes
 to himself opened up the possibility of approaching
his adversary for a genuine negotiation, one in which neither side would lose.
And that made all the difference, as we’ll see later in the book.
As this story suggests, putting yourself in your shoes helps you become
your friend rather than your opponent when it comes to negotiating with others.
It helps you not only to understand yourself, but to accept yourself just as you
are. If self-judgment is a 
no
 to self, self-acceptance is a 
yes
 to self, perhaps the
greatest gift we can give ourselves. Some might worry that accepting
themselves as they are will diminish the motivation to make positive changes,
but I have found that the exact opposite is usually true. Acceptance can create
the sense of safety within which we can more easily face a problem and work
on it. 
As Carl Rogers, one of the founders of humanistic psychology, once
noted: “The curious paradox is that when I accept myself as I am, then I
change.”
Now that you have put yourself in your shoes and uncovered your needs,
the natural question to ask is: Where can you find the power to meet those
needs? That is the next challenge in getting to yes with yourself.
--- PAGE 29 ---
[No text extracted]

--- PAGE 30 ---
 
 
2
