THE THREE WINS
I imagine yes is the only living thing.
—
E. E. CUMMINGS
This book began with a question that is a universal human dilemma: How can
we get what we truly want while satisfying the needs and concerns of others in
our lives—family members, work colleagues, clients, and others?
The core premise of this book is that 
the better we are able to get to yes
with ourselves, the better we will be able to get to yes with others
. Perhaps
no factor has a greater impact on our relationships and negotiations than our
underlying attitude toward ourselves, toward life, and toward others. 
The most
powerful change we can make in our life is to change that inner attitude from
no
 to 
yes
.
Very little in life may be under our full control, but the choice between yes
and no is ours to make at any moment. We can choose to say yes or no to
ourselves,
 to be either our best ally or our worst opponent. We can choose to
say yes or no to 
life,
 to treat life either as friend or foe. We can choose to say
yes or no to 
others,
 to relate to them either as possible partners or implacable
adversaries. And our choices make all the difference.
Getting to yes with yourself makes possible three kinds of wins—a win
within, a win with others, and a win for the whole.
--- PAGE 108 ---
A WIN WITHIN
In the morning when I look at myself in the mirror, I like to remind myself that I
am seeing the person who is probably going to give me the most trouble that
day, the opponent who will be the biggest obstacle to me getting what I truly
want. I find it valuable to review in my mind, even if for a few minutes, the six
steps of the inner yes method in order to prepare myself for any challenges that
may arise that day. I like to ask myself 
questions for each step. This process
helps me get out of my own way—and I hope it can help you too:
1.
 
Put Yourself in
 
Your
 
Shoes.
 Can you notice the inner critic at work—
and simply observe your thoughts and feelings without judging? What
underlying needs do your feelings point to? What do you 
really
 need?
2.
 
Develop Your Inner BATNA.
 Are you blaming anyone or anything for
your needs not being met? What benefit does this blame provide you—and
what are the costs? Can you commit to take care of your deepest needs no
matter what?
3.
 
Reframe Your Picture.
 Do you feel like life is in some way against
you? How can you make your own happiness today? If life is challenging, can
you nonetheless choose to say yes to it, just the way it is?
4.
 
Stay in the Zone.
 Are you carrying any resentments about the past or
anxieties about the future? What will it take to let go and accept life as it is
today? What is one small step you can take to stay in the zone, where you are at
your best?
5.
 
Respect Them Even If.
 Are you feeling any antagonism toward
anyone? What is it like to be in their shoes? 
Even if they are not showing you
respect, can you still respect 
them
?
6.
 
Give and Receive.
 Do you feel a fear of scarcity in any situation you
are currently facing? What will it take for you to change the game from taking
--- PAGE 109 ---
to giving, from win-lose to win-win-win?
Each step addresses a particular obstacle that gets in the way of us getting
what we most want in life. Each step makes the next step easier to take. Even if
they may sound simple, none of these steps is easy, particularly in the daily
conflicts we all face. Indeed, the work of arriving at an inner yes is some of the
hardest work anyone can do, all the more so because it is invisible.
As valuable as the method can be, it will be of little use without continual
practice. Understanding the six steps can help you a lot, but in the end, no one
can do the work but you. As with any sport, while you may never be perfect at
it, you will gradually get better and better. I like to think of each step as being
like a muscle; the more I exercise it, the stronger it gets. As powerful as each
muscle is alone, exercising all six together is what allows you to move toward
your desired destination.
How you actually go through the process of getting to 
yes with yourself is
particular to you. You will have your favorite ways to go to the balcony, for
example. Some like to go for a solitary walk in the park, others to go out for a
coffee with a good friend who can listen. I encourage you to adapt this method
to your own needs. Make it your own so that it works best for you.
I have found that this journey from 
no
 to 
yes
 with myself is not a single trip,
but ultimately a lifelong journey. I have been on this journey for a long time and
expect to be on it for as long as I live. There is always more for me to learn.
One truth keeps getting clearer for me: there is no bigger yes than the yes
inside, no bigger win than the win within. An inner yes brings a growing sense
of calm and contentment and a deepening feeling of satisfaction and
sufficiency. If that were the only win, it would be enough, but there is more.
A WIN WITH OTHERS
The next win is a win with others—our colleagues and customers, our spouses
and children, and even our negotiating opponents. Once we have gotten to yes
--- PAGE 110 ---
with ourselves, it is considerably easier to get to yes with others, as difficult
as that sometimes can be. As we have seen, each of the six 
steps provides us
with a missing prerequisite for success in negotiation. Putting yourself in 
your
shoes helps you put yourself in the other person’s shoes. Developing your inner
BATNA helps you develop your outer BATNA. Reframing your picture of life
helps you reframe your relationship with others—and so on. The key work in
negotiation starts from within.
It is all too tempting to react in the middle of a difficult conversation or
tough negotiation. If you have the luxury of preparing before a problematic
conversation or negotiation, you can run through the six steps in advance to
bring your best ally instead of your worst opponent to the conversation or
negotiation table. If you are on the fly, you will still be able to rely on the inner
yes method if you have steadily practiced it over time. Even in the midst of
conflict, you can stay on the balcony, calm and collected.
I have found, moreover, that the process of getting to yes with yourself not
only makes it easier to 
resolve
 conflicts, but also actually helps 
prevent
conflicts from arising in the first place. By not reacting, by staying calm and
grounded, you will avoid being provoked and will be less likely to take attacks
personally. You are far less likely to say or do things that you will later come
to regret. With an attitude of sincere respect and a genuine willingness to help
address the needs of others, you will be able to resolve matters long 
before
they escalate into serious disputes. You will get along naturally with others
with a minimum of conflict.
A WIN FOR THE WHOLE
Three decades ago, when I had the privilege of working with Roger Fisher on
writing 
Getting to Yes,
 our goal was to help people shift from adversarial
approaches to cooperative methods for dealing with differences at work, at
home, and in the community. But our dream was bigger than that. It was to help
the world take a step toward peace. We were concerned about humanity itself,
--- PAGE 111 ---
whose fate in an age of mass destruction ultimately rests on our abilities to
resolve disputes in a cooperative fashion.
Although our world today is filled with scarcity, inequity, and violent
strife, the truth is that, thanks to the technology revolution, there is enough to
meet everyone’s needs. We know how to end hunger, how to prevent war, and
how to use clean energy to save the environment. The central obstacle in the
way is us. It is our difficulty in coming together to cooperate. In order to build
a better, safer, and healthier world for ourselves and for our children, we must
be able to deal with our differences constructively and creatively. Getting to
yes may be highly challenging, 
of course, but, having worked on some of the
world’s most difficult conflicts, I am convinced that it is fully possible. And
the first radical step in the process is for us to get to yes with ourselves.
Getting to yes with ourselves brings a larger and more generous
perspective that benefits everyone around us and makes possible not only a
win with others, but a third win for the larger whole. The work on ourselves
inspires us to imagine and to work toward a world in which every single
human being matters.
Perhaps no one has illustrated this possibility better in recent times than
Nelson Mandela. In prison for twenty-seven years, Mandela went to the
balcony and began to observe and listen to himself: 
“Learn to know yourself
. . . to search realistically and regularly the processes of your own mind and
feelings” was the lesson he drew.
Mandela avoided falling into the blame game and took full responsibility
for his life, his needs, and his relationships with his enemies. He boldly
reframed the picture, choosing to see life on his side, despite all evidence to
the contrary. He let go of old resentments and grievances, forgiving his
enemies.
When Mandela emerged from prison, he brought with him an extraordinary
spirit of respect and inclusion, welcoming 
people of all races in the new South
Africa he envisioned. Drawing on his own inner satisfaction, he gave
unstintingly of himself to others. The result was that he was able to lead his
nation to a win-win-win agreement aimed to benefit all by ending the evil of
apartheid and ushering in a new democratic era for South Africa.
Fortunately, most of us will not face the magnitude of the challenges that
Mandela faced, but we can nonetheless take inspiration from him and make use
--- PAGE 112 ---
of the same basic principles in our daily lives. Choosing to say yes to
ourselves, to life, and to others, we can change the fundamental game we play
from win-lose to win-win-win. And therein lies hope for us, for our families,
for our workplaces, and for humanity.
I have devoted much of my professional life to trying to prevent and stop
wars. Peace is my passion. If someone had told me thirty-five years ago that
the key to peace was inner peace, I would have thought them utopian and
unrealistic. I preferred instead to work on something more practical—which
was to focus on strategies for negotiation. Now I have come to realize that I
was the one who was perhaps unrealistic in believing that we could arrive at a
sustained peace in this world without also doing the necessary work within
ourselves.
WINNING THE GAME OF LIFE
My great hope is that getting to yes with yourself will not only improve your
ability to negotiate effectively with others, but more broadly will help you
create the inner satisfaction that will, in turn, make your life better and your
relationships healthier. I hope that changing your inner attitude from 
no
 to 
yes
will help you win the most important game of all, the game of life.
No matter how great the challenge can be at times, the potential rewards
are far greater: peace of mind and heart that can help you bring peace in the
family, peace in the workplace, and peace in the larger world.
I wish you much success . . . and much peace!
--- PAGE 113 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This book began with a single reader—myself—as I started to jot down notes
seven years ago to help learn how to get to yes with myself more effectively. It
was a deeply personal project as, faced with challenges in my life and in the
lives of those around me, I felt compelled to look more deeply inside myself.
As a fan of frameworks, I began to develop a simple framework to help myself
remember. Only later on, when I showed my evolving notes to family and
friends did I think it might be of use to others as well.
With encouragement from friends, the process became much easier. I would
like to offer warm thanks to Curt Manfred Mueller, who believed in this book
long before it was written, to David Friedman and Robert Gass, who 
gave me
early insightful feedback and enthusiastic support on many walks, to David
Baum, Francisco Diez, Patrick Finerty, Mark Gerzon, Margo King, David Lax,
Jamil Mahuad, Ronald Mueller, Simon Sinek, Gary Slutkin, and John Steiner,
whose encouraging comments helped me persevere, and to Donna Zerner, who
offered extensive editing advice on an early draft.
Finding the right stories to convey the message is never easy. For their
instructive and inspiring stories, I would like to thank Robert Chapman, Judith
Ansara Gass, Adam Grant, Scott Harrison, Azim Khamisa, Jamil Mahuad,
Paola Mahuad, Jill Bolte Taylor, Gabi Ury, Lizanne Ury, Dennis Williams, and
Jerry White. I am especially indebted to Abilio Diniz for his friendship and
generosity in allowing me to use the example of his successful conflict
resolution in this book.
I could not have been more fortunate in finding an agent who understood
and supported my project in every way. Jim Levine guided the evolution of the
manuscript, found a good publishing home for it, and gave valuable counsel
throughout the process. He has been a true friend and I am extremely grateful to
him as well as to his colleagues and family.
Then there was the talented team at HarperOne. My editor, Genoveva
Llosa, has been a sheer pleasure to work with 
as she thoughtfully reviewed the
--- PAGE 114 ---
manuscript and offered many savvy editing suggestions to tighten the logic and
the language. To her and all her capable colleagues, including Mark Tauber,
Claudia Boutote, Kim Dayman, Melinda Mullin, Gideon Weil, Miles Doyle,
Michele Wetherbee, Dwight Been, Terri Leonard, Natalie Blachere, Laurie
McGee, Carol Kleinhubert, and Hannah Rivera, I offer my immense thanks.
Writing became easier because of the able assistance in running my office
and protecting my time. I benefited greatly from the dedicated and highly
skilled support of Cathy Chen-Ortega and her predecessors Essrea Cherin and
Myka McLaughlin, to whom I am very grateful indeed. For a writing refuge in
nature, I would like to express my special thanks to the fine people of Aspen
Winds—Dot, Phil, Sharon, and Ryan.
As the book evolved, the challenge loomed of how to build a solid bridge
between the interior world of self that I was exploring and the exterior world
of negotiation. In this process of bridge building, I was fortunate to be able to
try out the draft manuscript on a variety of readers who were kind enough to
give me their thoughtful feedback. I would like to thank Goldie Alfasi, David
Baum, Barry Berkman, Shelby Boyer, Todd Brantley, Helena Brantley, Sara
Davidson, Francisco Diez, Renée DuPree, Lindsay Edgecombe, 
Patrick
Finerty, Norman Galinsky, Mark Gerzon, Bill Gladstone, Daniel Greenberg,
Margo King, Joan Levine, Joshua Levine, Jamil Mahuad, Kiana Moradi,
Leopoldo Orozco, Shana Parker, Julissa Reynoso, Stephanie Rostan, Raphael
Sagalyn, Monica Sharma, John Siffert, David Sikes, Lindsey Moses Sikes,
Roberta Sotomaior, Kerry Sparks, John Steiner, Danielle Svetcov, Elizabeth
Ury, Monika Verma, Lauren Wasserman, Joshua Weiss, John Wilcockson, and
Tim Wojcik.
This book, in the end, is the fruit of what I have learned from my
experience and my teachers. It is to my teachers that I would like to dedicate
this book. When I was in my teens, the writings of Friedrich Nietzsche, Ralph
Waldo Emerson, and Henry David Thoreau deeply inspired me with their
philosophy of saying yes to life, come what may. I learned from my close study
of the words and life of Mohandas K. Gandhi how essential inner work is to
outer action. In my twenties, Roger Fisher enthusiastically introduced me to the
field of negotiation, generously taught me about mediation, teaching, and
writing, and inspired me to make this my life’s work. I am forever indebted to
him as well as to my aunt Aline Gray and my friend Frank Fisher for
--- PAGE 115 ---
introducing me to Roger.
Ever since high school I have been a passionate reader of philosophy and
wisdom from Plato to Lao-Tzu to Ramana 
Maharshi, but in recent years I have
had the benefit of experiencing such wisdom firsthand from my friend Prem
Baba. For his clear, insightful, and compassionate lessons, I am profoundly
grateful.
My biggest debt is to my wife, Lizanne, whose love and support sustained
me throughout. She listened with deep care and encouragement to each of many
drafts. From Lizanne, I have learned priceless lessons about gratitude,
presence, and all matters of the heart. She and our children—Chris, Thomas,
and Gabi—are my greatest blessings.
--- PAGE 116 ---
NOTES
Introduction
“If you could kick . . .”
 This quote comes from the online source BrainyQuote.com. See
http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/t/theodorero120663.html.
Chapter One: Put Yourself in 
Your
 Shoes
The 
Financial Times
 called the dispute
 “Brazil’s Billionaire Baker Who Came of Age in Captivity,”
Financial Times,
 July 1, 2011.
a mother’s account of witnessing
 The author is Charlotte Z. Rotterdam in 
Fearless Nest: Our
Children as Our Greatest Teachers
. Edited by Shana Stanberry Parker (http://www.lulu.com, 2010), 93.
For more information, see http://www.fearlessnest.com.
“To observe without evaluating . . .”
 I heard this quote by Jiddu Krishnamurti from my friend Marshall
Rosenberg. I also found it at The European Graduate School, http://www.egs.edu/library/jiddu-
krishnamurti/biography/.
Psychologists have estimated
 “Stop Fighting Your Negative Thoughts,” 
Psychology Today,
 May 7,
2013, http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/shyness-is-nice/201305/stop-fighting-your-negative-thoughts.
Also, from the University of Southern California’s Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, see
http://www.loni.usc.edu/about_loni/education/brain_trivia.php.
“If you talked to your friends . . .”
 This saying I heard from David Baum. Variants can be found at
http://behappy.me/OneToughMotherRunner/if-you-talked-to-your-friends-the-way-you-talk-to-your-body-
youd-have-no-friends-left-21380 and at http://www.experienceproject.com/question-answer/If-Someone-
In-Your-Life-Talked-To-You-The-Way-You-Talk-To-Your-Self-Sometimes-How-Long-Would-They-Be-
There/452083.
“Sadness . . . was not well received . . .”
 Joanna Barsh, 
Centered Leadership: Leading with
Purpose, Clarity, and Impact
 (New York: Crown Business, 2014), 236–37.
“In the old story . . .”
 This story of the Holy Grail has many variants. I owe this one to Elias Amidon.
As Carl Rogers . . . once noted
 Carl Rogers, 
On Becoming a Person: A Therapist’s View of
Psychotherapy
 (New York: Mariner Books, 1995), 17.
Chapter Two: Develop Your Inner BATNA
the Tylenol crisis in 1982
 A more detailed version of the Tylenol story can be found in an article by N.
R. Kleinfield, “Tylenol’s Rapid Comeback,” 
New York Times,
 September 17, 1983.
“I didn’t like that image . . .”
 Jerry White, 
I Will Not Be Broken: 5 Steps to Overcoming a Life
--- PAGE 117 ---
Crisis
 (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2008), 58.
In his insightful book
 David Schnarch, 
The Passionate Marriage: Keeping Love and Intimacy Alive
in Committed Relationships
 (New York: Henry Holt, 1997), 124. The original pseudonyms used by
Schnarch are Bill and Joan.
“I’m no longer willing . . .”
 Schnarch, 
Passionate Marriage
, 124.
Chapter Three: Reframe Your Picture
“This,” Einstein declared
 Robert D. Dilts, 
Strategies of Genius: Volume II
 (California: Meta
Publications, 1994), 20–21.
“A human being,” Einstein once wrote
 Walter Sullivan, “The Einstein Papers: The Man of Many
Parts,” 
New York Times,
 March 29, 1972. This article also can be found reprinted here:
http://news.google.com/newspapers?
nid=1964&dat=19720329&id=sYMyAAAAIBAJ&sjid=x7cFAAAAIBAJ&pg=6595,5077091.
“Our left brain . . .”
 “Does Our Planet Need a Stroke of Insight?” January 3, 2013,
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/dr-jill-bolte-taylor/neuroscience_b_2404554.html. For a more in-depth
discussion, see Jill Bolte Taylor, 
My Stroke of Insight: A Brain Scientist’s Personal Journey
 (New
York: Plume, 2009).
“How then can we reframe . . .”
 I would like to acknowledge my debt to Stephen Covey and Lynne
Twist for their thinking about the shift from the scarcity mindset to the abundance or sufficiency mindset.
For an in-depth exploration, see Stephen Covey, 
The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People: Powerful
Lessons in Personal Change
 (New York: Free Press, 1989) and Lynne Twist, 
The Soul of Money:
Transforming Your Relationship with Money and Life
 (New York: W. W. Norton, 2003).
“The lesson . . . ,” Gilbert says
 Daniel Gilbert’s TED talk, “The Surprising Science of Happiness,”
https://www.ted.com/talks/dan_gilbert_asks_why_are_we_happy. For more analysis, see Daniel Gilbert,
Stumbling on Happiness
 (New York: Knopf, 2006).
“From the time I was young, . . .”
 This is from an interview conducted by Petria Chaves and Fabiola
Cidral on the radio show “Caminhos Alternativos,” December 1, 2013.
“We’ve discovered scientific proof . . .”
 “Pay It Forward,” last modified June 1, 2007, Dr. Robert
Emmons’s article on gratitude, http://greatergood.berkeley.edu/article/item/pay_it_forward. For more in-
depth discussion, see Robert Emmons, 
Thanks!: How Practicing Gratitude Can Make You Happier
(New York: Mariner Books, 2008).
By absolute safety, Wittgenstein meant
 Ludwig von Wittgenstein, “A Lecture on Ethics,” 1929,
reprinted on http://www.geocities.jp/mickindex/wittgenstein/witt_lec_et_en.html.
Dr. Viktor Frankl tells the story
 Viktor E. Frankl, 
Man’s Search for Meaning
 (Boston: Beacon Press,
2006), Kindle edition.
Chapter Four: Stay in the Zone
Research psychologist Mihaly
 Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, 
Flow: The Psychology of Optimal
Experienc
e (New York: Harper Perennial Modern Classics, 2008).
--- PAGE 118 ---
“It’s a very strange feeling. . . .”
 This quote from Mark Richardson comes from Jeff Grout and Sarah
Perrin, 
Mind Games: Inspirational Lessons from the World’s Finest Sport Stars
 (New York:
Capstone/Wiley, 2006).
“Tell me the truth . . .”
 “Mandela Beat Apartheid ‘Demon’: Clinton,” July 18, 2013,
http://www.news24.com/SouthAfrica/News/Mandela-beat-apartheid-demon-Clinton-20130718.
“We cannot live . . .”
 “Christo Brand & Vusumzi Mcongo (South Africa),” March 29, 2010,
http://theforgivenessproject.com/stories/christo-brand-vusumzi-mcongo-south-africa/.
“If you live, you will make mistakes . . .”
 “Laugh and Dare to Love,” originally published in 1995,
interview with Maya Angelou, http://www.context.org/iclib/ic43/angelou/.
“My life has been full . . .”
 I found this quote at BrainyQuote.com. See
http://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/m/micheldemo108601.html.
My friend Judith
 Rotterdam, 
Fearless Nest,
 102–3. For more information about Judith, see Judith’s
website http://www.sacredunion.com.
Chapter Five: Respect Them Even If
The atmosphere was tense.
 This example comes from a personal conversation with Dennis Williams,
June 2014.
While I was writing this book
 These interviews were done under the auspices of the Harvard-NUPI-
Trinity Syria Research Project and compiled into a report entitled “Obstacles to a Resolution of the Syrian
Conflict,” by David Lesch with Frida Nome, George Saghir, William Ury, and Matthew Waldman,
September 2013.
“If we could read the secret . . .”
 This quote comes from Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, 
The Prose
Works of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow: Outre Mer and Driftwood
 (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1886).
“The increased compassion . . .”
 David DeSteno, “Gray Matter: The Morality of Meditation,” 
New
York Times Sunday Review,
 July 5, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/07/opinion/sunday/the-
morality-of-meditation.html?hp.
Larry married a Mexican American woman
 “A Teacher, a Student, and a 39-Year-Long Lesson in
Forgiveness,” by Tom Hallman Jr., at
http://www.oregonlive.com/living/index.ssf/2012/04/a_teacher_a_student_and_a_39-y.html.
Lincoln paused and addressed
 Clifton Fadiman (gen. ed.), 
The Little Brown Book of Anecdotes
(Boston: Little Brown, 1985), 360.
“When I got the phone call . . .”
 “Azim Khamisa & Ples Felix (USA),” March 29, 2010,
http://theforgivenessproject.com/stories/azim-khamisa-ples-felix-usa/.
Since that opening journey
 “Ten of the Best New Trails: Discover the Best New Hikes from Wales &
New Zealand to the Balkans and the Middle East” by Ben Lerwill, 
National Geographic Traveller (UK
Edition)
, April 2014, 72–73.
Chapter Six: Give and Receive
The research suggests that giving
 Adam Grant, 
Give and Take: A Revolutionary Approach to
--- PAGE 119 ---
Success
 (New York: Viking, 2013), 7.
Everyone wanted to be partners
 “Thoughts of Li Ka-Shing,” December 29, 2006,
http://www.forbes.com/2006/12/29/li-ka-shing-biz-cx_tf_vk_1229qanda.html.
In a comprehensive analysis
 Carsten K. W. De Dreu, Laurie R. Weingart, and Seungwoo Kwon,
“Influence of Social Motives on Integrative Negotiation: A Meta-Analytic Review and Test of Two
Theories,” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
 78 (2000): 889–905. Cited in Grant, 
Give and
Take,
 213.
“I could just feel . . .”
 Grant, 
Give and Take,
 250–54.
“My default is to give”
 Grant, 
Give and Take
, 22.
“I really saw . . .”
 Scott Harrison’s story, http://www.charitywater.org/about/scotts_story.php.
“Originally I thought . . .”
 Gabi Ury’s website, http://www.gabiury.com.
The news went around the world
 The source for this piece of information is Steve Priola, who made
the video.
The humanistic psychologist
 Abraham H. Maslow, 
The Farther Reaches of Human Nature
 (New
York: Penguin, 1993).
Conclusion
“Learn to know yourself . . .”
 Anthony Sampson, 
Mandela: The Authorized Biography
 (New York:
Vintage Books, 2012), Kindle edition, chapter 17.
--- PAGE 120 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
WILLIAM URY
, cofounder of the Harvard Negotiation Project, is one of the
world’s best-known experts on negotiation. He is the coauthor of 
Getting to
Yes,
 an international bestseller with over thirteen million copies in print, and
author of seven other books including 
Getting Past No
 and 
The Power of a
Positive No
.
For the past thirty-five years, Ury has served as a negotiation adviser and
mediator in conflicts ranging from boardroom battles to coal mine strikes to
wars in the Middle East, Latin America, and the Caucasus. He has taught
negotiation and mediation to tens of thousands of leaders in business,
government, and civil society around the world.
Ury is founder of the Abraham Path Initiative, which 
seeks to inspire
understanding, prosperity, and hope by opening a long-distance walking trail
across the Middle East retracing the journey of Abraham and his family.
Trained as a social anthropologist, with a B.A. from Yale and a Ph.D. from
Harvard, he lives with his family in Colorado.
For further information, please visit www.williamury.com or send an e-
mail to info@williamury.com.
Discover great authors, exclusive offers, and more at 
hc.com
.
--- PAGE 121 ---
ALSO BY WILLIAM URY
Getting to Yes
Beyond the Hotline
Getting Disputes Resolved
Windows of Opportunity
Getting Past No
Getting to Peace
 (published in paperback as 
The Third Side)
Must We Fight?
The Power of a Positive No
--- PAGE 122 ---
COPYRIGHT
GETTING TO YES WITH YOURSELF
 (and Other Worthy Opponents). Copyright © 2015 by William Ury. All
rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required
fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-
book on-screen. 
No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse-
engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by
any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereafter invented, without the express
written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
HarperCollins website: 
http://www.harpercollins.com
HarperCollins
®
, 
®
, and HarperOne
™
 are trademarks of HarperCollins Publishers.
FIRST EDITION
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ury, William.
Getting to yes with yourself : (and other worthy opponents) / William Ury.
—First edition.
pages cm
ISBN 978–0–06–236338–1
EPub Edition November 2014 ISBN 978–0–06–236339–8
1. Negotiation. 2. Attitude (Psychology) 3. Interpersonal conflict. I. Title.
BF637.N4U793 2015
158.1—dc23
2014028189
15
16
17
18
19
RRD
(
H
)
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
--- PAGE 123 ---
ABOUT THE PUBLISHER
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty. Ltd.
Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street
Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia
www.harpercollins.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Canada
2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor
Toronto, ON M4W 1A8, Canada
www.harpercollins.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollins Publishers New Zealand
Unit D1, 63 Apollo Drive
Rosedale 0632
Auckland, New Zealand
www.harpercollins.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London W6 8JB, UK
www.harpercollins.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
195 Broadway
New York, NY 10007
www.harpercollins.com
