--- PAGE 1 ---

--- PAGE 2 ---
F i n i s h  W h a t  Y o u  S t a r t :  
 T h e  A r t  o f  F o l l o w i n g  T h r o u g h ,  T a k i n g  A c t i o n ,
E x e c u t i n g ,  &  S e l f - D i s c i p l i n e
 
 
By Peter Hollins,
Author and Researcher at petehollins.com
 
 
C l i c k  f o r  y o u r  F R E E  H u m a n  N a t u r e  C h e a t  S h e e t :  7
S u r p r i s i n g  P s y c h o l o g y  S t u d i e s  T h a t  W i l l  C h a n g e  T h e
W a y  Y o u  T h i n k .
--- PAGE 3 ---
T able of Contents
 
Finish What Y ou Start: The Art of Following Thr ough, T aking Action,
Executing, & Self-Discipline
T able of Contents
Intr oduction
Chapter 1. Stop Thinking, Just Execute
Chapter 2: Staying Hungry
Chapter 3: Cr eate a Manifesto
Chapter 4: Follow-Thr ough Mindsets
Chapter 5: The Science of Smashing Pr ocrastination
Chapter 6. No Distraction Zone
Chapter 7: Deadly Pitfalls
Chapter 8. Daily Systems for Success
 
Summary Guide
--- PAGE 4 ---
Intr oduction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What ex actly is finishing what you start and following through? Y ou have
may heard these phrases before, but what do they mean?
 
T o me, they mean making your intentions reality . T oo often, we’ll say we’ll
do something, and we might even start it one lucky weekend. But at the first
sign of hardship , fatigue, boredom, or busyness, we abandon it all too easily
and it sits in our  garage (mental, figurative, or literal) for the res t of eternity .
 
Finishing what you start and f ollowing through is breaking through that
common loop and taking hold of your life.
 
My personal experience with fin ishing what I start has been checkered. One
summer , I promised myself tha t I would carve a wooden canoe, about 12
inches lo ng and  3 inches wide. Not too big, but a suf ficient challenge for
someone with no woodworkin g experience. The first week, I made a
considerable den t in my wood block. The second week, my hands were sore
and the new Star W ars  m ovie was out . The third we ek, I was too busy
seeing Star W ars  again and procrastinating. My wooden canoe wasn’ t
meant to be.
 
But every time I walked through my garage to my car , the canoe was a
damning reminder of my laziness and inability to follow through. It wore on
me until I committed myself to finishing it a couple of summer s later . Y ou
--- PAGE 5 ---
can probably guess what happened. The first week went great, the second
week was moderate, and the third week I was already running on fumes.
 
I was fortunate to learn about temptation bundling some time shortly
thereafter , which  provided the b oost for me to finish my canoe. Briefly , as
temptation bundling will be a major theme later in the book, temptation
bundling is when you combine a n obligatory (and undesirable) task with an
instantaneous reward. When you can bribe yourself into working hard,
suddenly finishing what you start isn’ t a massive exercise in willpower—
it’ s the pursuit of something pleasurable, if only by association.
 
The rew ard I bundled the canoe carving with was listening to my favorite
albums—something we rarely have time for these days. When’ s the last
time you listened to your favo rite album from beginning to end without
interruption?
 
Suddenly , a new world was ope ned to me; if I could make any unpleasant
task just  pleasan t enough by pa iring it with something I enjoy ed, I could
plow my  way through just about anything. It was a small rea lization like
this that  led me to study the science of following through and executing,
despite the human brain’ s instinctual resistance to doing so. How can we
circumvent our worst instincts a nd get things done when we want, without
the specter of a deadline over our heads? How can we pay attention to our
attention and do that what is most dif ficult—live with supreme discomfort?
 
I’d l ike to think I’ve come up with great systems for myself that can be
widely applied for just about any context. There are many tactics in this
book—I don’ t use all of them all of the time, but most of them will work for
most people. As usual, I wrote t his book for myself and am glad and proud
to b e able to share my findings. I hope they are helpful an d help you
accomplish exactly what you want. At least, I hope they force y ou to listen
to your favorite albums from time to time—a win in itself!
 
 
 
 
--- PAGE 6 ---
Chapter 1. Stop Thinking, Just Execute
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Esther h as thoug ht about it a million times. Stuck in a dead-end desk job for
the last six years, she has fan tasized about not having to deal with the
monotony of paperwork, not ha ving to report to a demanding boss, and not
having to leave her two-year -old son at the daycare center every day .
 
And exa ctly how  were such fant asies supposed to be realized w hen she had
to ea rn a living to make ends meet for her family? She had the answer: she
figured she’d start her own baking business right at home.
 
It w as a ll just a fantasy , a thoug ht she’d conjure to get her through dif ficult
days at work. But one day , som ething felt dif ferent. For some reason, she
finally decided— she’ s going for it. After all, baking was h er one true
passion. For years, she’d been baking cakes and cookies for her friends,
who all said sh e should think of turning it into a business, so maybe it
wasn’ t such a bad idea, right?
 
So began Esther ’ s quest to open  her baking business. She didn’ t  quit her job
just yet but filed  for a two-week vacation leave to start testing the waters.
First , she thought, r esear ch . S he figured tha t she needed to get this business
thing all figured out in her head first, before she took any further step
forward. The more prepared and planned she was, the better . She intended
to research everything there is to know about starting such a venture, from
recipes to finance management.  She also planned to survey her friends and
--- PAGE 7 ---
the entire neighborhood to get a feel of the market needs. It was all starting
to take shape in her head.
 
Unfortunately , whatever took sh ape in Esther ’ s head stayed there and never
found its way out.
 
The thought of having to learn  everything about how to start and run a
baking b usiness from scratch overwhelmed Esther so much that she was
paralyzed from taking any actio n in that direction. T axes, busi ness filings,
leases? All she wanted to do was bake!
 
When h er vacat ion days started, she always found things to do other than
what she had ini tially planned. She spent her days sleeping in, doting on her
son, busying herself with “home projects,” and catching up with  her friends
and neig hbors—and not even to ask them for marketing input. She was too
worried that if s he started telling people about wanting to start a business
they mig ht think  she was too ambitious for her level of talent, expect her to
fail, or , worse, expect her to succeed. She couldn’ t deal with the idea of
expectations hanging over her head.
 
T wo weeks thus came and went, and all Esther managed to do was put the
“vacation” in vacation leave. As she headed back to work, the thought of
running her own baking busines s kept on replaying in her head, still more a
fantasy than a plan. She had a feeling she’d continue to think about it,
several million times more.
 
What Is Following Thr ough?
 
What do  you suppose went wrong in Esther ’ s situation? Did she lack focus?
Self-discipline? Action? Persistence?
 
If yo u say she lacked all of the above, you’re pointing to actually just one
concept: following through.
 
Following through is related to focus, self-discipline, action, and
persistence, but it is not synonymous to any of them. Rather , it is a
--- PAGE 8 ---
composite of all of them—a bit like how those big Japanese a nime robots
come to  be formed by the fusio n of smaller individual robot p arts. Power
Rangers , or V oltr on , to be s pecific. And much like how each smaller robot
forms a dif feren t body part in the big robot, so too does each of these four
elements—focus, self-discipline, action, and persistence—correspond to a
body pa rt that, when pieced with the others, forms the whole o f following
through.
 
The head: focus.  Followi ng through involves having focus. It’ s akin to the
head bec ause it is focus that keeps your head in the game and y our eyes on
the p rize. Focus guides your thoughts in figuring out how to fol low through
and directs your actions toward achieving your vision. See, following
through is not just about exerting ef fort; it’ s about exerting ef fort that’ s
concentrated on a single goal. W ith focus, no ef fort is wasted. What’ s
followed is a sin gle line of sight, so what’ s pursued is the single  most direct
way toward a goal.
 
Going b ack to Esther ’ s situatio n, had she been focused on her dream of
starting a business, she would’ve structured her free time better , scheduling
activities in view of realizing that dream.
 
The spine: self-discipline.  The spine of following through, self-discipline,
is what enables you to get you r head down and work when you need to,
even if you don’ t want to. It’ s the ability to control yourself so that you
retain focus on what needs to be done, despite the temp tations and
distractions you  may encounter . This element is essential to  following
through because  it’ s what gives you the power to regulate  your own
thoughts, feelin gs, and actions toward ends that are meaningful to you.
W ithout self-discipline, you wou ldn’ t be able to consistently exert ef fort on
something until it’ s done, which is what following through is all about.
 
As t he head is continuous with the spine, so is focus continuous with self-
discipline. If you are focused on what you need to do, self-dis cipline will
naturally follow . Likewise, if you are self-disciplined, it will be easier for
you to focus o n what needs to be done and avoid distrac tions. Self-
discipline, like the spine, keeps you upright so you don’ t slump into a mess.
--- PAGE 9 ---
 
If Esther  had enough self-discipline, she would’ve been able to  resist using
all h er free time  just for leisure. There’ s nothing wrong with cat ching up on
some sle ep or spending time wi th your loved ones, but if all yo ur days are
spent doing just those and none of productive work, then balance is lost.
Leisure is an important part of life, but if it’ s excessive and tak es the place
of reasonable productivity , then it becomes a vice.
 
The hands and feet: action.  Action, the hands and feet of following
through, means  prioritizing execution and simple motion. This is what
makes following  through more than just having focus and self-discipline.
Following through is an intention that’ s been translated into action. It is
action th at will move things in the real world and take you from  Point A to
Point B—that is, from where yo u are now to where the fulfillment of your
goals lies. It is  the visible as pect of following through, the one that’ s
actually observe d, measured, and evaluated against your goals. Action is
thus crucial to th e execution of y our plans and the realization of your goals,
for without it, plans remain abstract and goals remain dreams.
 
Had Est her acted on even jus t the first part of her plan, re search, she
would’ve at least inched her way toward realizing the dream business she
had in mind.
 
The heart: persistence.  Finally , at the heart of following through is
persistence. Per sistence is firmly sticking to something for a prolonged
period of time, e ven as you enco unter things that try to unstick  you . It’ s the
tenacity to adhere to a course of action even in the face of obstacles. It is
not enough to j ust start; you need stick with it until it’ s done . Following
through is about having enough  heart to keep pushing even in the face of
obstacles, distra ctions, and setbacks. Many of the goals worth a iming for in
life call for not just a sprint but a marathon. If your heart is not fit enough to
run the length of it, then you will find yourself stopping halfway through
and giving up before you reach the finish line.
 
Did Esth er have  the persistence to see her dream through? It seems this
question isn’ t even available to  ask in Esther ’ s case, as the question of
--- PAGE 10 ---
persistence can only arise if on e has in fact taken enough action to get to
encounter several roadblocks ov er an extended period of time. Since Esther
stopped before she even began, the question of persistence wa sn’ t even in
the equation for her .
 
So t here you hav e it—the individual parts focus, self-discipline,  action, and
persistence all combine to be the super -robot called following through and
finishing what you start. It’ s gratifying and fulfilling to be able to pull
together focus, self-discipline, action, and persistence within ourselves and
get to watch our dreams be turned into reality as a result of it.
 
But if following  through is so awesome, why don’ t we all just do it all the
time? Th e short  answer is beca use it’ s hard. The long answer (which also
explains why it’ s hard) is detailed below .
 
Why Don’t W e Follow Thr ough?
 
When it comes to thinking up what we want to do, what we need to do, or
what other people need to do, we’re usually experts. Our ideas r un wild, the
blueprints in our heads get magically written out with not much ef fort, and
the men tal pictu re of us living our dreams comes into sharp focus faster
than we can say “cheese!”
 
But when it comes to actually getting of f our butts and following through
with action, we’re usually not on ly amateurs but also unwilling p articipants.
When it  comes down to it, we often couldn’ t find the focus, sel f-discipline,
action, and persistence needed to get the job done.
 
Sometimes we go into the battle without our heads or our spines; other
times we lack our hands and feet or our hearts. W e think we could just call
on these parts to get together when we need them to, but we arrive at the
battleground only to discover that it’ s never as easy as we thoug ht it would
be.
 
The excitement and enthusiasm with which we thought out all our dreams
and plans fizzle out as soon as we realize the amount of hard wo rk we need
--- PAGE 11 ---
to put in to turn those dreams in to reality , to bring those plans into life. W e
don’ t follow through, and it’ s not for lack of ability or intelligence, no.
 
W e don’ t follow through for two main reasons: we have an entire selection
of (1) inhibiting tactics  and/or (2) psychological r oadblocks  that hinder us
from finishing what we start. W e’ll cover each of those in turn below .
 
Inhibiting T actics
 
Inhibiting tactics  refer to our schemes for misusing time and ef fort, with the
end resu lt of our being held bac k from following through. These are ways
we sabotage ourselves, sometimes consciously . These tactics, which include
(1) s etting bad g oals, (2) procrastination, (3) indulging in temptations and
distractions, and (4) poor time m anagement, inhibit us from maximizing the
time and ener gy we have toward productive ends.
 
Setting bad goals.  One way we handicap ourselves from following through
is by  setting ba d goals, such a s those that are too abstract or downright
impossible. Setting bad goals is like buying the wrong map for a road trip; it
prevents us from following thro ugh because the directions are skewed and
confusing. It eventually causes us to lose patience and will to ke ep on in our
journey , which we often end up abandoning halfway through.
 
When our goals are too abstract, we find ourselves lost as to what needs to
be done in order to reach them. For example, if we say our goal is to be
healthier and yet don’ t even specify what we mean by “healthier ,” we’re
less like ly to take steps towa rd accomplishing it. W e want to follow
through, but we don’ t know how .
 
When our goals are too high or unrealistic for any mortal to reach, we find
ourselves looking up at an impossibly high ladder without rungs. The
beauty of this is that no one would be able to accuse us of not trying hard
enough to climb, because ther e are no rungs in the first place. W e are
absolved from the guilt of not f ollowing through. T ake for instance a plant
manager aiming to double manufacturing output despite real logistical
limitations.
--- PAGE 12 ---
 
Since th e goal is impossible to a chieve anyway , whether he follows through
or not wouldn’ t make a dif ference—and so he’ s saved from both the trouble
of having to follow through and the guilt from not doing so.
 
Procrastination . This is one of the most widely used tactics in the book. W e
are som ehow exceptionally talented at delaying work until we absolutely
need to do it, until the very last minute. In fact, we're so talented  at delaying
work that we could convince oth ers (and even ourselves) that w e’re already
working even when we’re not.
 
One way  we procrastinate is with endless planning. W e plan all the details
of our task, and once we’re do ne planning, we decide that either the plan
needs re vising o r the task itself needs to be scrapped. Then w e plan for a
new task, and so  on—all the wh ile conveniently unaware of the fact that all
the plan ning we’re doing is also a form of procrastination. Ultimately , it’ s
something best referred to as pr oductive pr ocrastination  because it feels
like you’re getting somewhere, but you’re really just moving in place.
 
If we can get away with putting of f a task at the moment, we tend to do so
because it’ s easy , comfortable , and stress-free. This is how a lot of
would’ve-been success stories get to be just that—would’ve been. A
lifetime string of “laters” ends up being woven into the noose of “never .”
 
T emptations and distractions . The road of following through would be easy
enough to tread, without delay , i f it were like a hallway with bla nk walls on
either si de. If you didn’ t have a  choice, you might very well put your head
down an d work , work, work. But no. This road is lined with all sorts of
shiny trinkets, glittering detour signs, and inviting rest stops. T emptations
and distr actions come aplenty these days, with something as sim ple as a red
notification alert on our phone screens flooding our brains with feel-good
chemicals that, in turn, keep us glued to our phones even longer .
 
T ake fo r example a marketing of ficer tasked to develop a campaign to
promote a new p roduct. She is well aware of the research she n eeds to do,
the r eports she n eeds to write, th e presentations she needs to sta rt prepping.
--- PAGE 13 ---
But instead of following through and retaining focus so she gets things done
faster , her hours are riddled by Snapchat conversations, Y ouT ube binges,
and end less Instagram scrolls. Eventually , the research may get done, the
reports may get written, and the presentations may be prepped, but such are
not likely to reflect her true potential.
 
But of course, we cannot rid the world of temptations and distractions.
After all, they’re not the main problem. The main problem is t hat we lack
the know-how to properly deal with them. While they may come aplenty on
either si de of the road, there are  two ways we can still manage t he situation
through (1) strategic avoidance and (2) healthy , moderate use.
 
First, we may i mplement strategies to avoid temptations and distractions.
For example, if we’re distrac ted by frequent notifications from social
media, w e may schedule blocks of time during which we’re  logged out
from our social media accounts while we focus on our work.
 
Second, we may deal with tem ptations and distractions in a healthy and
productive way . W e don’ t need to deprive ourselves of te mpting and
enjoyable leisure activities for the rest of our lives just so we could follow
through on our goals. In fact, we’re not supposed to.
 
Giving ourselve s a well-deserved break by indulging in activities we find
enjoyable would  help rechar ge u s so we could function better . The key is in
having t he discip line enough to indulge on those activities in a h ealthy way .
For insta nce, we may periodically reward ourselves with a 10-minute break,
during which we log back in and check on our social media accounts, after
we accomplish a set amount of work.
 
Poor time management . “So much to do, and not enough time to do it.”
How many times have you heard these words spoken by a colleague, a
family member , or the person lo oking back at you in the mirror? And how
many times could you see that it’ s not time they lacked, but th e ability to
use their time productively? W e all have the same amount of time in the
day .
 
--- PAGE 14 ---
T ime management is the practice of using time in a way that maximizes
productivity and  ef ficiency . Good time management involves not only the
ability to schedule tasks, but also the insight and good judgment to
recognize which  tasks are best done when. Moreover , it requires having the
self-discipline to do tasks as initially planned and the focus to or ganize
resources accordingly . W ith goo d time management, a schedule is cleverly
or ganized and then promptly followed, so tasks get done as planned.
 
On the other h and, bad time management involves a lack o f planning,
or ganization, focus, and self-discipline. W e for get, overlook, or
miscalculate tasks in terms of how much time they’d require for
completion, lead ing to a domino ef fect that messes up the rest of our plans.
W e fail to foresee and provide for the resources we need for the activities
we’ve planned, leading to delays and cancellations. W e fail to prioritize our
activities, instead choosing to spend our time doing nonessential tasks,
leading to unsuccessful endeav ors (plus maybe a scolding glare from our
boss).
 
Life in the 21st century is challenging our ability to maintain work-life
balance like no other time bef ore. W ith technology allowing more work
hours as  well as more entertainment options than ever , we no l onger seem
to find 24 hours enough to fit in everything we need and want to do in a
day . W ith such d emands and lifestyles, poor time management has become
the norm, and go od time management is a superpower only the enlightened
have seemed to master .
 
And if we can’ t even manage our time when it comes to our day-to-day
tasks, how could we expect to fi nd time to follow through on our bigger life
plans?
 
Psychological Roadblocks
 
Psychological roadblocks refer to the internal, often unconscious
mechanisms in our psyches th at act as barriers to followin g through.
Among these mechanisms are (1 ) laziness and lack of discipline , (2) fear of
judgment, rejection, and failure,  (3) perfectionism out of insecurity , and (4)
--- PAGE 15 ---
lack of self-awareness. These psychological roadblocks operate internally to
inhibit external action, thus preventing us from following through.
 
Laziness and lack of discipline.  The  reason we don’ t follow through can
sometimes be as simple as bein g too lazy and lacking the discipline to do
so. Our laziness hinders us from  getting of f the couch and working on the
important tasks that will get us  closer to our goals. Our lack o f discipline
sees us squandering our time to  distractions and temptations. W e may get
our calendars planned out, our  to-do lists ready , and everyth ing else we
need prepared, but somehow we  lack the willpower and discipli ne within us
to just start, just do, and just keep pushing. W e see the sacrifice, however
small, we would have to make, and we decide that it’ s not worth it.
 
W illpower is the ener gy that a ctivates our bodies, while discipline is the
focus th at directs that ener gy so  that we’re constantly moving toward our
goals. If  we don’ t find a way to  turn our willpower and discip line on, our
bodies would simply continue to be in their inactive state, never following
through.
 
Fear of judgment, rejection, and failure . I magin e Lara, a volunteer for a
local or ganizatio n helping provide education for less fortunate children. She
has an idea for a fundraising campaign that will bring in more sponsors. She
plans what she n eeds to do and researches who she needs to talk  to in order
to make things happen.
 
But before she even makes the first call to get the ball rolling, her breath
catches. She hesitates and thinks, What if I or gan ize this campaign but
nobody signs up for it? What if our community leaders back my idea but it
winds up being a flop? What if we’d end up spending mor e money than we
actually gain?  So she drops the idea entir ely and immediately starts
breathing easier .
 
What stopped Lara from follo wing through was her fear o f judgment,
rejection, and failure. T o her , not following through was an act of self-
preservation, a way to save herself from the pain of failure. Since she never
--- PAGE 16 ---
asked for anything, she never got rejected. Since she never went after a
goal, no one could say she failed at it.
 
Fear of judgmen t, rejection, and failure thus paralyzes us from following
through. W e think that by ab staining from action, we cancel out the
possibility of producing any output that might be subject to evaluation or
judgment. And if we can’ t be evaluated or judged, we also can’ t be rejected.
If we don’ t try to go for things, especially things that challenge  us, then we
can’ t fail. However , these are ruinous distortions in reasoning. By not acting
and not following through, we have already judged and rejected ourselves
even bef ore we’ ve started. W e h ave already failed the moment we decided
not to try .
 
Perfectionism o ut of insecurity . Paul has bee n planning to apply for
promotion for several years now . He has been putting in the ef fort to
upgrade his professional knowledge and skills, attending seminars, taking
certification exa ms, and enrolling in post-graduate classes. He wants his
résumé to be pe rfect so that wh en he does apply for promotion, he can be
sure he’ll get it. For Paul, it was either perfection or nothing.
 
Several more years passed, and he’ s still never applied for a high er position.
His credentials didn’ t feel goo d enough to him, and it never did. His
perfectionism, b orn out of his fear and insecurity that he wasn’ t good
enough, was what prevented Pau l from following through. Instead of taking
action that will move him forw ard, he focused his ener gy on o verplanning
and striving for perfection, ultimately leading to stagnation. T o the outside
world, i t may have seemed that Paul was a busy bee working  toward his
goals, b ut in reality he was internally inhibited by his perfecti onism from
truly following through.
 
Lack of self-awareness . Finally , lack of self-awareness could also be a
psychological barrier against following through. Because we’re so often
afraid of making mistakes and v enturing past our comfort zones, we never
get to learn the  fullest extent of what we can do. Thus, many of our
interests, passions, and talents remain hidden to us forever . And not
knowing our true capacities, we remain convinced that we will never make
--- PAGE 17 ---
it, e ven if we tried. So we don’ t follow through on our plans and, in so
doing, trap ourselves in a lifetime of stagnation.
 
What’ s m ore, w e don’ t even rea lize we’ve fallen into the trap of stagnation
because we also lack the self-awareness that we’re not following through.
W e continue living our busy lives, content with the idea that we can’ t
possibly be working harder than we already are. But if we str ip our lives
with the little bits and bobs we busy ourselves with and take a long hard
look at the big p icture, we then realize that we’ve been avoidin g following
through on things that really matter .
 
So there you ha ve it—the list of reasons why we don’ t follow t hrough. W e
start wi th excitement and enthusiasm but end up with excuses and
explanations. W e start with anticipation but end up with alibis. And all too
often, we don’ t bother looking p ast what’ s in front of us because what’ s in
front of us is easy and convenient. A part of us doesn’ t want to know what’ s
possible beyond  that because we’re afraid to want it and to hav e to do the
hard work that will get us there.
 
But take  courage for a moment , and for the sake of your perso nal growth
and hap piness, consider how your life would be dif ferent if  you made
following through a habit.
 
What if W e Do Follow Thr ough?
 
Following throu gh is the more dif ficult path, but the benefits it can yield
make the journey worth the struggle. If you develop the habit of following
through, you’ll be able to inc rease your productivity , maximize every
opportunity , and  realize your fu llest potentials. Y our academic  and career
goals will be rea l guideposts in your life instead of just being pipe dreams
and ending up as frustrations.
 
Being a person who follows through will also improve your relationships.
Y ou’ll find that as you consist ently keep your promises, you’ll gain and
retain the trust o f your supervisors, your colleagues, and your staf f. More
importantly , you’ll be building better relationships with your spouse, your
--- PAGE 18 ---
children, and your friends. They know they can trust your word because
they’ve seen you act on your plans and deliver on your promises.
 
What’ s more, following throug h will help you build a better relationship
with you rself. F ollowing throug h forces you to be in touch wit h your own
wants, n eeds, capacities, and fears more intimately , so you get to take
char ge of your own life instead  of being just a slave to your u nconscious
fears and society’ s pressures on you.
 
In summary , following through is the powerful combination of focus, self-
discipline, action, and persistence. It’ s the force that drives you toward
higher p rofessional achievements, better relationships, and greater personal
satisfaction.
 
However , both tactics-based and psychologically-based roadblocks can
often hinder you from consistently following through on your dreams and
goals. Y ou may  have the passio n and motivation to do someth ing at first,
but t he fire within you is likely to die down somewhere along the way . T o
reignite it, you must first under stand what’ s holding you back, then equip
yourself with the right tactics and psychological tools to help  you follow
through on the things you start.
 
Recall the story of Esther told a t the beginning of this chapter . She took a
leave in the hop es of getting to start on her own business, but s he failed to
follow through  because she was tempted to indulge in pleasurable
distractions and  was taken by her fear of rejection and failure. Instead of
using the time she had to set realistic goals and follow through on building
the life of her dreams, she end ed up returning to a life she d idn’ t enjoy
living.
 
Imagine if Esther was aware of the barriers that were keeping her from
following through. Suppose she  responded by using the right tactics and
psychological tools to counter such barriers and eventually succeeded in
running a home-based bakery business. Every day , she’d be  waking up
excited to get to work with something she’ s passionate about. She’d get to
--- PAGE 19 ---
spend every day near her son an d watch him grow . She’d be living the life
she had only dreamed of.
 
T ake a moment to consider the story of your own life. Are you following
through on what you really wan t in your life? Or are you const antly falling
victim to the tactics and psycho logical barriers that hinder you from doing
so?
 
If you answered  the latter , then read on. The following pages will equip you
with the tools you need and show you the way toward de veloping in
yourself the all-important power of following through.
 
T akeaways:
 
The art of follow ing through is something that allows you to cr eate
the life that you actually want instead of settling for the life you
currently have.
It ca n be said to be composed of four parts: focus, self-discipl ine,
action, and persistence—all equally important.
However , it’ s not just as easy as  knowing you have to do it and thus
doing it. There are powerful reasons we don’ t finish what we s tart
and follo w through very often. T hese reasons can generally be split
into two camps: inhibiting tactics and psychological roadblocks.
Inhibiting tactic s are the ways we plan against ourselves with out
even realizing it. They include (1) setting bad goals, (2)
procrastination, (3) indulging in  temptations and distractions, and
(4) poor time management.
Psychological roadblocks are the ways we don’ t follow through
because we are unconsciously protecting ourselves. These inc lude
(1) lazin ess and lack of discipli ne, (2) fear of judgment, rejection,
and failu re, (3) perfectionism out of insecurity , and (4) lack of s elf-
awareness.
 
--- PAGE 20 ---
Chapter 2: Staying Hungry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What dr ives you  to follow through and finish what you start? How can you
remain motivated?
 
Let’ s co nsider a woman named Sally . Sally is an idealist so s he started a
charity t o benefi t impoverished people. What she did not anticipate was the
influx of challenges that came along with her endeavor . She did not realize
that working in a nonprofit settin g still counts as business and that her work
would involve far more business than just helping people.
 
Whenever she encountered a challenge in procuring funding, competing
with oth er charities for donations and grants, and creating marketing to
incite interest in her cause, she felt overwhelmed. “Why is it so hard to get
people to care about other people!?” she asked herself.
 
Pretty soon, Sally became completely disinterested in her work—it just
carried with it too many nega tive feelings and associations. She hated
writing grant letters and attending charity events. It took only a few months
for her to give up on a cause that she cared deeply about. Other people
wondered why she stopped working for something that meant so much to
her .
 
A key to Sally’ s failure was her inability to anticipate and plan for negative
aspects of her foundation. She imagined doing more to help people and
working less to procure funding . Because she relied solely on her goals to
--- PAGE 21 ---
give her  the motivation to follow through, she did not give hers elf anything
to actually help her defeat the n egative aspects of the business side of her
foundation.
The true problem that Sally had , however , was failing to find a true source
of m otivation. She needed to have found a true source of motiva tion to help
carry th rough the discouraging  ef fects of the negatives. By creating a
balance between her dream, the positives, and the negatives, the negatives
would have been acceptable obstacles in pursuit of her grand goal. She
could ha ve also kept her motivation alive by reminding herself  of why she
undertook this project in the first place and how each thing she did, even the
tasks she hated, led to the fulfillment of her idealistic dream.
 
Sally is a great example of how you can’ t just count on your passion for
something to lead you to follow through.
 
Sometimes we just don’ t care about what we are doing, and thus we don’ t
follow through. W e lose steam because of disinterest. That’ s
understandable. But even caring about something is not always the key to
following throug h. Sometimes, even for things we care about, w e still can’ t
follow through because we lack a drive to push us forward.
 
This lack of d rive is caused by a massive disconnect bet ween three
important aspec ts: (1) what the things we care about repres ent, (2) the
positive benefit s we receive from our actions, and (3) th e negative
consequences w e can avoid rela ted to our causes. When we lose steam, we
aren’ t tie d close ly enough to an y of those aspects, which come  together to
create motivation .
 
What is motivat ion? Things that really matter to you and are ne ar and dear
to your heart. Things that make you actually want to work t oward your
goal. Things that not only drive you, but also discourage you from giving
up. On top of that, you have to minimize negative consequences involved
with you r work and simultaneously maximize the positive benefits that you
receive.
 
--- PAGE 22 ---
There ar e many  ways to define the concept of motivation, but an ef fective
framework to view them through is external  and internal  motivations.
 
External Motivators
 
External motiva tors entail using sources besides yourself as m otivation to
do some thing. They are other people or circumstances that drive you to
action. Y ou are doing something to avoid a negative circumstance or earn a
positive circumstance from people and things outside of you.
 
More typically , external mo tivators are about avoidin g negative
consequences. F or example, you might be trying to avoid disappointing
your fam ily by failing, so you are determined to succeed. Y ou might be
afraid of getting fired, so you act with aplomb. A majority of these
motivators are punishments or negative consequences that you are desperate
to avoid. The only positive external motivation is self-bribery .
 
Still, you can ge t a lot of mileage out of external motivators i f you make
them work to your advantage . Driving yourself to avoid a negative
consequence can serve as an excellent push to do something. No one wants
to suf fer . If you know that not f ollowing through will result in some sort of
suf fering, you will do anything to avoid that negative consequence.
Therefore, you feel as if you have no choice but to follow through.
 
Accountability partners . Accountability partners are people who hold you
accountable. This is a person that you commit to something with. This
person lets you k now when you need to do things, and he or she chides you
when you want to give up. Then he or she gets on your c ase for not
following through.
 
Since you want to avoid disappointing this person, you are more likely to
act. Y ou  rely on this person to  give you the external motivation to avoid
shame s o you become accounta ble for your actions and your goal to avoid
his o r he r negati ve feedback. Y ou may also become accountable  in order to
avoid le tting thi s person down, as he or she counts on you to c omplete the
goal with him or her .
--- PAGE 23 ---
 
Accountability group . An accountabil ity group can be more ef fective than a
single partner . By having mult iple people holding you accountable, you
face the possibility of exponential shame—the shame and disappointment
of m ultiple people building on top of each other is a horrible feeling that
you wil l want to avoid. Plus,  you will still have people to hold you
accountable should one person drop out of the race. It can be hard to rely on
a sin gle partner ’ s commitment, but a group is much steadier in its pressure.
Having more people to answer to and to guide you can help you stay on
track to avoid shame.
 
Putting money down . Th e risk of losing money is a nother motivator that
you can use to y our advantage. A good example of this is an expensive gym
membership fee  that makes you want to go to the gym more  often. Y ou
don’ t want to waste money , so you go to the gym just to make that fee you
paid worthwhile.
 
Another exampl e is paying a lot of money for a course. Y ou want to finish
the c ourse because you paid so much for it and you consider it  a shame to
just waste that f ee. By investing in something monetarily upfro nt and even
slightly before you feel ready , you’ll be pushed to follow through to avoid
wasting and losing money . The primary operator here is guilt for spending
money on something that you never used or did.
 
Y ou can take monetary investment motivators to the next level by hiring a
coach or trainer of some type. This is the next level because paying
someone money to hold you accountable combines both monetary
investments and accountability partners. Now you have two reasons not to
quit or back out of your comm itment. Y ou don’ t want to waste money or
hear about how you have failed from a disappointed accountability partner .
 
Finally , you can give someone money and then tell them not to give it to
you unt il you complete something. When you give a friend $500 and
instruct them not to return it to you until you complete your t asks, you’ll
quickly discover  just how much  your work ethic is worth to you. If $500 is
--- PAGE 24 ---
not enough, up the ante next tim e to make it truly something you’ll work
toward.
 
Self-bribery . A  final externa l motivator is to bribe yourself. This is where
you promise yourself a reward if you follow through. Therefore, you let that
reward drive you and surmount  your dif ficulties. For example, you might
know th at you can take your dre am beach vacation if you save your money
wisely a nd earn  enough to have  spare. Keeping the emotions o f the beach
vacation can be powerful remi nders every time you want to spend your
money .
 
External motivations are mostly about avoiding pain, so figure out what
pains you are avoiding or can create for yourself. Then let y our ur ge to
avoid those pains drive you. A voiding negative social emotions works well
because no one wants to feel s hame, guilt, or rejection. Use your fear of
negative social emotions to carry you through a project or commitment to
the very end.
 
Internal Motivators
 
Internal motivat ors are about w hat you want , as opp osed to  avoiding a
negative consequence or punishment.
 
If yo u ar e motiv ated by avoiding a negative consequence, but you realize at
some point that maybe negative consequence won’ t actually kill you so you
can deal with it, there goes your motivation—you’ll simply deal with the
consequences sometimes.
 
In some  cases, relying on external motivators and fear does not work as
well as going after the things you love and want. Therefore, internal
motivators are often better sources of motivation than external o nes. W e can
view it thusly: if you are driven by fear or face a substantial negative
consequence, ex ternal motivatio n is ideal, while internal motiva tion is more
suitable if you know what you want and there is little to fear .
 
--- PAGE 25 ---
Internal motivators are your “why” for taking action and putting in ef fort.
Think of a donk ey walking forward to reach the carrot. Interna l motivators
are the carrot, while external motivators are the stick. External motivators
drive you forward out of fear  of something unpleasant, while internal
motivators make you feel that re aching your goal is going to give you a big
reward and lots of pleasant benefits.
 
The more internal motivations you can articulate, the more motivated you
will be to follow through and finish. Ask the following questions to
determine how you will benefit,  then let your desire for those be nefits drive
you forw ard. Internal motivatio ns tend to be more uniform because they
speak to people’ s universal desires and needs.
 
What ar e you getting out of this ? Maybe you are getting money or a sense
of happiness and fulfillment in life. Y ou are getting closer to a goal, which
can mean a lot in terms of benefits.
 
How will your life change or benefit ? Y o u may be able to get a better home
or a nicer car if you earn more money . Or you may be able to recover from
depression and ultimate sadness by attaining a higher sense of fulfillment.
 
How will your family benefit ? Y o ur family m eans a lot to you, so let them
motivate you. Imagine the smiles on their faces as you give them a better
life and make th em proud. Imagine getting your kids better school clothes,
living in  a safer neighborhood, and being able to af ford private school and
college.
 
What impact will you have on others ? Pe rhaps you will become a role
model for some people, which in turn will make you feel important and
good ab out your self. Perhaps you can donate to charity or gift n eedy people
with clothes and shoes come winter . Perhaps you can donate money to erect
new structures in your community that will be named after you.
 
What positive emotions will yo u get ? Co nsider the happiness, prid e, and
self-esteem you will reap from your goal’ s ultimate completion. After all,
this may be the root of all philanthropic ef forts.
--- PAGE 26 ---
 
How wi ll your actions lead to your long-term and short-term  goals ? Are
you accomplishi ng steps toward your goals? Think of the things you must
do to finish a no vel, for example, such as research and actual word count.
Then think of the steps you take each day toward those goals.
 
Using internal motivators in your daily life can really help you follow
through with every task you have to complete. Even when the going gets
tough an d you contemplate givin g up, finishing what you start is way easier
when yo u are focused on how your world will benefit. So wh enever you
have to do something that you h ate, think of how it will bring y ou closer to
your goa ls. Or whenever you find yourself bored or tired while working on
your go als, cons ider how great you will feel when you finish. Every day ,
review y our goals and why you want to complete them. Then let that fill
you with motivation to drive you forward toward project completion.
 
Answer the above questions an d consider writing them down somewhere.
Review the answers periodica lly to remind yourself why you want to
change or improve your status quo.
 
Understand Opportunity Cost
 
Following throu gh and finishing what you start will always call for
sacrifice.
 
Y ou hav e to spend money , expe nd ef fort, and give up time that you could
use for doing things you love in order to commit to things you have to
complete. Since  by definition no one likes sacrifice, sometimes the looming
shadow of a s acrifice will overshadow your goals—unless you create
motivators powe rful enough to overpower your sense of sacrifice and make
each sacrifice seem worthwhile.
 
Everything in life is an opportunity cost , wh ich means t hat everything you
do w ill call for something from you. Every act takes away tim e or ef fort
that cou ld be committed to so mething else. Learning to play the guitar
means s olitary hours of drilling scales, chords, and dealing with painful
--- PAGE 27 ---
calluses on your fingers. Going to college entails getting up early and
heading to a bor ing lecture and spending hours doing homewo rk. Are you
ready to make the trade-of f?
 
If th e op portunity cost is too ex pensive for you to want to pay it, then you
will not  follow through. Therefore, you must find a motivator that drives
you to accept the opportunity cost. If you don’ t feel motivated enough to
pay that cost, then you are guaranteed to lose steam and give up.
 
Therefore, there  are two ways to solve this problem. The first is that your
motivation must  be even strong er and more salient in order to make you
ignore these opportunity costs and the things you are missing out on. The
motivation must mean more to you than the things you sacrifice to make
you feel that this is all worth it.
 
The sec ond solution is to mak e your sacrifices smaller . This means that
there is less pain associated with getting things done. In both cases, the
cost-benefit anal ysis must be significantly weighed in favor of th e benefit—
but the first m ethod manipula tes the benefit, while the second method
manipulates the cost.
 
An exam ple of this is giving give up your weekly Friday night out with
friends to go to a late-night history class. This class is essential to getting
the degree you n eed to break in to your dream career . But you sure do love
your nig ht out with friends. T o u se the first solution, your desir e to get into
this care er and better your life and feel proud of yourself mu st outweigh
how mu ch you love Friday nigh ts out. Y ou must keep in mind th at your life
will drastically change for the b etter if you can resist a few Fr iday nights.
Otherwise, you will find the conflict too great to overcome and you will
quit the class in favor of your friends.
 
Let’ s apply the second solution for the same results. Instead of just giving
up on your Friday night out, s chedule a dif ferent night or d rum up the
ener gy to go out after class and s pend just a little less time with your friends
every F riday night. Y ou’re turning a full sacrifice into a co mpromised
--- PAGE 28 ---
sacrifice. The end result is a c ompromise that makes it possible to keep
doing what you want while also working on your goals.
 
When fa ced with  opportunity cost and potential sacrifice, keep in mind that
your life can’ t continue 100% as you want it to—but if you focus on
increasing the benefit or min imizing the sacrifice, you can continue
progress toward your goals while staying motivated and not listless.
 
Keep Y our Motivation on Y our Mind
 
Internal and external motivators are great ways to fuel the productivity and
commitment req uired for following through. But they won’ t do a nything for
you if they are out of sight and out of mind.
 
According to Psychological Science, people are more inclined to follow
through if they a re exposed to s timuli that remind them of their  motivators.
Seeing or hearing their motivat ors can drive them to maintain motivation.
In o ther words, sometimes the simplest solutions work best: constant
reminders will keep you on track because our minds can only fixate on so
many things.
Additionally , K atherine Milkman of the University of P ennsylvania
developed the hypothesis that reminders through association could aid
people in remembering goals and following through with them.
T o confi rm this hypothesis, she conducted a study whose participants were
asked to complete an hour -lo ng computer task. They were promised
compensation as well as a dollar donated to the local food bank . They were
asked to make sure their donat ions were made by picking up  paperclips
when th ey got their compensatio n. The control group was told this and then
thanked for their time. The test g roup was told that the paper clips would be
waiting by an elephant statue.
It turned out that 74% of the group told about the elephant statue
remembered to get their paper cl ips at the end of the study . Only 42% of the
members of the other group remembered to do this. Having the visual cue
of the elephant statue actually made it easier for students to r emember to
--- PAGE 29 ---
complete the simple task. When students saw the unusual statue, it sparked
their memories far more than ordinary-looking notes.
On t op of that, Rogers and Milkman discovered that having ver y noticeable
cues wo rked better than cues th at did not stand out. For example, a written
reminder did not remind study participants as well as a visual cue such as
one of the aliens from T oy Story .
Therefore, the best way to make motivators work for you is to expose
yourself to them often. Y ou can  use cues to help prompt you t o keep your
motivation in mind and thus to  follow through. However , these cues also
need to stand out to you.
For insta nce, us e loud, vivid im ages that you can’ t ignore, or employ other
senses and include sounds, text ures, and scents. Include a picture on your
desk of your child to remind you to keep working toward your dream for a
better fin ancial f uture for your f amily—but make the picture frame smell of
your child’ s shampoo or your spouse’ s perfume or cologne. T o emphasize,
we a ren’ t just ta lking about visual aids of putting Post-its every where—the
cues we can use can be spread across our five senses in imag inative and
creative ways.
However , be sure to move and change these cues around every few days so
that you do not become too accustomed to them and start to ignore them as
part of the background noise of your life.
Finally , you can also write yo ur motivators down every few days with
dif ferent phrasin g. Again, be su re to change them up to avoid getting too
used to them. The act of creating the cue each repeatedly helps to keep the
motivation firm and fresh in your mind.
 
T akeaways:
 
How do  we stay hungry and mo tivated? By delving deep and really
asking what internal and exte rnal motivators you have at y our
disposal—a task that is rarely performed.
External motiva tors are when w e leverage other people, places, and
things to push us into action. For the most part, these are when  we
want to avoid negative consequences involving other peo ple,
--- PAGE 30 ---
places, and things. These methods include accountability partners
and groups, putting money down upfront, and self-bribery .
Internal motivat ors are when we look at how we stand to benefit
and improve our lives. These are universal needs, drives, and
desires t hat are easy to lose trac k of. The easy way to find thes e is
to answer a set of questions that directly asks things such as how am
I go ing to benef it fr om this and  h ow does my life stand to impr ove
fr om this ? It’ s only through answering these questions that you
realize what you are neglecting.
Anything we want to accomplish has an associated opportunity
cost. W e  must sacrifice, even if we are sacrificing our ability to  lie
on the couch an d watch television. W e can deal with this me ntal
obstacle by playing with the cost-benefit ratio so the cost is
minimized or the benefit is maximized.
Motivation has been shown to work best when we are reminded of
it—otherwise, out of sight, out of mind. Thus, you should have c ues
you’re y our motivations all around you—but make sure to k eep
them dis tinct and memorable, use all five senses (even taste), and
make sure to cha nge and switch them periodically to avoid grow ing
used to them and for getting them.
--- PAGE 31 ---
Chapter 3: Cr eate a Manifesto
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y ou will face forks in the r oad where you must deliberate between
following through or giving up. Instead of having to make the hard decision
and reac h deep into your willpower toolbag every single time, having rules
for your self can help you decide which direction to take whenever you
reach the fork.
 
W e’ve been told since we were young that we have to follow rules. W ell,
this time we c an choose our own rules that will ultimately help us
accomplish exactly what we want.
 
Rules c an generally be called mental models , wh ich can be  critical to
follow-through. This is because they create a set way that you have to make
every decision, no exceptions. W ith your decisions already made for you by
your rules, you thus make decis ions automatically and you no longer have
room to make t he wrong decision based on waning willpow er and self-
discipline, which is to give up.
 
Rules hold you accountable so that you are not winging it every day but
instead are guided. Use your rules to guide your worldview and your daily
actions. Let them make every decision for you.
 
A go od example of a rule is to a lways complete two tasks on yo ur to-do list
for y our goal ev ery day . It’ s sim ply unacceptable to not do this —you have
to co mplete the steps no matter what. As a result, you’ll find tha t you make
--- PAGE 32 ---
progress toward your goal, even when you don’ t want to. The choice was
out o f yo ur hands. Deciding to work each day is not your decisi on to make;
it ha s already be en made for you by your rule, and thus you have no choice
but to do it.
 
Consider an example of when Jo hn, a writer , doesn’ t use the rule of always
completing two steps on his to-do list.
 
In the morning, he is excited an d thinks, “After work, I will go home and
start writing my novel! I will write two chapters.” Then he goes to work and
grows fa tigued and loses his in spiration slowly but surely throughout the
day . By the time he gets home, all he wants to do is watch Gossip Girl . So
since he does not have this rule in place, he fails to write. He has made zero
progress and is far from his goal. The sense of guilt that pla gues him is
horrible. As he goes to bed, he vows to himself that he will make up for the
lost progress by writing four chapters tomorrow .
 
What do  you think will happen then? He comes home tired a nd defeated
again. H e lets the fact that work drains him become his excuse for not
writing. Moreov er , since he faces the monumental task of w riting four
chapters today , it feels impossible to start on. If he didn’ t have  ener gy for
two chapters the night before, he certainly won’ t have the ener gy for four
chapters tonight. He gets overwhelmed and doesn’ t write at all. It seems as
if he will never finish this novel  because he always finds some excuse to let
himself of f of the hook from actually writing.
 
He gave  himself too much choice and leeway and thus allowed self-
sabotage all too easily .
 
Now let ’ s consi der if John applied the rule every day , which is black and
white an d doesn ’ t care about fat igue. No matter how tired and uninspired he
feels, he knows that he has to write two chapters a night aft er work, no
exceptions and no excuses. So w hen he gets home, he looks at his computer
and he feels tem pted to just go watch TV and conserve his ener gy by being
lazy . But because he follows a rule in his life, he can’ t break it and so he has
to write. In fact, he plans for it all day because he knows it’ s coming. He
--- PAGE 33 ---
sits down and tackles the two chapters and goes to bed ex hausted but
contented and proud of himself . He has made significant progress on his
novel. P retty s oon, he is do ne with his novel and the feeling of
accomplishment is worth the ener gy he had to spend on the nov el when he
was drained after work.
 
Rules help you follow through because they limit your vision . When you
are robb ed of your decision-making power—the same power that leads you
to fi ddle with s ocial media when important tasks need to be done—then
your hands are tied and following through is the only choice you have.
 
This chapter is about creating a  set of rules, collectively a manifesto , for
you to follow every time you co me across a fork in the road. They push and
guide yo u into the right direction and avoid depleting the willpower you do
have. Here are a few ideas for you.
 
Rule 1: Evaluate Y ourself
 
Rule 1 is to ask yourself, “If not for laziness or fear , would I be giving up?”
This makes it very clear to yourself that you are not acting out of a lack of
ability o r talent, but rather you a re just taking the easy way out. Is that what
you wan t to admit to yourself? When you face the fact that yo u are being
lazy or fearful h ead-on, it makes you not want to be that way a nymore. It’ s
the kick in the butt that forces you to call yourself lazy/fearful and then
drives you to take action.
 
Realizing that only fear or laziness stands in your way helps you realize
how silly that is so you get ove r it. So before you give up, make it a rule
that you always ask yourself if i t is laziness or fear that is holding you back
from action.
 
Let’ s say that y ou have a goa l to make a certain amount of money by
delivering so many projects to y our clients in a month. But the w ork is hard
and you  find yourself losing motivation. Y ou want to stop working and take
several d ays of f. Ask yourself, “Am I just being lazy?” That kic ks your butt
--- PAGE 34 ---
into gear and you take action. Y ou do your work and you feel better about
yourself knowing that you are doing the best you can.
 
Rule 2: Thr ee T asks Maximum
 
Rule 2 is to fo cus on three th ings a day maximum . On ly . T ops. Being
overwhelmed or disor ganized can kill your ability to get t hings done.
Sometimes we can’ t follow through on what we want because we don’ t plan
smartly . W e give ourselves too much to do and we become overwhelmed.
But using this rule enables you to plan against that problem by only
allowing yourse lf to focus on three things a day maximum. Plan how to
reduce your focus to only three things by deciding on what they are going
to be the night before. Prepare to focus only on those things so that you can
plan logically and not react emotionally .
 
One setb ack you ’ll face when y ou attempt to limit yourself to  three main
tasks a day is dif ferentiation.  Specifically , you will need to learn to
dif ferentiate between important  things and ur gent  things. Important things
must be done and should make it to your top three, while ur gen t things are
not necessary .
 
Ur gent things will seem important and will cause you stress, but they may
not actually be important or take priority . An ur gent thing might be making
time for  a harried client who is r ushing you. Meanwhile, getting a project to
a cli ent before t he deadline is an  example of an important task.  Everything
on your  agenda  will appear im portant and  ur gent so you must determine
which is which and plan accordingly .
 
Similarly , dif ferentiate between useless motion that looks bu sy but gets
nothing done and actual action, which is movement toward wha t you want.
Useless motion is shifting papers around your desk, while actu al action is
using those papers to get work done and make progress on a project. Make
what really matters the priority .
 
How mi ght you use this rule is to set an agenda for yourself? Suppose you
have fiv e tasks to do for your business. T wo of the tasks are not really
--- PAGE 35 ---
important and only appear to be since they are ur gent, so yo u decide to
focus on them later .
 
Y ou pick three tasks to focus on, and you evaluate which one is most
important so that you can focus on that first. The night before, l ook at those
three items on y our to-do list and determine what steps you will take in
actual action to complete those items, starting with the most im portant one.
The next day , take that actual action for your first task, then your second,
then you r third. Only complete one task at a time and do not multitask. By
the close of the workday , you just completed three major tasks a t a realistic
pace!
 
Rule 3: Cr eate Limitations and Requir ements
 
Rule 3 is to make actual rules fo r yourself. Create an actual code of conduct
for y ou to follow  in terms of being more disciplined and following through
more. W rite your code down in detail and then post it in a v isible area.
While y ou may not adhere to all of them every day , you at l east stand a
better chance of follow-through when you actually take the time to think
about your code of conduct and write them down.
 
The rules should focus on crea ting either limitations  or r equir ements  for
what you do eac h day so that you actually take initiative and get  tasks done.
 
This rule forces you to determine what you really need and want and
analyze what you hope to achieve. Basically , you are stoppin g to check
yourself and evaluate how you are progressing toward your ultim ate goal. It
helps yo u focus more on your in tentions and clarify them, making them an
integral part of your work ethic. So when you set out to accomplish
something, you have a rule in place to make yourself follow thr ough on the
project.
 
Give yourself five daily limitations and five daily requirements. Make clear
statements about what you cannot  do and what you must  do.
 
--- PAGE 36 ---
Limitations are relatively easy to understand. They limit distraction and
temptation. As for requirements , understand that you are not Superman or
Superwoman, so  you can’ t overload yourself. Instead, work smarter and
have fiv e requir ements that you can r easonably  m eet. Y ou may  not always
adhere t o this rule, but you at least have some guidance for yourself. In
addition, you gain some clarity about what you have cut out for you each
day .
 
An example is to set a limitation that you will not watch more than one hour
of T V a day , you will not spend more than an hour on Facebook, and you
will not  take longer than a one-hour lunch break. Meanw hile, your
requirements are that you must read at least 30 pages a day , you must
complete at least four hours of work before lunch, and you mu st complete
eight hours of work total by the time you sign out or clock out of work.
 
Rule 4: Reaffirm Y our Intentions
 
Rule 4 is quite similar to rule 1. This rule comes into play when you are
faced w ith a fork in the road b etween deciding to follow through or not.
This rule seeks to r eaffirm your intentions  by reminding y ourself what they
are and why you want to achieve them.
 
When you find yourself deliberating between quitting and following
through, ask these three questio ns to yourself. Better yet, have the answers
written somewhere so you can look over again.
 
“I want…”  Thi s is where y ou state your end goal and how you will benefit
from it. What is  your reason and motivation? Keep reminding  yourself of
the exte rnal or internal motivators that you have on your side. Remind
yourself something like, “I want to be rich.”
 
“I will…”  T his is where you state how you  must reach that end goal and all
the work you s hould be doing to get there. This statement brings your
attention back to how necessary it is to complete what you are currently
doing and how these tasks tie into the end goal. The journey is a necessary
part of the goal. It helps for you to be very specific in this statement to see
--- PAGE 37 ---
what actions you really do hav e to take. For example, tell yourself, “If I
want to be rich,  I will need to finish this project and work ha rd on other
projects.”
 
“I won’ t…”  This is where you state what you shouldn’ t do because that
action will impede your progre ss toward your end goal. Ther e are many
things detrimental to your progress, including distractions, temptations, lack
of d iscipline, procrastination, and other destructive or wasteful a ctions. T ell
yourself something like, “If I want to be rich, I won’ t distract myself with
social media and I won’ t prioritize social media over my work projects.”
 
Let’ s apply this concept to a p otential real-life conundrum th at you may
encounter . As you work to com plete a certification program necessary to
get a  pay  raise at work, you find  the volume of work overwhelm ing and you
despise having so little free time on your hands. Y ou contemplate giving up
and saying “whatever” to the certification. After all, you have a job, so do
you really need to advance yourself anymore?
 
As y ou c ontemplate this, realize that this is the time when you should apply
this rule  because you have hit a fork in the road of follow-th rough. Y ou
choose to implement the rule and you state three things to yourself:
 
“I want to make more money at work and be able to af ford a nicer home for
myself and a future family .”
 
“If I want to have more money and move into a better place, I will finish
this certification program in order to get a raise at work.”
 
“If I want to make more money at work and move into a better place, I
won’ t le t myself  get discouraged and stop doing the work to co mplete this
program or be thrown of f track by simple temptations or laziness.”
 
Y ou hav e just stated your intentions from beginning to end. As you may
have noticed, a running theme in this book is that repetition helps follow
through, and presence of mind i s key . W e may have the best int entions, but
if we simply for get about them, then what good are they? When you face
--- PAGE 38 ---
these questions constantly—you r end goal and the steps you m ust take to
reach, as well as the steps you must not take to reach it—it all becomes
crystal clear .
 
Rule 5: Think in T erms of 10-10-10
 
The nex t time you feel that you’ re about to give in to an ur ge or temptation,
stop and ask you rself how you will feel 10 minutes, 10 hours, and 10 days
from now . This rule may not seem all that powerful, but i t’ s ef fective
because it forces you to think a bout your future self and to see how your
actions are going to af fect yours elf in the future—for better or worse. A lot
of times, we may know that we are losing willpower or doing something
harmful in the moment, but th at’ s not enough to stop us from doing it
because we don’ t have any con nection to our future self that will have to
deal wit h the consequences. This rule quickly creates that connection, and
that can make the dif ference between a success or failure of discipline.
 
Why time intervals of 10 minutes, hours, and days? Because that helps you
realize h ow sho rt-term the pleasure or comfort of a discipline is relative to
its long-term consequences. At 1 0 minutes, you might be feeling  good, with
perhaps just the initial bit of sha me creeping in. After 10 hours , you’ll feel
mostly s hame a  regret. T en day s later , you might be consume d by regret
having r ealized some of the ne gative consequences that your decision or
action has had on your pursuit of your long-term goals.
 
On the other hand, you might apply this rule and realize that a lapse in
following through now won’ t make a dif ference 10 days into the future. If
that’ s the case, then you can indulge a bit without guilt or shame.
 
For exam ple, im agine that you a pply this rule when deciding wh ether or not
to skip a workout to go to din ner with coworkers. If you’ve just begun
exercising and haven’ t built it into a consistent habit yet, your decision to
skip a single workout might inc rease the odds of skipping futu re workouts
or stopping working out altogether .
 
--- PAGE 39 ---
How will you feel in 10 minutes, hours, and days? T en min utes—good,
with a slight tinge of regret, as you can still taste the lasagna o r ice cream.
The ple asure is still tangible. T en hours—almost entirely regret, as the
pleasure is gone and fleeting, and your diet has been soundly broken. T en
days—100% regret, because the broken discipline is now completely
meaningless and  but a faint memory . The lasagna does not have a lasting
benefit, but it does have a lasting cost.
 
On t he o ther han d, if exercising is already a consistent and enjo yable habit
for you,  then imagining how you’ll feel 10 days from now w ill quickly
show you that one skipped w orkout isn’ t harmful to your long-term
discipline or goals.
 
And when you’re not swayed b y this rule or your dilemma of w illpower is
extra dif ficult, you can add a final question for yourself. That is, how will
breaking willpow er now af fect you in 10 weeks or even longe r -term? Y ou
might want to change the parameters to 10 weeks if you’re mostly engaged
in longer -term decisions and tasks.
 
In th is p rocess, it’ s crucial to be honest with yourself and wary o f your own
abilities to rationalize and make  excuses. For example, you may have tried
to qu it a n addictive habit many times in the past, only to fail and eventually
reinforce the harmful behavior . If you have a history of falling into bad
habits after a single lapse in discipline, then an honest assessment of how
you wou ld feel after 10 days or 10 weeks will tell you that you s imply can’ t
af ford a  lapse in discipline now if you’re going to achieve you r long-term
goals. It  wasn’ t an exception or justified in that one circumstance—it is a
reflection of your character for better or worse.
 
W ithout that honesty and ability  to see your own rationalizing and excuses
for what they are, applying this rule may be a futile exercise.
 
Rule 6: Just 10 Minutes
 
The final rule is simple, easy , and powerful.
 
--- PAGE 40 ---
If y ou want som ething negative, harmful, or detrimental to your follow
through, wait at least 10 minute s before getting it. It’ s simple and leaves no
room for debate or excuses. When you feel an ur ge, force yourself to wait
for 10 minutes before giving in to whatever the ur ge is. If you’re still
craving it after 10 minutes, then have it. Or wait 10 more minutes because
you’ve a lready done it and surv ived just fine. Simply by choo sing to wait
you rem ove th e “immediate”  from immediate gratificatio n—building
discipline and improving decision-making.
 
Similarly , if you want to quit something beneficial, wait just 10 more
minutes. It’ s the same thought process applied in a dif feren t way . T en
minutes is nothing, so you can wait or continue that long easily . Then, if
you do it once, it’ s easy to repeat, isn’ t it? In other words, say  to yourself
“just 10 minutes more of willpower” each time you reach a fork in the road.
 
Another benefit  of this rule is t he purposeful escalation of good habits. If
you’ve forced yourself to do s omething productive for 10 minutes, you
might end up d oing it for 15 or even 20 minutes more. Next  time, your
tolerance will build such that you’re more immune to temptation and
distraction—the following time you might continue for an extra six or seven
minutes.
 
Every time you feel distracted, just exercise willpower for a few minutes
longer , and you’ll steadily follo w through better with each es calation. At
some iteration of “just 10 minutes more” you’ll reach a point of momentum,
and that’ s often enough to carry you for hours.
 
T akeaways:
 
A m anifesto is n othing more than a set of rules to follow every day .
W e mig ht hate rules, but rules t ake the guesswork out of our days
and give us gu idelines to follow . They make matters black and
white, which is h elpful to following through because there is sim ply
no other choice.
Rule 1: Are you acting out of laziness? If so, is this a
characterization you want about yourself?
--- PAGE 41 ---
Rule 2: Three m ajor tasks a day , maximum. Dif ferentiate betw een
important tasks, ur gent tasks, and simple wasted motion.
Rule 3: Create daily limitations and requirements for yourself.
These keep you within the bounds of what you know you need to
do. These are also the building blocks of good habits.
Rule 4: Sometimes we lose sight of what we want to accomp lish.
Thus, reaf firm your intentions b y stating “I want,” “I will,” and “I
won’ t” statements.
Rule 5: T ry to lo ok into the future, 10 minutes, hours, and days at a
time. Do you like what you see when you consider not follow ing
through? Is it worth the benefit to the current self at the expense of
the future self? Probably not.
Rule 6: It’ s just 10 minutes, right? So if you want to quit, it’ s jus t 10
minutes. And if you need to wait, it’ s just 10 minutes.
 
 
 
 
--- PAGE 42 ---
Chapter 4: Follow-Thr ough Mindsets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Follow-through is 100% mental. It takes a cognitive ef fort to follow through
on something, especially when you hit discouraging obstacles. Mindsets
help with that.
 
What is a minds et? A mindset i s a set way of visualizing and approaching
situations and problems. Certain  mindsets are all it takes to find the will and
motivation necessary to follow through on something.
 
Gerald i s an example of someone with a mindset that impeded with his
progress. Gerald  had many aspirations to create his own business. He was
determined in spirit and relished the idea of one day being a well-known
and rich entrepreneur like Steve Jobs. While he knew that success is not just
something easy that anyone can grab, he did not realize how sometimes
success calls for uncomfortable situations.
 
When he actually endeavored to start his own business, he ran into a lot of
situations that cause him fear . For example, he had to make a monetary
investment and it terrified him to think that he may lose his money and
never ge t it back. This fear made Gerald uncomfortable. Anoth er thing he
hated w as havin g to conserve h is money and cut expenses and  luxuries he
didn’ t n eed to devote more m oney to his start-up. Living without the
luxuries he was used to made him  quite uncomfortable as well—so much so
that he could not handle it.
 
--- PAGE 43 ---
Instead of adapting to uncomfortable situations and embracing new things
that mad e him feel scared, Gerald freaked out. He decided that the lifestyle
of an entrepreneur was not worth it. He liked the idea but was not prepared
for the reality . Finding out that starting up a new business was not all
sunshine and rainbows made him give up on it. Instead of starting his dream
company and having a shot at b ecoming the next Steve Jobs, G erald settled
back into the job that he hated simply because it was comfortable to him.
He never amounted to much and never reached his dreams as a result.
 
Gerald’ s mindse t was negative, to say the least. He refused t o deal with
discomfort or make sacrifices that were mildly unpleasant for his dream
career . He preferred what he knew over the unknown, even though what he
knew did not satisfy him as much as his dream would have satisfied him.
That mi ndset m ade him choose to approach the situation from the vantage
point that it was all bad and not worth it. He focused on the negative and the
discomfort and he refused to work around it.
 
Gerald may have succeeded at his goal had he held a dif ferent mindset. But
his colle ction of  poor and inflex ible mental habits caused him to approach
problems incorr ectly , which left him with no hope for succ ess. He let
himself fail by approaching pr oblems in the wrong way and  eventually
giving up.
 
Had he decided to become com fortable with discomfort, he never would
have given up ju st because the g oing got tough at one point. He could have
adjusted to the discomfort of m aking sacrifices and embracing unknown
scary si tuations, which would have made him better able to  found his
business and become an entrepreneur .
 
Mindset 1: It’ s W orthwhile
Consider what the Chicago Consortium on School Reform (along with
many ot her educ ational experts)  says motivates students to per severe even
when th ings become dif ficult at school. Three concepts contribute to
student success, which are easily transferable to our adult lives.
--- PAGE 44 ---
The first concept is holding the  belief that hard work can and will lead to
improvement. N o matter how hard things get, it is your ef forts that will get
you the results you desire, nothing else. Everything else is a byproduct of
luck—the hard work itself is a prerequisite. Of course, hard work doesn’ t
overcome everything, but it’ s  an essential component that cannot be
skipped.
The second concept is having the confidence that you, and people like you,
belong in school and that school is a place where you can thrive. Y ou can
apply this to settings outside of school.
The heart of this concept is that you believe in yourself and that you are just
as good as anyone else. Basicall y , you need to believe in your own abilities
and trust in you r opportunities. Don’ t create self-limiting belie fs that hold
you bac k, such as thinking that you are not as good as everyon e else. This
belief is illustrated by feeling that you also  have valuable input at a business
meeting or that you have just as  much ability to handle a client as everyone
else  in the of fice.
The fina l concept is holding the belief that what you are doing  is valuable
and relevant to your goals. Why would you stick with doing something if
you don’ t see how it benefits you or helps you reach your goals? That
would undermine entire chapters of this book.
Understanding w hy you do som ething and how it fits into the big picture of
what you are tr ying to accomplish makes it seem more worth while. Y ou
won’ t want to quit an endeavor if you think that it is getting you
somewhere. Y o u don’ t even have to see instant gratification and goal
completion to know that you are on the right track. Assigning value and
remembering how each thing you do ties into your main goal is very
important because it helps you feel that you are doing well just by working.
There is a point to everything you do, so every action you take is valuable.
An example of t his concept at w ork would be when you feel that the classes
you are taking for your degree are pointless. Remember that they are not
pointless, because they are leading to your graduation, which in turn will
lead to your dream job in the field of your interest.
These concepts can help you because they lend value and meaning to your
work, and they can make you fe el like you are making a dif ference just by
--- PAGE 45 ---
following through and executing.
Mindset 2: Comfort with Discomfort
Another critical  mindset is believing that your journey to s uccess will
become supremely uncomfortable at times, so you need to get comfortable
with dis comfort. Following thr ough is never comfortable because it asks
you to do thing s that are unfam iliar and new . T o be successful and never
give up, you need to minimize negative consequences of uncomfortable
situations by getting immunized to the sense of discomfort.
Sometimes, you feel the need to avoid something that will lead to success
out of discomfo rt. Maybe you are avoiding extra work becau se you are
fatigued, or you are avoiding talking to new people because it makes you
nervous. Y ou are actively shutt ing out success because you wa nt to avoid
being uncomfortable for a little while.
Therefore, overcoming your instinct to avoid things just because they are
uncomfortable for you at first is essential. Change is always uncomfortable,
but it is key to doing things dif ferently in order to find that magical formula
for success. T ry doing new things outside of your comfort zone. Do
something new , try to learn new  skills, talk to new people, and practice new
actions that you are bad at unti l you are good at them. Expose yourself to
new situ ations and things. The unfamiliarity will feel very unc omfortable,
but you will not be able to exp and your horizons and achieve success any
other way .
The more you do things th at make you uncomfortable,  the more
comfortable you become with discomfort. Y ou will find that dis comfort is a
temporary emot ion that leaves with exposure to the situation. T he benefits
of being uncomfortable far outw eigh the mild and fleeting unpleasantness
of the sensation. Y our mind will come to stop fearing discomfort so much
when it realizes that discomfort does not actually hurt you.
Meanwhile, staying comfortable by only doing what you kno w is a bad
idea. It is the recipe for complacency and for staying static. Y ou will not
make any changes if you do what you always do.
Don’ t ever give up on things just because they call for some change and
discomfort. Discomfort is mere ly your fear instinct at play and does not
actually hurt you, so getting comfortable with it is a good idea.
--- PAGE 46 ---
Y ou can choose to stay home an d not meet new people, or you can choose
to go out and make valuable connections that will help you reach your
goals. Y ou can choose to never learn a new language, or you ca n choose to
learn it and find a wealth of ne w business opportunities, such as fun jobs
overseas or well-paying jobs in t ranslation. By repeatedly going  to language
classes and talking to new peo ple, you will become conditioned to the
sensation of going out of your comfort zone. Thus, you will become
comfortable with being uncomfortable. Then you will stop fearing
discomfort and you will open yourself up to some positive changes in your
life. Just push yourself consistently every day and try new things to expand
the edges of your comfort zone and make your life what you dream about.
Mindset 3: Allow Learning
This mindset entails developing  the viewpoint that following through and
finishing equals learning and evaluating yourself. Y ou are essentially testing
and sco ring yourself based on your progress. Giving up is an automatic
failure.
When yo u finish something, on the other hand, you ace the test . Y ou get to
see how you do and you get to evaluate your performance. Y ou also gain a
lot o f va luable s kills and information that can help form your success and
enable you to try again with better success should you ever fail at
something.
Y ou only learn c ertain things if you see them through to the end. Y ou are in
a consta nt state of seeking information and knowledge, which you can only
gain wh en you complete a project in its entirety . Otherwise, you don’ t catch
the f ull g limpse of how things w ork. Y ou get to learn about what it takes to
finish so mething and what you are made of if you follow through. If you
don’ t follow through, then you don’ t learn all that you have to do and you
don’ t lea rn anything about yourself except that you are lazy or afraid or a
failure.
Y ou can also teach yourself wha t doesn’ t work. If you follow through to the
end and still don ’ t succeed, you can evaluate your work and see  where you
went wrong. Then you can avo id that issue in the future. Y ou can become
more su ccessful in the future as a result. V iew life as a series of lessons that
you can use for future betterment.
--- PAGE 47 ---
V iewing your endeavors as quests for knowledge can make challenges seem
less daunting. It takes the fear out of failing because you still gain
knowledge. Y ou  will be less inclined to just give up when faced with a
challenge becau se you instead want to learn how to work around the
challenge. Y ou want to see w hat happens when you try something to
overcome the challenge. Y ou will gain no knowledge if you don’ t follow
through, so you have to have the mindset to leap over chall enges more
fearlessly .
One way  to adopt this mindset is to ask yourself, “What can I  learn from
this?” That breeds a thirst for knowledge, which can be infinitely more
motivating than any other mindset. Y ou get curious and you want to see
what the  finish line looks like. Y ou want to gain the experienc e that your
endeavor can give you, so you go after follow-through in order to get that
experience.
Mindset 4: De-Str ess
Stress af fects how much willpow er and self-control you have. Y ou may not
be consciously aware, but think  about how little you can get do ne if you’re
stressed out or a nxious. Even more so if you’re simply tired a nd fatigued.
Y our wo rking sp irit is more deli cate than you might imagine, w hich is why
it’ s important to protect it and de-str ess .
An Australian study showed th at students who were stressed because of
their exa ms neglected healthy habits like maintaining a proper diet, getting
enough sleep, and exercising. They also smoked more, consumed more
caf feine, struggled with controlling their emotions, and paid less attention to
household chores, self-care habits, commitments, and spending.
It’ s easy to conc lude the following: if you fail to take care of your mental
health, your discipline and willpower quickly deteriorate. Prevent this
situation by introducing stress-re ducing habits in your life. Each day , spend
at least 30 min utes doing relaxing activities. Meet with frien ds. Read a
book. Listen to music. Medita te. Exercise. Cuddle. T ake a walk in the
woods. Whatever works for you to unwind and turn your brain of f.
It’ s important to relax when you can and overall be aware of your affect—
the psy chological term for the emotions you are feeling and overall
temperament.
--- PAGE 48 ---
Why? Because  negative affect  is among the most important triggers of self-
control failure. For instance, depressed people desire specific things that
bring immediate  gratification and procrastinate or avoid any activity that
involves ef fort. Emotional distress causes a behavioral shift toward
immediate improvements in mood, and so people make poor decisions. This
gets even worse when you realize that pr ojection bias  occurs every day
without our conscious knowledge.
 
Projection bias is when people falsely project their curr ent  feelings onto
their futur e  fe elings . If you feel depressed,  stressed, and tired, you imagine
you’ll feel that way next time you want to follow through and finish
something. Of course, there’ s no correlation, but people routinely fail to see
that there is no solid connection between these feelings.
 
For example, people condemn j unk food when they aren’ t hun gry without
realizing how much they want those delicious cookies once they  are hungry .
When you plan your diet, you are probably calm and in a mo od to make
drastic changes.  Y ou can also see projection bias as overenth usiasm that
your current feelings are how you will feel about something for ever .
 
Point being? Don’ t underestim ate the impact of stress on your ability to
follow through.
 
T akeaways:
 
Following throu gh is 100% me ntal, which means it’ s probably a
good idea to talk about the mindsets you attempt to embody .
Mindset 1: It’ s a ll worthwhile. If you feel that your hard work will
get y ou somewhere, you belong and are as good as anyone else,  and
you feel impact toward your o verall goals, execution is easier to
stick with.
Mindset 2: Become comfortable with discomfort. Everything you
want to do will have elements of discomfort, unless you just want to
watch television  all day by yourself. Thus, becoming used to this
feeling allows you to tackle what you want without fear .
--- PAGE 49 ---
Mindset 3: W ithout following through, there is no learning. Only
when you finish something can  you evaluate yourself and correct
your errors. Embody an information-gathering mindset.
Mindset 4: The detrimental po wer of stress and anxiety can’ t be
overstated. Eve n being in a poor mood is dangerous to your
productivity and follow-through. Be aware and take proactive
measures to modulate your stress levels.
 
--- PAGE 50 ---
Chapter 5: The Science of Smashing Pr ocrastination
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Procrastination is a huge problem in following through. How can you
approach it ef fectively?
 
Madeleine has a big project coming up soon. Her deadline is in a week. She
knows that to m eet this deadline, she has to complete 15 pages of code a
day . But when it comes down to it, she just cannot work. So she puts it of f,
planning to write 30 the next day to make up for lost progres s. Then she
can’ t write 30 pages so she puts it of f and now has to write 45. Now she is
right on her deadline with almost no code written.
 
She pulls an all-nighter and sends in a code that is rife with errors. She ran
into many challenges with this code that she did not have tim e to solve
because she was so far behind in work. The client rejects the code and is not
happy . Madeleine just earned a bad review and no repeat client.
 
Michelle works on the same typ es of projects. Unlike Madeleine, Michelle
understands wha t her challenges may be. She breaks the work into small,
manageable parts and writes what she can each day and gives herself
rewards for every section she completes. Usually she is able  to meet or
exceed the 15 pa ges minimum quota that she has set for herself. At the end
of th e week, she  compiles the code with no errors and sends it to her client.
He i s very happ y to have a working code that runs well and he pays her
well. She earns a five-star review and the client is eager to hire her again for
future projects.
--- PAGE 51 ---
 
The dif ference between these two coders is that Michelle succe eded at her
project by not procrastinating. She used a system called temptation
bundling to ensure that she did not put of f work. That gave her plenty of
time to not only write code but to find and fix bugs. Madeleine did not use
this for esight so she produced poor -quality work. Y ou can see how
procrastination leads to intense stress, frustration, and sloppy work.
 
W e all know what procrastination is. But why is such a common issue in
people t rying to meet deadlines and get quality work done? There are some
answers regarding this covered by behavioral psychology .
 
The main component in this self-defeating habit is c alled time
inconsistency . This is where humans value immediate and instant
gratification over long-term rewards.
 
Imagine that you have two selv es, a present self and a future self. In this
instance, they are completely di f ferent people with dif ferent desires that do
not overlap. When you make goals, you are making plans for your future
self. It is easy to  plan for what is best for your future self. Y ou can see what
you need in the  future and you  want that so you plan for it. Researchers
have found that envisioning your ideal future reality is quite easy .
 
However , only your present self can actually do anything. T o make goals
reality , your present self has to take action. Sadly , your present self wants
rewards now . It do es not want to wait to see the results in the future. So it
wants to avoid having to do work for long-term goals, favoring instead
tasks tha t reward  you right now . For example, you want to get a big project
done to make money , but you really need a nap. Y ou are going to choose the
nap over work because that’ s an immediate reward for your present self.
Meanwhile, you are hurting your future self by napping instead of working.
 
Y our future self wants goals that pay out at some future date after work
performed in the present. The present self wants rewards that pay out now ,
which in turn of ten hurt your chances to get your future self it s long-term
rewards.
--- PAGE 52 ---
 
The bes t way to counteract time inconsistency is to move future long-term
rewards into the present more ef fectively . That way , your present self sees
the benefit and w ants to stick to the long-term program. W aiting  for a future
reward is often not suf ficient to motivate your present self because your
present self does not want to wait.
 
T emptation Bundling
 
T emptation bundling is an excellent and ef ficient way to kill procrastination
and increase productivity by co mbining present and future selves and their
conflicting needs.
 
This takes the above concept  and introduces the means to reducing
temptation to neglect your futur e self in the present moment. Conceived by
behavioral Katy Milkman at the University of Pennsylvania, temptation
bundling is a way to blend both future and present self needs  by making
future rewards more immediate . Y ou give yourself instant gratification in
the present while also achieving goals that benefit your future self in the
long-term.
 
It’ s simpler than it sounds.
 
Basically , you make a positive (but dif ficult) behavior or habit in the long-
term fee l good at the present mo ment as well. Think eating T wi nkies while
working out, working out while  watching TV , or doing work while soaking
your feet in a salt bath—these are examples of ways to make th e long-term
feel good at the present moment.
 
There is no need to suf fer in t he present to get something do ne for your
future self; if you do suf fer , then you will lose all mot ivation and
procrastinate. So  find ways to bundle your temptations with you r long-term
goals. In other words, pair your obligations with instantaneous rewards.
 
Milkman found  that up to 51% of her study participants were willing to
exercise with temptation bund ling. It is an ef fective means  to correct
--- PAGE 53 ---
procrastination habits. Y ou should make a list with two colum ns, one side
being yo ur guilty pleasures or temptations and the other side being things
you need to do for your future self. Then figure out creative ways to link the
two conflicting columns in harmony .
 
Suppose you like chocolate, surfing, soccer , and running. But work,
homework, and piano lessons st and in your way . How might you combine
things to make the unpleasurable more tolerable?
 
Small, Easy Incr ements
 
Another way to mitigate procrastination is to start in small, easy increments.
Really , you want to break tasks down into minuscule, microscopic
components. This makes your first step seem incredibly easy—and taking
that first step is the hardest part with procrastination.
 
Think of  procras tination as an en ormous wall you must climb. If  you collect
enough small pebbles and rocks, you can eventually create a step for
yourself high enough to simply walk over the wall. Y ou can collect boulders
the size of your torso, and you may get the same result, but it’ s a much
tougher road.
 
Just mak e sure your barriers to s tarting are extremely low . For ex ample, you
can even complete 95% of a task and leave the remaining 5% as a starter
task for later , so you can get back in the swing of things easily . Doing this
breaks i nertia and enables you to gain forward momentum. Y ou gain
momentum by working and creating work that you can build of f of later as
you tackle the harder parts of the project. 
  
Small an d easy increments invo lve two key parts. The first part is to break
your tas ks into smaller , more manageable steps. Don’ t view y our task as
one huge boulder that you have to get done all at once. Rather , view it as a
series of  steps to take from Point A to Point B. Y our mind wil l thank you
for this as things  suddenly seem easier and more doable. An exa mple of this
is to view the writing project  you have ahead of you as a series of
paragraphs only 100 words long.
--- PAGE 54 ---
 
Maybe you have to write 100 pages, but don’ t look at it that way . Look it as
taking baby steps with short paragraphs. After you complete so many
paragraphs, you  have written your 100 pages. Small tasks build up rapidly ,
especially when you are not procrastinating, so create tiny , mentally
palatable steps that you can take to build something monumenta l and reach
your ultimate goal. A book is composed of words, after all.
 
The second part is to start with the easiest tasks first. This may seem
counterintuitive. Why would you leave all the hard stuf f for later?
Remember that procrastination is about making the first step  as easy as
possible. Y ou are encouraging y ourself and proving to your mind that this
task is more than possible with each easy task that you tick of f  your to-do
list. By the time you reach the harder tasks, they will seem more attainable
and surmountab le to your mind since your mind has already done a lot of
work.
 
Inertia is the force that builds as you are at rest. On the other hand,
momentum is the drive to keep  moving forward until you get everything
done. Y o ur task here is to break inertia and gain momentum. Small and easy
increments accomplish that beca use nothing else will get you moving more
quickly .
 
Back to the writing example: consider how you can do the easy parts, such
as the outline and the research notes. W rite the parts that take the least ef fort
first. Get the bulk of it done, the easy and simple things that are not hard but
that take up a lot of time. Leave the hardest 5% of the writing for last for
when you have momentum. Y ou will not feel so frustrated and
overwhelmed, a nd thus you will not consider this writing t ask a huge
sacrifice that taxes your present self. Y ou will accomplish it and not suf fer ,
which of fers some pleasure to your present self.
 
Consider Risks
A fi nal t actic is to consider what may go wrong. Being hypervi gilant about
what may go wr ong  is a tactic employed by highly successful and
--- PAGE 55 ---
productive people like Bill Gates. Jim Collins explores this tactic in his
book Gr eat By Choice . Referr ing to this as pr oductive paranoia , he
discusses how people like Bill Gates were constantly paranoid about what
may go wrong. By always planning for the worst and trying to avoid the
worst, th ese people actually ended up working extremely hard. They were
always f ocused on their projects just to avoid the worst possible scenarios.
As a result, fear motivated them and kept them from procrastination.
Be paranoid and start to question what could go wrong. Think about making
contingency plans and working to avoid certain challenges or problems.
Thinking about what can go wr ong can serve to make you work to avoid
things going wrong. As a result , you become more productive just because
you are afraid and hypervigilant at the moment.
Be sure to ask y ourself how you might lose out if you delay taki ng action at
this moment. The opportunity may go to someone more proactive. Y our
opportunity may even simply  go away , since many things are time-
sensitive. Consider how disastrous it could be to your success. The fear of
losing out will m otivate you. Sure, fear is not a pleasant motivator . But if it
works, why not use it? Knowing that you are in danger of some kind kicks
you into overdrive. Procrastination comes from boredom, complacency , and
safety , s o strippi ng those feelings away can leave you paranoid and eager to
avoid bad consequences.
Of c ourse, fear is not a fun mot ivator , so only use this tactic in small, safe
doses. D oing it too much can really drain you and stress you out. As we all
know , st ress is damaging to your working spirit. A void stress and only use
this tactic when you begin to feel an intense temptation to procrastinate.
Our ope ning exa mple of Madeleine could have used fear to help her detect
possible mistake s and thus to motivate herself to write her code each day .
Using fear , she would have plan ned to leave plenty of wiggle room in her
schedule so that she could properly compile the code and ensure that there
were no  errors in her code writing. She would have anticipat ed possible
errors and would have worked each day in order to give herself time to
catch and fix these errors.
T akeaways:
--- PAGE 56 ---
T ackling procrastination is similar to pushing Sisyphus’ s stone. Y ou
can beat  it back for a bit, but it ’ s so natural that you will never be
fully rid of it. The problem is ty pified by time inconsistency , where
we comprise two selves that don’ t have overlapping desires—one
wants gratification in the future and the other wants it right now .
T emptation bu ndling is an ef fective method to b attle
procrastination. It consists of combining your unpleasurable tasks
with something pleasurable. This mainly works because you are
battling time inconsistency and giving both selves what they w ant
simultaneously .
Start easy and small. Procrastination thrives of f inertia. Therefore,
you need to mak e the path to motion and action as easy as possi ble.
Then eventually you can gain momentum—the opposite of inertia.
Sometimes beating procrastination just requires a kick in the pa nts.
Fear and  productive paranoia can do that to you—if you are so
fearful of the negative repercussions you will face, then you will
certainly be spurred into action. But this is not a method to use very
frequently .
--- PAGE 57 ---
Chapter 6. No Distraction Zone
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This is a chapter that promise s to kick your butt. It’ s full of powerful
techniques to ensure that you j ump into action. W ithout further ado, let’ s
jump into it.
 
Minimizing Distractions
 
W e ofte n think that distractions  can be our friends when it comes to self-
discipline. If willpower is finite, then we reason that it’ s better to take a
break, refresh, and distract ourselves from ur ges and temptations.
 
Baba Shiv , a professor of mark eting at the Stanford Graduate School of
Business, condu cted a study that illustrates how distractions af fect us. Shiv
distracted one group of particip ants by asking them to rememb er a phone
number and then asked all the study participants to choose either chocolate
cake or fruit. Those who were trying to remember phone numbers chose the
cake 50%  more  often than thos e who weren’ t. The conclusion here is that
focus is an essential part of being disciplined.
 
If you’r e constantly distracted, you succumb to temptations without even
giving y ourself a  chance to exer cise your willpower . It just does n’ t occur to
you, and you choose the path of least resistance despite your best intentions.
Distractions sne akily eat away a t our self-discipline. This process can go on
in the backgroun d so that we don’ t even realize that our discipline is lapsing
until it’ s too late and all of our past ef forts have been wasted.
--- PAGE 58 ---
 
The design of checkout lanes in supermarkets is a prime example of
capitalizing on distracted mind s and depleted willpower . Y ou can make
healthy decision s every step of the way through the grocery store, but you
can’ t escape without one final d istraction of candy , chocolate, and snacks at
the regi ster . This is frequently the most dif ficult time to be disciplined
because you’re so close to exiting and thinking ahead and the items are
cheap and available to purchase instantly .
 
What should you do with this knowledge? If you work in a cluttered
environment, clean it up. A clean desk can help create a clear mind, and a
clear mind is m uch more able to remain disciplined. A Cornel l University
study provides some compelling  evidence supporting the concept of “ out of
sight, out of mind” as a means of im proving discipl ine, and it applies to far
more beyond your desk.
 
The stud y partic ipants were given a jar full of Hershey’ s Kisses that was
either clear or opaque and either placed on their desk or six feet away . On
average, the participants ate 7.7 Kisses per day from the clear jars on their
desks as opposed to 4.6 per da y from opaque jars in the same location.
When th e jars were placed six f eet away , the participants ate 5.6 Kisses per
day from the clear jars and 3.1 per day from the opaque jars.
 
Surprisingly , the study subjects consistently reported feeling th at they had
eaten mo re Kisses when the jars were placed six feet away , even  though the
opposite was true. That discrepancy is a crucial piece of information
because it provides a simple guideline for improving discipline. That is, you
can use  laziness to your ad vantage by clearing your workplace of
distractions. Y ou may not completely for get about those distractions, but the
more ef fort it takes for you to give in to a temptation, the less likely you are
to d o so. Furthe rmore, it eliminates some of the most counte rproductive
discipline lapses—the mindless ones that we don’ t even rea lize we are
doing.
 
It’ s so much ea sier to reach your hand into a cookie jar without thinking
about it if that jar is easily acc essible and visible. Those are t he types of
--- PAGE 59 ---
scenarios that you want to av oid when designing an environment for
discipline. If you place the cookie jar in a distant cabinet, you don’ t
eliminate the temptation altoget her but you make it so that giving in to the
temptation requires a lot of ef fort. That makes a big dif ference.
 
Ultimately , you want to create an environment for yourself that is clear of
distractions and obvious temptations. Y ou can make discipline drastically
easier ju st by eliminating the m indless and ef fortless lapses in discipline
that are made possible by an en vironment that hasn’ t been optimized. This
applies to your desk, your workspace, your of fice, what you can see from
your des k, and even your computer desktop. Keep them clear of distractions
as much as poss ible and you’ll simply for get about them. In your lapses of
discipline or boredom, you’ll have no other option than to keep working.
 
Default to Positive Actions and Behaviors
 
Optimizing your environment for self-discipline really comes down to
understanding how automatic most of your decision-making is.
 
T o illust rate tha t point, consider the findings of a study conducted in 1 1
European countries on or gan donors. The data showed that countries that
automatically have citizens opted-in to being or gan donors —requiring
action t o opt-out—had rates at or above 95% participation. When the
default choice was not to be an or gan donor , however , the highest rate found
in an y o f the 1 1 countries was a  mere 27% participation. Ultimately , people
just wen t with the option that re quired the least ef fort. It said nothing about
their actual intention or desire to be an or gan donor .
 
This same concept of defaulting to the more desirable choice can be applied
to your own self-discipline. W e’re lazy and will happily accept whatever is
in front of our faces. Y ou can m ake it easy for yourself to choose whichever
options most benefit you while  also making it as dif ficult as possible to
make harmful decisions.
 
A default option is one that the decision-maker chooses if he or she does
nothing or the minimal amount of ef fort. In other contexts, default options
--- PAGE 60 ---
also incl ude those that are normative or suggested. Countless experiments
and observationa l studies have shown that making an option the default will
increase the likelihood of it being chosen, which is known as the default
ef fect. Making decisions requir es ener gy , so we often choose  the default
option to conserve ener gy and a void making decisions, especial ly when we
aren’ t familiar with what it is we are making a decision about.
 
Optimizing thes e default decisions is where the bulk of your ef fo rts to make
a m ore discipline-conducive env ironment can take place. Y ou might believe
that you control the majority of your choices, but in reality , that isn’ t the
case. Ins tead, a significant amou nt of your actions are just responses to your
environment.
 
If yo u’re distracted by social media, for example, you might move the app
icons to the bac k page of your phone so that you aren’ t const antly seeing
them whenever you open your phone to do something else. Better yet, you
can log out of the apps after e ach use or delete them from your phone
altogether so that you’ll only use them when you really want t o instead of
letting them be distractions.
 
And if you’re in the habit of mindlessly picking up your phone while
working, you can simply start placing it faced down and far en ough away
that you have to get up to reach it. If you want to practice violin more, put it
on your desk with your music notes open. If you want to flos s your teeth
more, keep floss in your backpack, in your bathroom, on your nightstand,
and on your sofa.
 
There is  a seemingly endless number of examples of how you can utilize
the default ef fect to become more disciplined with very l ittle use of
willpower itself. Another one is that leaving potato chips and cookies out on
the kitch en cou nter will make it your default choice to eat t hose things
whenever you walk to the kitchen feeling even the slightest bit hungry .
Hiding those (or not buying th em at all) and replacing those unhealthy
snacks with fruit will instantly increase the probability that you eat fruit and
that you avoid the unhealthy snacks. W ant to exercise more? Put a pull-up
bar in your bathroom doorway .
--- PAGE 61 ---
 
If you keep sugary sodas and ju ices in your refrigerator , you’re making it
your default choice to drink them whenever you are thirsty and open the
fridge. B ut if you don’ t have tho se options, you increase the lik elihood that
you’ll drink water or make tea. W ant to take more vitamins? Pu t them right
next to your toothbrush for easier access.
 
If you sit in an of fice all day and have back problems, then  you might
benefit from standing up and walking frequently throughout the day . Y ou
can make this your default option by drinking water constantly so that you
are f orced to get up to go to the bathroom. Or perhaps you cou ld schedule
alarms on your phone and place it somewhere out of reach so that you have
to stand up to turn of f the alarm whenever it goes of f.
 
The whole point of this is that you can save your willpower and your ener gy
by maki ng posit ive changes to y our environment. The two biggest facets of
environmental change are reducing clutter and distractions and optimizing
choices based on the default ef fect.
 
If you reduce distractions from your environment, you’ll clear your mind,
which in turn increases focus, ef ficiency , and productivity . Furthermore,
you can use you r dopamine reward system to your advantage by  reinforcing
your ow n good habits while also cutting back on mindless pursuits of small
pleasures. Finally , you can make it so the path with the least ef fort leads to
the choices you desire and benefit from.
 
These all make i t so you can sidestep actually using discipline a nd to save it
for your  bigger daily challenges. After all, why exercise willpower when
you don’ t need to if you can plan around it?
 
Attention Residue
 
Sometimes focu sing on work can be dif ficult, and you fi nd yourself
wondering just why  it’ s so hard to stay on track and ignore shiny objects.
Luckily , there is an explanation for this. In 2009, Sophie Leroy published a
--- PAGE 62 ---
paper that was aptly titled “Why Is It So Hard to Do My W ork?” In it, she
explained an ef fect that she called attention residue.
 
Leroy noted that other researche rs had studied the ef fect of multitasking on
performance but that in the modern work environment, once yo u reached a
high eno ugh lev el, it was more common to find people working  on multiple
projects sequent ially . “Going from one meeting to the next, start ing to work
on one project and soon after having to transition to another is just part of
life in or ganizations,” Leroy explains.
 
This is essentiall y the modern version of multitasking—working  on projects
in short bursts a nd switching between them, not necessarily do ing them all
at on ce. People may not actually be working on multiple tasks at the same
time, bu t it’ s nearly as bad to keep switching between them in relatively
quick succession. For all intents and purposes, this is multitasking.
 
The problem identified by this research is that you cannot switch seamlessly
between tasks without a delay of sorts. When you switch from  T ask A to
T ask B, your a ttention doesn’ t immediately follow—a resid ue of your
attention remains stuck thinkin g about the original task. This becomes
worse an d the residue becomes  especially “thick” if your work  on T ask A
was unb ounded and of low inte nsity before you switched, but even if you
finish T a sk A before moving on, your attention remains divided  for a while.
 
Leroy’ s tests forced people to sw itch between dif ferent tasks in a laboratory
setting. In one of these experiments, she started the subjects working on a
set of word puzz les. In one of the trials, she would interrupt the ir work and
force the m to move on to a new and challenging task—for example, reading
resumes and making hypothetical hiring decisions. In other trials, she let the
subjects finish the puzzles before giving them the next task.
 
While th e participants were switching between puzzling and hiring, Leroy
would p lay a quick lexical decision game. This was so she cou ld quantify
the amount of leftover residue from the first task. The results were clear:
“People experiencing attention residue after switching tasks a re likely to
--- PAGE 63 ---
demonstrate poo r performance on that next task,” and the more intense the
residue, the worse the performance.
 
This doesn’ t seem too far of a stretch when you think about i t. W e’ve all
experienced that frantic moment  when we’re doing too many things at once
and suddenly find ourselves unable to do any at all. Ho w can you
concentrate on any task if you k eep switching back and forth b etween two
or m ore dif ferent things? Y ou’ll likely be stuck simply trying to make sense
of everything and or ganize it so you can understand it. It will only force you
to waste  time trying to catch up to where you were instead of pushing
forward. Y ou’ll take one step forward but two steps back each time you try .
 
Even worse news is presented b y a Stanford researcher , Clif ford Nass, who
examined the work pattern of p eople who multitask. The researchers split
their subjects into two groups : those who regularly do a lot of media
multitasking and those who don’ t. In one experiment, the groups were
shown s ets of two red rectangle s alone or surrounded by two, four , or six
blue rectangles. Each configura tion was flashed twice, and the participants
had to determine whether the two red rectangles in the se cond frame
dif fered from the first.
 
It sound s simple  enough: just ignore the blue rectangles and see if the red
ones change. In fact, it was quite simple, and those who didn’ t often
multitask had no trouble doing this. However , the high multitaskers
performed terribly as they were constantly distracted by the irrelevant blue
images.
 
Because they couldn’ t ignore the images, the researchers thought that
maybe they were better at storing and or ganizing information. Maybe they
had better memories. But this was proven wrong by the second test. After
being sh own se quences of alphabetical letters, the high multitaskers also
struggled to remember when a l etter was making a repeat appearance. And
again, the low m ultitaskers performed better overall. It was a s simple as
that.
 
--- PAGE 64 ---
“The low  multitaskers did great,” Ophir said. “The high multitaskers were
doing worse and worse the further they went along because they kept seeing
more letters and had dif ficulty keeping them sorted in their brains.”
 
Multitasking ma y seem to be the best of both worlds, but whe n you’re in
situations where  there are multiple sources of information coming from the
external world or emer ging from memory , you cannot filter out what is
irrelevant to your current goal. This failure to filter means that you are
slowed down by irrelevant infor mation and will struggle to complete a task
without distracti ons. It is much easier to focus on one thing at once, without
letting d istractions interfere, tha n to try doing several things at a time and
overload your brain with too much information.
 
From both of the se experiments, it’ s clear that multitasking isn’ t  really good
for anything, and all attempts to do it don’ t really lead an ywhere. By
multitasking you  are neither abl e to adequately focus on each new task nor
able to ignore any distractions that are hindering your work. There might be
certain w ays yo u can multitask 1% more ef fectively , but the overall lesson
is just to avoid it whenever possible.
 
Singletasking . What does this mean?
 
T o set everythin g else aside an d not check, monitor , email, or  even touch
anything other than the current task you are working on. It requi res singular
focus and the p urposeful and intentional tuning out of everything else.
Switch of f your notifications and ditch your phone. If you must be on your
computer , keep only one brows er tab or program open at a tim e. A lot of
singletasking is about conscious ly avoiding distractions that seem small and
harmless. The biggest culprits? Y our electronic devices. Ignore them when
possible.
 
Keep a spotless workspace so your eye doesn’ t catch somethin g that needs
cleaning or adjusting. Ideally , singletasking reduces your environment to a
blank room because you shouldn’ t pay attention to any of it.
 
--- PAGE 65 ---
Attempt to pay attention to w hen you are being interrupted or subtly
switching between tasks. This is hard to catch at first and will require you to
make conscious decisions against your instincts.
 
Something that will be very har d to resist is to tell yourself th at you must
act on somethin g immediately and interrupt your task. This is rarely the
truth. T o  combat this ur ge, set aside a Post-it to take notes for id eas that will
inevitably spring  to mind regarding other tasks. Just jot them down quickly
and return to your primary goal. Y ou can address them after your
singletasking period is over , and you won’ t have for gotten anything. It will
keep your mind focused on one single task while setting you up for future
success.
Batching
Henry F ord, founder of Ford Mo tor Company , got a lot of things right about
cars.
 
He h ad a  few competitors back in the day , but a primary reason those names
are e ssentially lost in time is because he was also the creator of  the factory
assembly line . On a factory assembly line, workers focus on one task at a
time.
 
This streamlines a process and makes it far more ef ficient than having a
single w orker se e a project thro ugh from start to finish, switching between
multiple tasks. It allows worker s to specialize and perfect their task, which
cuts down on er rors and makes troubleshooting far easier . W orkers didn’ t
have to do more thinking than was necessary for the task at hand. For Ford,
this mad e his automobile production ef ficiency and output shoot through
the roof and dominate his market.
 
That, in essence, is what batching  can do for you.
 
Batching is when you group similar tasks together to complete  them all at
once. Ford’ s assembly line was essentially 100% batching because his
workers only performed one task incredibly ef ficiently .
 
--- PAGE 66 ---
Let’ s take a common example we can all relate to—checking email.
 
If you have any  sort of online presence or job, you probably ha ve a steady
stream of emails trickling (o r gushing) into your inbox every hour .
Constantly chec king your email is an extremely inef ficient use  of time. It
interrupts other tasks and scatters your focus whenever you re ceive a new
email. Many of us drop what we ’re doing to take care of something from an
email. Then we have to start the  original task over again because our flow
and momentum has been interrupted.
 
Batching emails will considerably improve your productivity . An example
of this would be to only check your emails at the top of every two hours and
purposely ignore or block your inbox notifications. At first it might be
dif ficult, but limiting how often  you check email in this way al lows you to
focus on  your tasks without co nstantly being distracted and having to re-
acclimatize yourself.
 
Perhaps more importantly , it tea ches the lesson that saying no to some tasks
is ju st as import ant as saying ye s to the correct ones. Batching teaches the
art of purposeful, deliberate ignorance so you can focus on other tasks.
 
Switching from  task to task is a lar ge mental burden because you are
essentially stopp ing and starting from zero numerous times thr oughout the
day . It takes a lot of ener gy to switch from task to task, and there are usually
a few wasted m inutes just regaining your bearings and figur ing out the
status of the t ask you were working on. Of course, these kinds of
interruptions only lead to achieving just a portion of what you can and want
to.
 
In the example o f checking email, batching allows you to stay in a mindset
of readi ng and composing email with all its associated skills, tasks, and
reminders. Emai l is a distinctly dif ferent mindset and way of thinking than
designing a new graphic for an advertising campaign. Staying in the same
mindset pays huge dividends.
 
--- PAGE 67 ---
Batching allows you to save yo ur mental ener gy for the tasks  themselves
and not waste your ener gy on the process of switching back and forth
between them.
 
What else can you batch? Y ou can schedule all your meetings in one
afternoon so you will have a free, uninterrupted morning to work. Y ou can
plan to do ever ything that requires computer access in the m orning and
even bat ch parts  of tasks such as the parts that require you to m ake phone
calls.
 
Y ou can also batch your distr actions. This isn’ t to distract and amuse
yourself more ef ficiently; it’ s t o make sure that you are conserving your
ener gy and allowing your focused time to be exactly that—focused.
 
How ca n you batch distractions ? For example, if you’re burn ed out on a
particular task, you might want  to take a little social media break. By all
means, take it! However , allot just a bit more time to check all  of your
accounts: ESPN, Refinery29, and whatever other distractions you occupy
yourself with. Grab a new cup of cof fee, take a brisk walk around the of fice,
and say hello to your neighbor .
 
Get it all out of  your system so  that when you’re back to work, you can
have a solid and fixed block of time in which to focus. After all, if there is
nothing new on your Facebook page, you will probably feel less compelled
to check it. On ce you knock yourself out doing all these  distracting
activities within  the allotted time , you can switch to productive work for the
rest of your hour .
 
The mo re you divide your att ention among dif ferent activities, the less
productive you’ ll be. However , if you begin doing something similar to the
previous activity , you’ll find it’ s much easier to get going because your
mind is already geared toward doing a certain kind of task. Do all the
similar tasks together , one after the other , and then move on to the next
batch of  similar or related activ ities. Ef fective batching can skyrocket your
productivity no matter the context.
 
--- PAGE 68 ---
“Don’t-Do” List
 
Everyone know s the value of the to-do list—no doubt you’v e stumbled
across tips elsewhere about using a to-do list to increase productivity .
 
But everyone inherently kind of  knows what they should be doing and when
they need to do it by . The act of writing it down just helps remind them, and
it makes people more likely to take care of their obligations.
 
However , not everyone knows what they shouldn’ t  b e doing—wha t they
should be avoiding, common ways of procrastinating, and distractions that
masquerade as priorities. Along  with your to-do list, it’ s equally important
to m ake a don’ t-do list . Each day , we’re faced with choosing tasks that will
create the biggest impact for us, and there are many hidden obstacles.
 
Again, we all k now the obvious evils to avoid when trying to upgrade
productivity: so cial media, goofing around on the Internet, watching The
Bachelor ette  wh ile trying to work, and learning to play the flute while
reading.
 
It can be dif ficu lt to distinguish between real tasks and useless tasks, and it
will requ ire some hard thought on your part. Y ou need to fill your don’ t-do
list with tasks that will sneakily steal your time and undermine your goals.
These are tasks that are insignificant or a poor use of your time, tasks that
don’ t help your bottom line, and tasks that have a serious case of
diminishing returns the more you work on them.
 
If you continuo usly devote and waste your time on these tasks, your real
priorities and goals will be left untouched. Here’ s what you should put on
your don’ t -do list.
 
First, inc lude tas ks that are prior ities but which you can’ t do anything about
at present because of external circumstances.
 
These ar e tasks that are importa nt in one or many ways but are  waiting for
feedback from others or for underlying tasks to be completed first. Put these
--- PAGE 69 ---
on your  don’ t-d o list because t here is literally nothing you ca n do about
them!
 
Don’ t spend your mental ener gy  thinking about them. They’ll still be there
when you hear back from those other people. Just note that you  are waiting
to hear back fro m someone else and note the date on which you need to
follow-up if you haven’ t heard back. Then push these out of your mind
because they’re on someone else’ s to-do list, not yours. Y o u can also
temporarily push things of f your plate by clarifying and asking questions of
other pe ople. Th is puts the ball  in their court to act, and you can take that
time to catch up on other matters.
 
Second, include  tasks that don ’ t add value as far as your projects are
concerned.
 
There are many small items tha t don’ t add to your bottom line, and often
these are trivial things—busy w ork. Can you delegate these, assign them to
someone else, or even outsource them? Do they really require your time? In
other words, are they worth  your time? And  will anyone but you notice the
dif ference if you delegate the ta sk to someone else? By taking on the task
yourself, are you getting stuck in the weeds of perfectionism? Y ou should
spend your time on big tasks that move entire projects forward and not
myopic, trivial tasks. Often these are useless tasks disguised as important
ones, such as sel ecting the paint color for the bike shed in the parking lot of
the nuclear power plant you are building.
 
Third, in clude ta sks that are cur rent and ongoing but will not benefit from
additional work or attention paid to them.
 
These tasks suf fer from diminishing returns. These tasks are just a waste of
ener gy b ecause while they can s till stand to improve (and is there anything
that can’ t?), the amount of lik ely improvement will either not make a
dif ference in the overall outcome or success or will take a disp roportionate
amount of time and ef fort without making a significant dent.
 
--- PAGE 70 ---
For all intents a nd purposes, these tasks should be considered done . Don’ t
waste your time on them, and don’ t fall into the trap of conside ring them a
priority . Once you finish ever ything else on your plate, you can then
evaluate how much time you want to devote to polishing something.
 
If the task is at 9 0% of the quality you need it to be, it’ s time to look around
at what else needs your attenti on to bring it from 0% to 90 %. In other
words, i t’ s far more helpful to have three tasks completed at 8 0% quality
versus one task at 100% quality .
 
When y ou consciously avoid the items on your don’ t-do list, you keep
yourself focused  and streamlined. Y ou don’ t waste ener gy or tim e, and your
daily output will increase dramatically .
 
Why read a menu with food items that are unavailable? It’ s pointless and
wastes your mental bandwidth. By preventing your ener gy level from being
dissipated by those things that suck up your time and attention, a don’ t-do
list enables you to focus on what matters.
 
This can have a very dramatic and positive impact on your daily routine.
The few er things that tug on your mind, the better—the kind o f stress and
anxiety they create only hampe rs or kills productivity . A don’ t-do list will
free you r mind from the burd en of having too many things  in the air
because it eliminates most of those things! Y ou can focus on the balls that
are still in flight and steadily knock each one out.
 
The 40–70 Rule
Many of  us are reluctant to take actions outside the comfort zon e unless we
have all  the pertinent informatio n we need. But can you actually have too
much information to start something new?
Former U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell has a rule of thumb about
making decisions and coming to a point of action. He says th at any time
you face a hard choice, you should have no less  than 40% and no mor e  than
70% of the info rmation you need to make that decision. In that range, you
have en ough information to make an informed choice but not so much
--- PAGE 71 ---
intelligence that you lose your resolve and simply stay abreast of the
situation.
If yo u h ave less  than 40% of the information you need, you’re essentially
shooting from the hip. Y ou don’ t know quite enough to move forward and
will pro bably m ake a lot of mistakes. Conversely , if you chase down more
data until you g et more than 70 % of what you need (and it’ s unlikely that
you’ll tr uly need anything above this level), you could get overwhelmed
and uncertain. The opportunity may have passed you by and someone else
may have beaten you by starting already .
But in that swee t spot between 40% and 70%, you have enough to go on
and let your intuition guide your decisions. In the context of Colin Powell,
this is where ef fective leaders are made: the ones who have instincts that
point in the right direction are who will lead their or ganization to success.
For our purpose s of breaking o ut of the comfort zone, we can replace the
word “information” with other motivators: 40–70% of experience, 40–70%
reading or learning, 40–70% confidence, or 40–70% of planning. While
we’re completin g the task, we’ll also be doing analyzing and planning on
the fly , so this range of certainty helps us tend toward action.
When you try to achieve mo re than 70% information (or confidence,
experience, etc.), your lack of speed can result in many negative
consequences. I t can also destroy your momentum or stem yo ur interest,
ef fectively meaning nothing’ s going to happen. There is a high likelihood of
gaining nothing further from surpassing this threshold.
For example, let’ s say you’re o pening up a cocktail bar , whi ch involves
buying a lot of dif ferent types of liquor . Y ou can’ t expect to hav e absolutely
all the liquor you will ever nee d ready when the doors are ready to open.
But on the other hand, it doesn’ t make sense to commence operations
without enough for customers to choose from.
So you’ d wait until you have a t least 40% of available invent ory . Y ou’ve
got mom entum established. Y ou  figure if you could get more than half of
what you need, you’ll be in pre tty good shape to open. Y ou might not be
able to make ab solutely every drink in the bartender ’ s guide , but you’ll
have enough on-hand to cover the staple drinks with a couple of variations.
--- PAGE 72 ---
If you have aro und 50–60% inventory , you’re probably ready . When the
remaining inventory arrives, y ou’ll already be in action and can just
incorporate that new inventory into your of ferings. If you waite d until you
had 70%  or more inventory , you could find yourself stuck in neutral for
longer than you wanted to be.
This wa y of thinking leads to more action than not. W aiting until you have
40% of what yo u need to make  a move isn’ t a sedentary stay inside your
comfort zone— you’re actively planning what you need to do  to get out,
which is just fine (as long as it’ s not overplanning). Making the execution
before y ou’re 10 0%—or even halfway—ready to do so is the kind of gutsy
move that shakes you out of t he indif ference of your comfort zone in a
hurry .
 
Do Nothing
 
Burn-out is a ve ry real risk, esp ecially in today’ s modern age where to get
ahead, it seems that everyone has a full-time job as well as a sid e career that
is ai med toward making money .  W e seek to intentionally pack our days full
of ac tivities, professional and so cial, as a means of squeezing the last drop
of enjoyment out of our lives.
 
Ironically , this quickly becomes counterproductive because very few people
have a battery that can function  like that. As for what that mea ns for your
brain, any shred of fatigue will af fect your clarity of thought. That part
should be clear from our own l ives. W e function better on eight hours of
sleep versus three hours of sleep.
 
However , what’ s less obvious is that disconnecting from everything and
doing no thing a t all can actually be a path to greater creativity and insight.
There’ s a reason that when we a re zoning out at the gym or in the shower ,
we seem  to have a disproport ionate number of epiphanies. Thought is
inherently fatiguing and taxing on the mind and is characterized by the
brain em itting b eta waves. Relaxation and a lack of attention, on the other
hand, is characterized by the brain emitting alpha waves.
 
--- PAGE 73 ---
What are alpha waves also associated with? Studies by Professor Flavio
Frohlich, among  others, have shown that alpha waves are asso ciated with
enhanced memory , creative thinking, and overall increased happiness.
 
Maybe that’ s the reason meditation and practicing mindfulness is being
pushed s o hard these days. They intentionally slow you down and put you
into a state of releasing alpha waves, which trigger increased ha ppiness and
life satis faction. Most of the world’ s top performers, such as CEOs, always
mention meditat ion as a vital part of their daily routine—this is likely why .
The abil ity to tune things out al lows them to function at their peak when it
matters, like a battery rechar ge in the middle of the day .
 
For the high ac hievers out there, it’ s not necessarily a matter of taking a
break ju st to generate some alph a waves. Don’ t think of it as rest; think of it
as recov ering so  you can get ready when you need to really think creatively .
 
W e instinctively know to sleep, stretch, and warm up our bodies if we have
an a thletic competition, but we disregard doing the same for  our minds.
When y ou relax  more and do nothing at all, you enter a state of allowing
your mind to wander , and you also come back rechar ged and refreshed.
 
Allow y ourself to daydream because when was the last time your
daydreams were boring and routine versus creative and outlandish? If you
need a break, resist the ur ge to p ick up your phone and scroll through your
social media. Just staring into blank space might be a better use of your
time!
 
T akeaways:
 
Minimize your distractions in y our environment. It turns out that
out o f si ght is out of mind with distractions, so don’ t keep anyth ing
stimulating near your workstation otherwise your willpower will
slowly deplete itself.
Create d efault actions wherever possible. This is where the eas iest
and low est resis tance past for y ou is the path you want the m ost.
--- PAGE 74 ---
This is also done through curating and designing your environment
for productivity .
Singletasking is an important concept because it definitively proves
the flaw s of multitasking. When  you switch from task to task, you
create attention residue. This means it takes a while for you to
adjust to  each new task, even if  you were already familiar wit h it.
Y ou can eliminate this by sin gletasking, and also by batching,
which is when you do all similar types of tasks together  to
capitalize on your mental ef ficiency .
A do n’ t-do list can be just as pow erful as a to-do list because we are
rarely told what to ignore. As a result, these distractions or sne aky
time-suckers can invade our space without us even knowing we are
being duped. Include tasks yo u can’ t move forward on, m ake
progress on, or help.
The 40–70 rule is when you be at inaction through the amount of
information you  seek. If you have less than 40%, don’ t act. Bu t if
you have 70%, y ou must act. Y ou’ll never have 100%, and chan ces
are, 70%  is more than suf ficient—the rest you learn along the w ay ,
anyway .
Finally , you might want to do nothing from time to time. This is rest
and rela xation—but you should think of it as mental recovery . What
does an athlete do between races or matches? Y ou got it—they
recover so they are primed to work again when necessary .
 
--- PAGE 75 ---
Chapter 7: Deadly Pitfalls
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the science of following through, there are a massive number of mistakes
that you could make that could cost you your progress.
 
T ake Michael. Michael is only human. Thus, he made some mistakes with
follow-through w hen he first started his at-home freelance consulting firm.
He belie ved that starting his business would change his life overnight. He
imagined getting  tons of money  for minimal work, having plent y of time to
play with his newborn daughter , and even having time to hit the gym and
get pumped like Arnold. He im agined that having no boss would free up a
lot of his time.
 
W eeks w ent by and he did none of those things. In fact, his expectations felt
so extreme that they were intimidating and discouraging.
 
This is called false hope syndr ome . Michael thought he would accomplish a
lot m ore than w as humanly possible. His other mistake was not getting to
know hi mself o r how he work ed best. He tried to impose an unrealistic
schedule on himself that just did not fit his natural circadian rhythm and
work preferences.
 
False ho pe synd rome occurs when you think that you can do ev erything on
your to-do list and reach your  dreams in a short amount of time. Y ou
promise yoursel f, or a client, the moon. Then you are sorely disappointed
when you cannot deliver , and those big expectations have actua lly caused a
--- PAGE 76 ---
negative ef fect on your working  spirit. They’ll cause you to shrink back and
be m ore fearful of the failure you just experienced, and you may  end up in a
worse state than you were to begin with.
 
Michael was extremely disappointed by the lack of huge life changes he
saw when he started his busi ness. His life did not change  magically
overnight. He did not have the ener gy for all of these chan ges he was
planning to make. Plus, he hat ed working because he was fo llowing the
wrong schedule. He began to fall behind on work and procrastinate to avoid
the tasks he hat ed. He tried to work in the morning while dri nking three
cups of cof fee and found he just could not function.
 
After a while, Michael decided  to take a good long look at what he was
trying to do and  how he was failing. He adjusted his schedu le to fit his
lifestyle better and stopped working so early in the morning after staying up
late with his daughter , who had  not yet achieved a normal sleep cycle. He
found how to work on only a few goals at a time and make time for his
goals when he could.
 
Suddenly , Mich ael felt better an d worked better . Life was just easier since
he fell into a more comfortable and realistic groove. He was no longer so
overwhelmed and disappointed, so he stopped despising work and stopped
putting work of f out of loathing and dread.
 
Like Michael, we all make mist akes. But learning which mistakes to avoid
gives you a step up on other people. Y ou will not tax your self-discipline or
willpower for follow-through if you avoid these common mistakes.
 
False Hope Syndr ome
 
False ho pe syndrome, what Michael had, is where you overestimate the
changes you can make. Y ou set unrealistic expectations for what  you can do
and the speed, number , and eas e of the changes you plan to m ake to your
life. When you can’ t accomplish everything on your list of desired changes,
the d isappointm ent at failing to reach your lofty goals can cause a powerful
backlash that will cause you to give up hope.
--- PAGE 77 ---
 
Even if you have extremely strong self-discipline and desire to change, you
will still fail if your expectations are too high. Plan for proper expectations
and figu re out what you can actually hope for . Learn to let go o f hopes that
are not realistic and to set expectations that you can actually obt ain or meet.
One exa mple of  this might be thinking that you will magically be able to
change y our wo rk habits, even t hough you have tried doing the same things
in the past and have failed. Y ou  expect to get more done with distractions
and mul titasking, for example, even though that has never worked for you
before. Changin g your approach and not believing that you can initiate too
much se lf-change is essential to being successful because it prevents you
from falling into old habits and disappointing yourself.
 
False hope is a bout controlling your expectations. When yo u can have
realistic hopes, you can actua lly achieve, which leads to confidence,
competence, and skill. Anything else is just setting yourself up for
heartbreak and failure, which tends to not be productive. Don ’ t shoot too
high, but don’ t shoot too low; otherwise, you’ll grow bored and  unengaged.
Just rem ember that your goals can be entirely dif ferent from your
expectations.
Overthinking
Another mistake  is overthinking . Overthinking is a silent killer of joy , hope,
and reas on. It kills your positivity and desire to carry on. O verthinking
makes y ou inev itably fixate on the negative because they are  so easy to
find, and your entire worldview eventually goes dark.
Overthinking is so tempting bec ause it mimics progress. After all, you are
thinking about work and doing  research to make the best decision. Y ou
think yo u are being proactive. B ut really , overthinking is silently hampering
you and  this is a nother classic instance of mere motion versus ac tual action.
Y ou are considering too many options and doing too much research, which
limits your ability to make an executive decision. Y ou are wasting time
doing re search and forming plans for things that don’ t really matter instead
of putting one foot in front of the other and eliminating your inertia.
By over thinking, you freeze your ability to make decisions. P sychologist
Barry S chwartz suggests that a paradox of choice  is harmful because it
--- PAGE 78 ---
leads to analysis paralysis. His studies reveal that having more choices
actually causes people to develop anxiety and avoid making a choice in the
long run. Having fewer present choices helps people narrow it down.
Consider when you go to W alm art and you are faced with buying a new
printer for your of fice. Standing before the wall of printers, all of which
have great advertising and bo ast so many features, you fi nd yourself
overwhelmed an d can’ t settle on  a printer . Y ou panic and buy the first one
you see. (Or you go home without buying one even though you needed it.)
Y ou was ted so much time deliberating over printers and you ended up not
even usi ng the information you gained because you got overwhelmed. Y ou
can’ t decide because there is too  much information overloading  your brain
in the process. This is a perfect illustration of how overthinking kills your
ability to follow through and execute.
So instead of overthinking, place an emphasis on action. Most actions are
reversible—you can easily return a printer to W almart. But you’ll have
gained no further information if you stay in the same place without moving.
Y ou can  also limit the choices you give yourself and the criteri on you use.
Focus on the m ain things you need, and find the easiest choice that meets
your needs. Don’ t fall down th e rabbit hole of researching obsessively on
Google or comparing thousands of brands to find the best one. Chances are,
90% of them do exactly what yo u want with little variance. So what are you
really deliberating over?
If yo u a re taske d with buying th e new of fice printer , determine three traits
your of fice needs in a printer . Th en go to W almart and buy the cheapest one
that mee ts all of those needs. Put blinders on such that nothing else matters.
This is a classi c example of limiting your information intake  and being
willfully ignorant. Overthinking can sneak in because we don’ t have clarity
on what  matters , so when you can articulate those, suddenly y ou can see
clear choices.
W orry
W orry is  closely  related to overt hinking and it is the third powerful mistake
you might make in following through.
W orrying is when you ruminate  on problems, real or imagined . This takes
you out of the present, which you have control over , and puts y ou into the
--- PAGE 79 ---
future or past, which you have zero control over .
W orrying steals your control and composure, but taking action and focusing
on the present empowers you b y letting you get things done now . T ry to
switch y our mindset toward action and solutions rather than problems and
mistakes. Furthe rmore, worrying makes you focus on things that may not
even be real and  that you cannot  change, and you devote time and ener gy to
these worries that you could be spending on work instead.
It’ s a tall task to tell someone to worry less. But the truth is, worrying
causes y ou to suf fer twice—once during the worrying and again if the
dreaded event actually occurs. A nd if it doesn’ t occur , you’ve just suf fered
for no reason at all.
W orrying can also masquerade  as productivity , but again, it is wasted
motion. It’ s a lo t of ener gy spe nt to get nowhere. Focus on what you can
control and do something abou t. Focus on things that are real and have
happened, not imaginary outco mes or scenarios that may never come to
pass. Do what y ou can do at the moment, because that’ s all you can control;
in doing so, carry a mindset of action and control rather than fear .
Know Thyself
The final major mistake many  people make is failing to get to know
themselves. Kno wing yourself enables you to figure out how to work best
and create the most beneficial environments for yourself.
Not all people w ork the same w ay . One man might like a detailed schedule
that lays out eve ry part of his day , while another man needs bre athing room
and spontaneity .  One woman may need a quiet environment where she can
work alone while another w oman needs friends and a s ocial work
environment to thrive in.
Like Mi chael fo und out, don’ t impose unrealistic or unsuitable schedules,
ideals, o r enviro nments on yourself and expect to succeed. Find what is best
for you and then implement that to thrive. Y ou can only work best if you are
in your best env ironment. Find what that environment is instea d of forcing
yourself to conform to something that does not suit you and instead makes
you miserable and hinders your productivity .
When you use your preferences and strengths to your advanta ge, you are
more lik ely to follow through. This is because you are allowing yourself to
--- PAGE 80 ---
work at your be st, at your very peak. Y ou’re not fighting yourself and are
instead working within your flow and accessing your strengths. Y ou are not
making yourself miserable by following someone else’ s formula for
success.
Stop jud ging yourself and others for being dif ferent. W e are all dif ferent.
Our productivit y is very fragile and requires particular care to flourish.
T reat yourself to what helps you thrive if you want to follow through.
Figure o ut wha t times you wo rk best during the day . Then work during
those times. Don’ t let others judge you for not being functional before 8:00
a.m. or for wor king late into the night. W orking at your best time will
enable y ou to be more productive and follow through more easily because
you are using your ener gy when  you have the most of it. Don’ t  try to work
early in the mor ning if you are not a morning person because th at will only
lead you to failure.
There is  another component to getting to know yourself: diagnosing why
you are failing and fixing the un derlying problem. It is diagnosing the cause
and sour ce of your lack of follow-through so that you can addr ess it. Only
when yo u determine the cause of your poor follow-through can you actually
do something about it. Don’ t make the common mistake of attributing
failure to  the wrong cause, or you will never be able to address  and correct
the issue.
Be Sher lock Holmes if you are  having trouble with follow-through. Using
the pow er of deduction, deduce  what is wrong and why you are not being
productive. May be you are read ing another time management book when
you sho uld be keeping a calendar and not wasting time on bo oks. Maybe
you are trying to or ganize and label everything when really you just have
too m uch stuf f and need to get rid of some of it. Maybe you are discouraged
so y ou procrastinate and thus  keep failing and wondering why your
discouragement is growing.
Really c onsider how you feel w hen you don’ t follow through. L ook at your
feelings during the commencement stage of a project and see if you feel
overwhelmed or  put things of f for too long to reasonably finish them. Why
do you  s pe cifically give up? When you find the reason, you can figur e out
how to apply o ne of the rule s or mindsets in this book to rectify the
problem.
--- PAGE 81 ---
Failure h appens, and it’ s going t o happen. It’ s not the end of th e world. It’ s
certainly not the end of productivity . But failure is useful only when we’re
aware of the cause. When we see the cause, we can see how to fix it and
how to avoid repeated failure in the future. When we don’ t, we’re doomed
to repeat our mistakes until we do realize what’ s actually going on. A void
wasted time by diagnosing your reasons for failure early on.
 
T akeaways:
 
Pitfalls to following through and finishing what you start? T oo
many to  name. But a select fe w in this chapter are stronger and
more dangerous than most.
False ho pe synd rome is when y ou expect that you will be able to
change or improve to an unrealistic degree. When you inevit ably
fail to meet this mark, there is a very real backlash that result s in
you being even less motivated  and disciplined than before you
started. T o beat this, set proper expectations based on your his tory
and understand the dif ference between goals and expectations.
Overthinking is sneaky because  it feels like action and it even feels
productive. But it’ s not. Overthinking is when you fixate and can’ t
seem to take the first step toward action. Zero in on the details that
matter , deliberately ignore everything else, and you’ll feel much
more clarity .
W orrying is when you fixate on something and inevitably s tart
drawing out the negative scenarios and pitfalls. However , worrying
is al so when yo u fixate on things you can’ t control while igno ring
what yo u can control—the prese nt. The solution is to focus on what
you can do right now and only right now .
Do you know y ourself? W ell, what about in terms of productivity
and how  you work and produce the best? Y ou can consider tim e of
day , env ironment, setting, and so on. But you should consider that
knowing yourself is also the ability to look at yourself and
understand why  you may have  failed or come up short. It is  the
ability to self-diagnose and be self-aware.
 
 
--- PAGE 82 ---
Chapter 8. Daily Systems for Success
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ned star ted his own software consulting firm. He was thrilled to be his own
boss and did not anticipate th at he would have any troubl e managing
clients, answer ing emails, generating leads, sending out invoices,
performing his consulting work, and so on!
 
At f irst, everything in Ned’ s business was great. He would wake up early ,
answer e mails, and send out newsletters to generate leads. The n he would
get to his norma l job. When he had spare time, he would get bac k to emails.
Late into the night, he would be working, trying to market himself while
also working on his various projects.
 
But as his busin ess took of f, suddenly his inbox was inundated! His list of
projects grew longer and longer . Suddenly , he was completely
overwhelmed. Putting in 12-hour days at the very least, he struggled to
catch up  with emails, follow up with clients, send out invoices in a timely
manner , and meet deadlines. He  felt as if he were drowning. A ngry clients
would harass him, demanding to know where their work was!
 
Seeing his desk would have made Martha Stewart weep. Ned would spend
up to 15 minutes looking for important papers or notes that he had made on
projects. His home of fice was a jumbled mess. The room tha t he has so
cheerfully painted and decorated  was now a prison, where he s pent almost
all of his time.
 
--- PAGE 83 ---
Ned him self loo ked even worse. He looked like a zombie and s ubsisted on
cof fee and fast food. His eyes developed deep bags under them.
Then he realized that he was losing leads and losing money . Bad reviews
began to  pile up on his website  and his freelancing profile. It looked as if
his consulting firm was failing.
 
What did Ned do wrong? He didn’ t use a system. He relied on  himself to
get everything done and did not implement a way to or ganize and
streamline his work to make it e asier . He took on too much at once, trying
to accomplish tons of goals each  day without using a system to make those
goals easier .
 
W illpower is great to a degree. Y ou certainly need it in your life to push you
to b e the best that you can be . But relying on your willpow er and self-
discipline alone to be successful can fail you if you rely on it too heavily
because you cannot push yours elf past your maximum. Once you hit your
maximum, your  willpower and self-discipline cannot push you to move
forward. W illpower and self-discipline are fickle and can crumble when you
become overwhelmed.
 
The story of Ne d is a great glimpse into what happens when  you try to
always p ush yo urself to do things that you need to do for success in life.
Overcoming the sense of being overwhelmed and overworked is not easy .
Y ou ha ve to create an or gan izational system to make your success
consistent even when you’re feeling glum and fatigued.
 
Particularly in business, there will be days when the inertia is too  heavy and
you don ’ t feel like performing the tasks on your to-do list. Th ere will be
tasks tha t you dread doing and t hus can’ t summon the necessary willpower .
And the re will even be people who try to block your success, a nd you may
not always have the strength to fight them of f.
 
That is where daily systems come into play .
 
A sy stem is a set of actions that you consistently perform every day in order
to st reamline your success and r each your goals. Unlike your se lf-discipline
--- PAGE 84 ---
and willpower , a system or gani zes you and helps you perform your duties
without having to push yourself. W illpower and self-discipline, on the other
hand, on ly of fer you strength to force yourself to do things; they do not give
you a set way of doing things or a streamlined list of actions to complete.
 
A sy stem becomes routine so th at you do not have to think abo ut what you
need to do, but instead you just do it. The key to a system is to work on
progress and consistency in you r life, as opposed to working on goals. For
instance, let’ s go back to Ned and consider if he had used a time
management system to split up tasks and make time for each tas k. He could
have aut omated things so that he  could have gotten all of his tasks done in a
timelier manner , with less stress, disor ganization, and confusion.
 
Had Ned  implem ented a few sim ple daily systems into his app roach to his
business, he would have been more successful. Ned relied on his self-
discipline too much. He just cou ld not force himself to do so mu ch work on
his own. W orking at maximum, he burned out and began to fail.
 
For pers pective, a goal is antithetical to a system because goals play a part
in syste ms. Sys tems are simply ways to make sure you take the actions
necessary to reach a goal. They are not limited to one thing at a time, as
goals are; instead, they apply to everything you must do in your endeavor .
Once you complete one goal, you can move onto the next one easily by
simply f ollowing your system. Systems will carry you through every single
goal you set.
 
Systems also protect you from failure even if you do not reach a goal. Say
your go al for the day is to complete 1000 words of writing for a grant
proposal. Y ou use a system to he lp you get some work done, but you do not
reach the 1000-word mark. That is fully acceptable, because y ou still got
some w riting done. A system enables you to reach a better pl ace, even if
you do not meet  your exact goa l. From that better place, it is even easier to
move forward and accomplish your ultimate goal later on. Every day is a
chance t o get closer and closer  to your final goal when you h ave a good
system in place.
 
--- PAGE 85 ---
Ned foc used on accomplishing a series of goals each da y , such as
generating new leads and finish ing projects. He did not implement any sort
of system  that forced him to per form the necessary actions for h is goals at a
specific time each day . Had he  implemented a system and structured his
work, he would have been able to tackle his goals in a timely manner
instead of working in chaos a nd exhausting himself. Then his business
would have thrived as he earned new clients and pleased old ones
simultaneously .
 
Creating systems begins with having an overall goal in mind. Then you can
build the scaf folding that will get you there.
 
Keep a Scor eboard
 
The first type o f system is to keep a detailed scoreboard for yo urself. The
heart of this syst em is that you’ll be far more motivated if you feel that you
have the possibility to win  s ometh ing. Y ou must see some type of gain to
fuel interest in the project. Therefore, you want to keep score.
 
People play at their best when they feel as if they are winning or losing, so
be sure to demo nstrate how you are progressing and winning. People play
dif ferently when they are keeping score. If you’re not keeping score, you’re
just practicing. So start keeping score today to provide automatic
motivation for yourself and others. Here are some things you can do to keep
a scoreboard.
 
First, track your progress.  Every time you get something done, check it of f
of your list. Seeing your tasks checked of f will give you a sense that you are
actually getting something done. A big to-do list on a whiteboa rd mounted
on th e w all can help you. This is so motivating because people can visually
see they are getting things done, and seeing what they complete makes them
realize that the tar get goal is more and more possible.
 
Another important element of this system is to celebrate small victories for
you and those you are working with whenever you see a v ictory . The
smaller the victory , the better , because it is a chance to motiv ate yourself
--- PAGE 86 ---
and others. This also allows you to have an overall greater number of
victories to feel good about and celebrate momentum with. Find every little
small victory— be it scoring a  new client or finding a way around an
obstacle you face. Create friendl y competition  to bo ost this con cept, even if
you have to compete with your own past performance .
 
Finally , always have an ultima te reward or incentive at the end of the
project.  When y ou meet the ultimate goal that you have set, rew ard
yourself. Having  some type of reward set up for when you hit your goal can
give you something to look fo rward to, which pushes you fo rward even
when you want to give up. T re at yourself to a spa day when you hit that
mark, for example, or treat your  team to a night out. This ment ality is why
bonuses work well to motivate workers in companies.
 
An example of how to integrate this system into your work life i s to create a
list of things yo u wish to accom plish. When you check of f an item on the
list, hav e a small celebration, su ch as a pizza party for the who le team. Be
sure to set incentives, such as bonuses or a day trip, at the end . For every
sale, you  want to mark it and c elebrate it. V iew every day as a chance to
rack up more points on your scoreboard.
 
T ime Management
 
A ti me management system is essential to success for anyone. Knowing
how to divvy u p your time and how much time to give to each task will
help you complete goals on time. T ime management is essentia l because it
really h elps you get things done by your deadline, and it provides
motivation to follow through on tasks. Y ou can set realistic expectations
once you know an approximate time frame for everything you do.
 
T o pract ice goo d time management, first set a routine for your work. A
routine i s a system that enables  you to know what to do when . Y ou know
you need to start work at nine, for example. T ake deadlines and  other time
commitments into account when setting up your routine. Be sure to set
aside time for w ork, eating, sleep, appointments, and other commitments. In
addition, don’ t neglect yourself or you will hit your maximum and become
--- PAGE 87 ---
too stressed to handle work. So  be sure to also tend to your health, sleep
well, and eat right.
 
Always assess your time needs on a project. Ask yourself, “How much time
will som ething t ake?” T o get a better idea of your time needs, you can time
yourself on certain tasks to get an idea of how long things take you at your
normal, comfortable pace. Y ou should never feel hectic or stre ssed with a
good tim e mana gement system, so be sure to time yourself doing things at a
pace tha t does not stress you out and give yourself some wiggle room for
unforeseen issues that may cause you to need more time.
 
Read over your daily tasks at the start of the day . When you get to work or
even wh en you wake up, look  over a planner and see what you have
planned for the day . This helps you ensure that you meet goals in a timely
manner . Be sure to account time for important appointments, as  well as the
amount of time you need to do things related to your busine ss, such as
answering ema ils, attending networking events, and havi ng strategy
meetings.
 
Minimize distra ctions whenever you are working. Focus on one thing at a
time. Multitasking and having distractions can drastically cut down on your
productivity . Set a specific time to check emails, for example, instead of
checking emails throughout the day and letting your inbox distract you from
the task  at hand. Also have a set time to focus on marketing or on
networking.
 
Lower Y our T ransaction Costs
 
T ransaction cost s is an economic  term for the cost you must expend to be in
the market.
 
Whenever you do something, yo u have some sort of cost associated with it.
The cost may be monetary , such as an investment to start a business. Or it
may be emotional, such as th e apprehension of embarking on a new
business opport unity without knowing if you will succeed or fail. Or it
--- PAGE 88 ---
could ev en be physical, demanding your physical prowess and labor . These
are simply the costs, or obstacles, you have to overcome to play the game.
 
Build a system around manipula ting these costs to your benefit.  Cut out the
costs that tax yo u and make the gains you want convenient and easy .. Make
it harder on you rself to do unpr oductive things, such as procrastinating, by
raising the costs that such habits will create for you. Meanwhile, lower the
transaction costs  on things you want to do more consistently . Y ou want to
encourage good habits, such as systematic work and time management, by
making them easier for you so that they “cost” less. Meanwhile, flip the
tables a nd make bad habits, l ike being disor ganized, having poor time
management, and procrastinating, too expensive to entertain.
 
For example, by being more or ganized, you have less stress and spend less
time looking for things you nee d in the of fice. So that makes it easier to
practice this behavior . Find ef fortless means to or ganize your of fice without
spending too much money and without taking too much time. Use a simple
color co ding sys tem for papers and use boxes laying around the house to
create p aper bin s that you labe l clearly with a Sharpie. This costs almost
nothing, yet it saves you so much hassle as you work.
 
Notice h ow the behavior of bei ng or ganized becomes easier with reduced
costs and how that good habit makes reaching your goal easier . Y ou just cut
down on your costs by reducin g the taxation of being disor ga nized. Plus,
you expended almost no money or ef fort or ganizing your of fice.
 
Make undesired behaviors cost too much. T rain yourself to view bad
behavior as something that is too expensive to engage in. For example, raise
the costs  of unproductive behavior by forcing yourself to climb  five flights
of stairs to smoke or eat chocolate or browse your phone.
 
Let’ s loo k at how to generally m anipulate transaction costs. The  first part of
this is to make good habits cost nothing. The reward must be greater than
the c ost for a good behavior . This is the only way to motivate  yourself to
make positive changes. For example, you might make it easier to be
or ganized by spending less mo ney on an or ganizational system for the
--- PAGE 89 ---
of fice, a nd you can make it so simple to find things in the o f fice that it
reduces stress at work.
 
Make bad habits cost a lot. Y ou won’ t want to engage in a bad habit if the
costs outweigh the profit. A good example is to reduce unproductivity by
making time that you spend not working lose you money .
 
Consider how Ned could have r educed his transaction costs. The amount of
work he  put into his business became too much for him to hand le alone and
he quick ly hit his maximum, where he could not function anymore. By
making work easier and being d isor ganized harder , he could have made his
life and work much more ef ficient. He should have made his bad habits
(working 12-hour days) too expensive for him to af ford and his good habits
(or ganization) practically ef fortless.
 
Gather All Information First
 
This system is a bout gathering everything you require for a project before
you even  start the project. Find the information that is critical to  the project
and try to comp lete your research phase all in one go. This system saves
you the time of trying to gather resources while you are immersed in your
project. Y ou can focus on the pr oject rather than on gathering re sources and
information. This removes the hurdles that halt momentum.
 
Y ou can  use momentum to ro ll forward, making the project easier to
perform as you are in the middle of it. Having to stop your work to find out
information or find a supply can kill momentum. Momentum i s when you
work wi thout stopping, letting each completed goal build on top of each
other to make the next goal easier to complete.
 
For example, before a big wor k project, you may need a team of people
with certain skills or a single partner . Y ou may need some basic  supplies or
a specific software. Even consider the of fice supplies you will need, such as
pens and  paper , and have them a t hand. Gather all of the resources you need
and have them ready before you even commence working. Also, list all of
the i nformation you will need b efore working, such as contact information
--- PAGE 90 ---
for other workers and the deadline, so that you do not have to search for this
information whi le you are busy . Think of it like carrying all th e groceries
out of your car in one trip.
 
In Kerry Patterson’ s book Crucial Conversations, he suggests some of the
information you must gather or assess before you embark on any project.
Assign responsibility . As k “W ho is responsible for what?” Assign a name
to each task that must be comp leted. This is essential for crea ting clarity .
Y ou wan t to have a leader , a person in char ge of budgeting, a person in
char ge o f marketing, a person in char ge of human resources, and so on. For
every as pect of your project, find someone who can handle it. If you are
handling everything by yours elf because you are working solo, then
delegate responsibility to yourse lf by splitting your tasks into dif ferent roles
and then  performing each of those roles separately at dif fere nt times to
ensure you complete them.
Specify your desired outcome and expectations . Be very specific about
what yo u want to accomplish a nd what you expect to do. Having a tar get
outcome can guide you in succe ss by making it clear to you wh at tasks you
have to complete and how you need to work. Specify how much work you
want to get done, how many un its you want to sell, how much money you
want to make, a nd when you wa nt to meet your goals by . Go ahead and set
clear goals that are both reach able and inspiring. For example, you may
want to look at previous sales  and say , “Okay , we sold 1000 units last
month. Let’ s hit 1200 this month!”
Determine the deadline . Y ou probably h ave a deadline set by your boss or
client. If you d on’ t, set one y ourself. Nothing will motivate  you like a
specific date when you must h ave a project completed by . Deadlines can
give you  a clear guideline for ho w to structure your time and when to meet
milestones. Make sure to set a realistic deadline—do not promi se someone
the moo n and then not be able to deliver . Y ou want to set a d eadline that
gives you plenty of room to co mplete something by , taking into account
potential setbacks and challenges that cost you time.
Have a follow-u p plan . Y ou don’ t wan t to think of your current goal as the
finish line because life goes on after you reach the goal. What h appens after
the project? What do you do next? Have a plan for the steps to take once
--- PAGE 91 ---
you com plete a project and what goals to move on to. This can motivate
you as you have more things to look forward to.
Also consider following.
Gather physical resources . Y ou will need dif ferent things to get something
done—money , people, software, of fice supplies, materials. Find out what
you need and obtain all of it.
 
Identify obstacles .  Knowing the obstacles beforehand can help you
determine how to mitigate them . People will have a ton of enthu siasm when
they brainstorm ideas; they see only sunshine and are eager to press on.
When unexpected obstacles aris e, however , their enthusiasm runs out and
inertia sets in. If everyone involved knows what to expect and thinks of
these obstacles as hurdles to overcome as a team, then morale will not be so
heavily impacte d. If you see no obstacles in your path, you need to
brainstorm more to account for potential pitfalls.
 
Back to our example of poor N ed. Imagine how much easier th ings would
have been for him if he ha d or ganized his resources and gathered
information first. First, he should have or ganized his of fice, putting notes
where it  would be easy to find t hem when he needed them. Nex t, he should
have found the s oftware program s that would have let him automate emails,
newsletters, quotes, and invoices, which would have lessened the workload
he carrie d by himself. Finally , he should have anticipated the volume of
work coming in so that he could  have managed his time better and handled
his work load more ef ficiently . He should have set deadlines and  made sure
to meet them. He could have c onsidered hiring someone else  to take on
some of  his responsibility had he estimated how much work he was going
to gain.
 
On top of that, he should have identified challenges and prepared for them,
such as having t oo great of a workload. Then he could have mit igated these
challenges with a bit of foret hought. Gathering all of these resources
beforehand could have saved Ned so much work after he launched his
business.
 
--- PAGE 92 ---
Daily systems streamline work and cut down on the amount of willpower
you require to plug on in life. They make actions systematic and therefore
they encourage progress. Y ou can avoid failure in your life by using
systems to implement ef ficiency  and forward progress. Don’ t be a Ned. Use
daily systems to propel yourself into success.
 
T akeaways:
 
Systems are sets of daily behaviors. It doesn’ t have to be more
complex than that. Systems stand in stark contrast to goals because
goals a re one- of f accomplish ments, while systems empha size
consistency and long-term success.
Keep a scoreboard for everythin g lar ge and trivial. This keeps you
motivated and striving toward growth and progress.
Manage your time better by understanding how long things will
take in  reality and accounting for your own quirks and
inef ficiencies.
Lower your transaction costs by making undesirable behaviors
inconvenient an d unwieldy while making desirable behav iors
convenient and easy .
Gather a ll of the information and materials you need all at once and
before you get started. This al lows you to work interruption-free
and gather momentum.
--- PAGE 93 ---
S u m m a r y  G u i d e
 
Before getting to the overall book summary… I would be highly , greatly ,
amazingly grateful and appreciative if you felt like taking just 30 seconds
and leaving me a review on Amazon! Reviews are incredibly important to
an author ’ s livelihood, and they are shockingly hard to come by . Strange,
right?
 
Anyway , the more reviews my books get, the more I am actually able to
continue my first love of writing. If you felt any way about this book,
please leave me a review and let me know that I’m on the right track     
C L I C K  H E R E  T O  R E V I E W
 
 
Chapter 1. Stop Thinking, Just Execute
 
The art of follow ing through is something that allows you to cr eate
the life that you actually want instead of settling for the life you
currently have.
It ca n be said to be composed of four parts: focus, self-discipl ine,
action, and persistence—all equally important.
However , it’ s not just as easy as  knowing you have to do it and thus
doing it. There are powerful reasons we don’ t finish what we s tart
and follo w through very often. T hese reasons can generally be split
into two camps: inhibiting tactics and psychological roadblocks.
Inhibiting tactic s are the ways we plan against ourselves with out
even realizing it. They include (1) setting bad goals, (2)
procrastination, (3) indulging in  temptations and distractions, and
(4) poor time management.
Psychological roadblocks are the ways we don’ t follow through
because we are unconsciously protecting ourselves. These inc lude
(1) lazin ess and lack of discipli ne, (2) fear of judgment, rejection,
and failu re, (3) perfectionism out of insecurity , and (4) lack of s elf-
awareness.
 
--- PAGE 94 ---
Chapter 2: Staying Hungry
 
How do  we stay hungry and mo tivated? By delving deep and really
asking what internal and exte rnal motivators you have at y our
disposal—a task that is rarely performed.
External motiva tors are when w e leverage other people, places, and
things to push us into action. For the most part, these are when  we
want to avoid negative consequences involving other peo ple,
places, and things. These methods include accountability partners
and groups, putting money down upfront, and self-bribery .
Internal motivat ors are when we look at how we stand to benefit
and improve our lives. These are universal needs, drives, and
desires t hat are easy to lose trac k of. The easy way to find thes e is
to answer a set of questions that directly asks things such as how am
I go ing to benef it fr om this and  h ow does my life stand to impr ove
fr om this ? It’ s only through answering these questions that you
realize what you are neglecting.
Anything we want to accomplish has an associated opportunity
cost. W e  must sacrifice, even if we are sacrificing our ability to  lie
on the couch an d watch television. W e can deal with this me ntal
obstacle by playing with the cost-benefit ratio so the cost is
minimized or the benefit is maximized.
Motivation has been shown to work best when we are reminded of
it—otherwise, out of sight, out of mind. Thus, you should have c ues
you’re y our motivations all around you—but make sure to k eep
them dis tinct and memorable, use all five senses (even taste), and
make sure to cha nge and switch them periodically to avoid grow ing
used to them and for getting them.
 
Chapter 3: Cr eate a Manifesto
 
A m anifesto is n othing more than a set of rules to follow every day .
W e mig ht hate rules, but rules t ake the guesswork out of our days
and give us gu idelines to follow . They make matters black and
white, which is h elpful to following through because there is sim ply
no other choice.
--- PAGE 95 ---
Rule 1: Are you acting out of laziness? If so, is this a
characterization you want about yourself?
Rule 2: Three m ajor tasks a day , maximum. Dif ferentiate betw een
important tasks, ur gent tasks, and simple wasted motion.
Rule 3: Create daily limitations and requirements for yourself.
These keep you within the bounds of what you know you need to
do. These are also the building blocks of good habits.
Rule 4: Sometimes we lose sight of what we want to accomp lish.
Thus, reaf firm your intentions b y stating “I want,” “I will,” and “I
won’ t” statements.
Rule 5: T ry to lo ok into the future, 10 minutes, hours, and days at a
time. Do you like what you see when you consider not follow ing
through? Is it worth the benefit to the current self at the expense of
the future self? Probably not.
Rule 6: It’ s just 10 minutes, right? So if you want to quit, it’ s jus t 10
minutes. And if you need to wait, it’ s just 10 minutes.
 
Chapter 4: Follow-Thr ough Mindsets
 
Following throu gh is 100% me ntal, which means it’ s probably a
good idea to talk about the mindsets you attempt to embody .
Mindset 1: It’ s a ll worthwhile. If you feel that your hard work will
get y ou somewhere, you belong and are as good as anyone else,  and
you feel impact toward your o verall goals, execution is easier to
stick with.
Mindset 2: Become comfortable with discomfort. Everything you
want to do will have elements of discomfort, unless you just want to
watch television  all day by yourself. Thus, becoming used to this
feeling allows you to tackle what you want without fear .
Mindset 3: W ithout following through, there is no learning. Only
when you finish something can  you evaluate yourself and correct
your errors. Embody an information-gathering mindset.
Mindset 4: The detrimental po wer of stress and anxiety can’ t be
overstated. Eve n being in a poor mood is dangerous to your
productivity and follow-through. Be aware and take proactive
measures to modulate your stress levels.
--- PAGE 96 ---
 
Chapter 5: The Science of Smashing Pr ocrastination
T ackling procrastination is similar to pushing Sisyphus’ s stone. Y ou
can beat  it back for a bit, but it ’ s so natural that you will never be
fully rid of it. The problem is ty pified by time inconsistency , where
we comprise two selves that don’ t have overlapping desires—one
wants gratification in the future and the other wants it right now .
T emptation bu ndling is an ef fective method to b attle
procrastination. It consists of combining your unpleasurable tasks
with something pleasurable. This mainly works because you are
battling time inconsistency and giving both selves what they w ant
simultaneously .
Start easy and small. Procrastination thrives of f inertia. Therefore,
you need to mak e the path to motion and action as easy as possi ble.
Then eventually you can gain momentum—the opposite of inertia.
Sometimes beating procrastination just requires a kick in the pa nts.
Fear and  productive paranoia can do that to you—if you are so
fearful of the negative repercussions you will face, then you will
certainly be spurred into action. But this is not a method to use very
frequently .
Chapter 6. No Distraction Zone
 
Minimize your distractions in y our environment. It turns out that
out o f si ght is out of mind with distractions, so don’ t keep anyth ing
stimulating near your workstation otherwise your willpower will
slowly deplete itself.
Create d efault actions wherever possible. This is where the eas iest
and low est resis tance past for y ou is the path you want the m ost.
This is also done through curating and designing your environment
for productivity .
Singletasking is an important concept because it definitively proves
the flaw s of multitasking. When  you switch from task to task, you
create attention residue. This means it takes a while for you to
adjust to  each new task, even if  you were already familiar wit h it.
Y ou can eliminate this by sin gletasking, and also by batching,
--- PAGE 97 ---
which is when you do all similar types of tasks together  to
capitalize on your mental ef ficiency .
A do n’ t-do list can be just as pow erful as a to-do list because we are
rarely told what to ignore. As a result, these distractions or sne aky
time-suckers can invade our space without us even knowing we are
being duped. Include tasks yo u can’ t move forward on, m ake
progress on, or help.
The 40–70 rule is when you be at inaction through the amount of
information you  seek. If you have less than 40%, don’ t act. Bu t if
you have 70%, y ou must act. Y ou’ll never have 100%, and chan ces
are, 70%  is more than suf ficient—the rest you learn along the w ay ,
anyway .
Finally , you might want to do nothing from time to time. This is rest
and rela xation—but you should think of it as mental recovery . What
does an athlete do between races or matches? Y ou got it—they
recover so they are primed to work again when necessary .
Chapter 7: Deadly Pitfalls
 
Pitfalls to following through and finishing what you start? T oo
many to  name. But a select fe w in this chapter are stronger and
more dangerous than most.
False ho pe synd rome is when y ou expect that you will be able to
change or improve to an unrealistic degree. When you inevit ably
fail to meet this mark, there is a very real backlash that result s in
you being even less motivated  and disciplined than before you
started. T o beat this, set proper expectations based on your his tory
and understand the dif ference between goals and expectations.
Overthinking is sneaky because  it feels like action and it even feels
productive. But it’ s not. Overthinking is when you fixate and can’ t
seem to take the first step toward action. Zero in on the details that
matter , deliberately ignore everything else, and you’ll feel much
more clarity .
W orrying is when you fixate on something and inevitably s tart
drawing out the negative scenarios and pitfalls. However , worrying
is al so when yo u fixate on things you can’ t control while igno ring
--- PAGE 98 ---
what yo u can control—the prese nt. The solution is to focus on what
you can do right now and only right now .
Do you know y ourself? W ell, what about in terms of productivity
and how  you work and produce the best? Y ou can consider tim e of
day , env ironment, setting, and so on. But you should consider that
knowing yourself is also the ability to look at yourself and
understand why  you may have  failed or come up short. It is  the
ability to self-diagnose and be self-aware.
 
Chapter 8. Daily Systems for Success
 
Systems are sets of daily behaviors. It doesn’ t have to be more
complex than that. Systems stand in stark contrast to goals because
goals a re one- of f accomplish ments, while systems empha size
consistency and long-term success.
Keep a scoreboard for everythin g lar ge and trivial. This keeps you
motivated and striving toward growth and progress.
Manage your time better by understanding how long things will
take in  reality and accounting for your own quirks and
inef ficiencies.
Lower your transaction costs by making undesirable behaviors
inconvenient an d unwieldy while making desirable behav iors
convenient and easy .
G a t h e r  a l l  o f  t h e  i n f o r m a t i o n  a n d  m a t e r i a l s  y o u  n e e d  a l l  a t  o n c e  a n d
b e f o r e  y o u  g e t  s t a r t e d .  T h i s  a l l o w s  y o u  t o  w o r k  i n t e r r u p t i o n - f r e e
a n d  g a t h e r  m o m e n t .
