
Over ninety percent of your mental life is subconscious, so men and wom -
en who fail to make use of this marvelous power live within very narrow 
limits. Your subconscious processes are always lifeward and constructive. 
Your subconscious is the builder of your body and maintains all its vital 
functions. It is on the job twenty-four hours a day and never sleeps. It is 
always trying to help and preserve you from harm.
Your subconscious mind is in touch with infinite life and boundless wis -
dom, and its impulses and ideas are always lifeward. The great aspira -
tions, inspirations and visions for a grader and nobler life spring from the 
subconscious. Your profoundest convictions are those you cannot argue 
about rationally because they do not come from your conscious mind; 
they come from your subconscious mind. Your subconscious speaks to 
you in intuitions, impulses, hunches, intimations, urges and ideas, and it 
is always telling you to rise, transcend grow, advance, adventure and 
move forward to greater heights. The urge to love, to save the lives of 
others comes from the depths of your subconscious. For example, during 
the great San Francisco earthquake and fire of April 18, 1906, invalids 
and cripples who had been confined to be for long periods of time, rose up
and performed some of the most amazing feats of bravery and en -
durance. The intense desire welled up within them to save others at all 
costs, and their subconscious responded accordingly.
Great artists, musicians, poets, speakers and writers tune in with their 
subconscious powers and become animated and inspired. For example, 
Robert Louis Stevenson, before he went to sleep, used to charge his sub -
conscious with the task of evolving stories for him while he slept. He was 
accustomed to ask his subconscious to give him a good, marketable 
thriller when his bank account was low. Stevenson said the intelligence of 
his deeper mind gave him the story piece by piece, like a serial. This 
shows how your subconscious will speak lofty and wise sayings though 
you, which your conscious mind knows nothing about.
Mark Twain confided to the world on many occasions that he never 
worked in his life. All his humor and all his great writings were due to the 
fact that he tapped the inexhaustible reservoir of his subconscious mind.
How The Body Portrays The Workings Of The Mind
The interaction of your conscious and subconscious mind requires a simi -
lar interaction between the corresponding system of nerves. The cere -
brospinal system is the organ of the conscious mind, and the sympathetic 
system is the organ of the subconscious mind. The cerebrospinal system 
is the channel through which you receive conscious perception by means 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
of your five physical senses and exercise control over the movement of 
your body. This system has its nerves in the brain, and it is the channel of
your volitional and conscious mental function.
The sympathetic system, sometimes referred to as the involuntary ner -
vous system, has its center in a ganglionic mass at the back of the stom -
ach known as the solar plexus, and is sometimes spoken of as the ab -
dominal brain. It is the channel of that mental action, which unconsciously
supports the vital functions of the body.
The two systems may work separately or synchronously. Judge Thomas 
Troward, The Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science  (New York: Robert 
McBride & Co 1909) says, “The vagus nerve passes out of the cerebral re -
gion as a portion of the voluntary system, and through it we control the 
vocal organs' then it passes onward to the thorax sending out branches to
the heart and lungs; finally, passing through the diaphragm, it loses the 
outer coating, which distinguishes the nerves of the voluntary system and
becomes identified with those of the sympathetic system, so forming a 
connecting link between the two and making the man physically a single 
entity.
“Similarly different areas of the brain indicate their connection with the 
objective and subjective activities of the mind respectively, and speaking 
in a general way we may assign the frontal portion of the brain to the for -
mer and the posterior portion to the latter, while the intermediate portion 
partakes the character of both.” 
A rather simple way of looking at the mental and physical interaction is to 
realize that your conscious mind grasps an idea, which induces a corre -
sponding vibration in your voluntary system of nerves. This in turn causes
a similar current to be generated in your involuntary system of nerves, 
thus handing the idea over to your subconscious mind, which is the cre -
ative medium.
This is how your thoughts become things.
Every thought entertained by your conscious mind and accepted as true is
sent by your brain to your solar plexus, the brain of the subconscious 
mind, to be made into your flesh, and to be brought forth into your world 
as a reality.
There Is An Intelligence Which Takes Care Of The Body
When you study the cellular system and the structure of the organs, such 
as eyes, ears, heart, living, bladder etc., you learn they consist of groups 
of cells, which form a group intelligence whereby they function together 
and are able to take orders and carry them out in deductive function at 
the suggestion of the master mind (conscious mind).
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
A careful study of the single-celled organism shows you what goes on in 
your complex body. Thought the mono-cellular organism has no organs, it
still gives evidence of mind action and reaction performing the basic func -
tions of movement, alimentation, assimilation and elimination.
Many say there is an intelligence which will take care of your body if you 
let it alone. That is true, but the difficulty is that the conscious mind al -
ways interferes with is five-sense evidence based on outer appearances, 
leading to the sway of false belief, fears and mere opinion. When fear, 
false beliefs and negative patterns are made to register in your subcon -
scious mind through psychological, emotional conditioning, there is no 
other course open to the subconscious mind except to act on the blueprint
specifications offered it.
The Subconscious Mind Works Continually For The Common Good
The subjective self within you works continuously for the general good, 
reflecting an innate principle of harmony behind all things. Your subcon -
scious mind has its own will and it is a very real something in itself. It acts
night and day whether you act upon it or not. It is the builder of your 
body, but you cannot see, hear or feel it building, as all this is a silent 
process. Your subconscious have a life of its own, which is always moving 
toward harmony, health and peace. This is the divine norm within it seek -
ing expression through you at all times.
How Man Interferes With The Innate Principle Of Harmony
To think correctly, scientifically, we must know the “truth.” To know the 
truth is to be in harmony with the Infinite Intelligence and power of your 
subconscious mind, which is always moving lifeward.
Every thought or action, which is not harmonious, whether through igno -
rance or design, will result in discord and limitation of all kinds.
Scientists inform us that you build a new body every eleven months; so 
you are really only eleven months old from a physical standpoint. If you 
build defects back into your body by thoughts of fear, anger, jealousy and 
ill will, you have no one to blame but yourself.
You are the sum total of your own thoughts. You can keep from entertain -
ing negative thoughts and imagery. The way to get rid of darkness is with 
light; the way to overcome cold is with heat; the way to overcome the 
negative thought is to substitute the good thought. Affirm the good and 
the bad will vanish.
Why It's Normal To Be Healthy, Vital & Strong – It's Abnormal To 
Be Sick
The average child born into the world is perfectly healthy with all its or -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
gans functioning perfectly. This is the normal state, and we should remain
healthy, vital and strong. The instinct of self-preservation is the strongest 
instinct of your nature and it constitutes a most potent, ever-present and 
constantly operative truth, inherent in your nature. It is, therefore, obvi -
ous that all your thoughts, ideas and beliefs must operate with greater 
potentiality when they are in harmony with the innate life principle in you,
which is forever seeking to preserve and protect you along all lines. It fol -
lows from this that normal conditions can be restored with greater ease 
and certainty than abnormal conditions can be induced.
It is abnormal to be sick; it simply means you are going against the 
stream of life and thinking negatively. The law of life is the law of growth; 
all nature testifies to the operation of this law by silently, constantly ex -
pressing itself in the law of growth. When there is growth and expression,
there must be life; where there is life there must be harmony, and where 
there is harmony, there is perfect health. 
If your thought is in harmony with the creative principle of your subcon -
scious mind, you are in tune with the innate principle of harmony. If you 
entertain thoughts which are not in accordance with the principle of har -
mony, these thoughts cling to you, harass you, worry you, and finally 
bring about disease; and if persisted in, possibly death. 
In the healing of disease, you must increase the inflow and distribution of 
the vital forces of your subconscious mind throughout your system. This 
can be done by eliminating thoughts of fear, worry, anxiety, jealousy, ha -
tred and every other destructive thought which tends to tear down and 
destroy your nerves and glands – body tissue which controls the elimina -
tion of all waste material. 
Pott's Disease Cured
In the Nautilus magazine of March, 1917, there appears an article about a
boy suffering from Pott's disease, or tuberculosis of the spine, who had a 
remarkable healing. His name was Frederick Elias Andrews of Indianapo -
lis, now minister of Unity School of Christianity, Kansas City, Missouri. His 
physician pronounced him incurable. He began to pray, and from a 
crooked, twisted cripple going about on hands and knees, he became a 
strong, straight, well-formed man. He created his own affirmation, men -
tally absorbing the qualities he needed.
He affirmed over and over again many times a day, “I am whole, perfect, 
strong, powerful, loving, harmonious and happy.” He persevered and said 
that this prayer was the last utterance on his lips at night and the first in 
the morning. He prayed for others also by sending out thoughts of love 
and health. This attitude of mind and way of prayer returned to him multi -
plied many times. His faith and perseverance paid off with big dividends. 
When thoughts of fear, anger, jealousy or envy drew his attention, he 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
would immediately start his counteracting force of affirmation going in his
mind. His subconscious mind responded according to the nature of his ha -
bitual thinking. This is the meaning of the statement in the Bible, Go thy 
way, thy faith hath made thee whole. Mark 10:52 .
How Faith In Your Subconscious Powers Makes You Whole
A young man, who came to my lectures on the healing power of the sub -
conscious mind, had severe eye trouble which his doctor said necessitated
an operation. He said to himself, “My subconscious made my eyes, and it 
can heal me.”
Each night, as he went to sleep, he entered into a drowsy, meditative 
state, the condition akin to sleep. His attention was immobilized and fo -
cused on the eye doctor. He imagined the doctor was in front of him, and 
he plainly heard, or imagined he heard, the doctor saying to him, “A mira -
cle has happened!” He heard this over and over again every night for per -
haps five minutes or so before going to sleep. At the end of three weeks 
he again went to the ophthalmologist who had previously examined his 
eyes, and the physician said to this man, “This is a miracle!” What hap -
pened? This man impressed his subconscious mind using the doctor as an
instrument or a means of convincing it or conveying the idea. Through 
repetition, faith and expectancy he impregnated his subconscious mind. 
His subconscious mind made his eye; within it was the perfect pattern and
immediately it proceeded to heal the eye. This is another example of how 
faith in the healing power of your subconscious can make you whole. 
Pointers To Review
1. Your subconscious is the builder of your body and is on the job twen -
ty-four hours a day. You interfere with its life-giving patterns by negative 
thinking.
2. Charge your subconscious with the task of evolving an answer to any 
problem prior to sleep and it will answer you. 
3. Watch your thoughts. Every thought accepted as true is sent by your 
brain to your solar plexus – your abdominal brain – and is brought into 
your world as a reality.
4. Know that you can remake yourself by giving a new blueprint to your 
subconscious mind.
5. The tendency of your subconscious is always lifeward. Your job is with 
your conscious mind. Feed your subconscious mind with premises which 
are true. Your subconscious is always reproducing according to your habit -
ual mental patterns.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
6. You build a new body every eleven months. Change your body by 
changing your thoughts and keeping them changed.
7. It is normal to be healthy. It is abnormal to be ill. There is within the 
innate principle of harmony.
8. Thoughts of jealousy, fear, worry and anxiety tear down and destroy 
your nerves and glands bringing about mental and physical diseases of all
kinds.
9. What you affirm consciously and feel as true will be made manifest in 
your mind, body and affairs. Affirm the good and enter into the joy of liv -
ing.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
