
Down through the ages men of all nations have somehow instinctively be -
lieved that somewhere there resided a healing power, which would restore
to normal the functions and sensations of man's body. They believed that 
this strange power could be invoked under certain conditions and that the 
alleviation of human suffering would follow. The history of all nations 
presents testimony in support of this belief.
In the early history of the world the power of secretly influencing men for 
good or evil, including the healing of the sick, was said to be possessed 
by the priests and holy men of all nations. Healing of the sick was sup -
posed to be a power derived directly by them from God and the proce -
dures and processes of healing varied throughout the world. The healing 
processes took the form of supplications to God attended by various cere -
monies such as the laying on of hands, incantations, the application of 
amulets, talismans, rings, relics and images.
For example, in the religions of antiquity, priests in the ancient temples 
gave drugs to the patient and practiced hypnotic suggestions prior to the 
patient's sleep, telling him that the gods would visit him in his sleep and 
heal him. Many healings followed. Obviously, all this was the work of po -
tent suggestions to the subconscious mind.
After the performance of certain mysterious rites, the devotees of Hecate 
would see the goddess during sleep, provided that before going to sleep 
they had prayed to her according to weird and fantastic instructions. They
were told to mix lizards with resin, frankincense and myrrh and pound all 
this together in the open air under the crescent moon. Healings were re -
ported in many cases following this grotesque procedure.
It is obvious that these strange procedures, as mentioned in the illustra -
tions given, favored suggestion and acceptance by the subconscious mind
of these people by making a powerful appeal to their imagination. Actual -
ly, in all these healings, the subconscious mind of the subject was the 
healer.
In all ages, unofficial healers have obtained remarkable results in cases 
where authorized medical skill has failed. This gives cause for thought. 
How do these healers in all parts of the world effect their cures? The an -
swer to all these healings is due to the blind belief of the sick person, 
which released the healing power resident in his subconscious mind. Many
of the remedies and methods employed were rather strange and fantastic,
which fared the imagination of the patients, causing an aroused emotional
state. This state of mind facilitated the suggestion of health, and was ac -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
cepted both by the conscious and subconscious mind of the sick. This will 
be elaborated on further in the next chapter.
Biblical Accounts Of The Use Of The Subconscious Powers
What things soever ye desire, when ye pray believe that ye receive them,
and ye shall have them. Mark 11:24 .
Note the difference in tenses. The inspired writers tells us to believe and 
accept as true the fact that our desire has already been accomplished and
fulfilled, that it is already completed, and that is realization will follow as a
thing in the future.
The success of this technique depends on the confident conviction that 
the thought, the idea, the picture is already a fact in mind. In order for 
anything to have substance in the realm of mind, it must be thought of as
actually existing there.
Here in a few cryptic words is a concise and specific direction for making 
use of the creative power of thought by impressing upon the subconscious
the particular thing which you desire. Your thought, idea, plan or purpose 
is as real on its own plane as your hand or your heart. In following the 
Biblical technique, you completely eliminate from your mind all considera -
tion of conditions, circumstances or anything which might imply adverse 
contingencies. You are planting a seed (concept) in the mind, which, if 
you leave it undisturbed, will infallibly germinate into external fruition.
The prime condition, which Jesus insisted upon, was faith. Over and over 
again you read in the Bible, According to your faith is it done unto you . If 
you plant certain types of seeds in the ground, you have faith they will 
grow after their kind. This is the way of seeds, and trusting the laws of 
growth and agriculture, you know that the seeds will come forth after 
their kind. Faith as mentioned in the Bible is a way of thinking, an attitude
of mind, an inner certitude, knowing that the idea you fully accept in your
conscious mind will be embodied in your subconscious mind and made 
manifest. Faith is, in a sense, accepting as true what your reason and 
senses deny, i.e.  a shutting out of the little, rational, analytical, conscious
mind and embracing an attitude of complete reliance on the inner power 
of your subconscious mind.
A classical instance of Bible technique is recorded in Matthew 9:28-30. 
And when he was come into the house, the blind man came to him; and 
Jesus saith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They said 
unto him, Yea, Lord. Then touched he their eyes, saying, according to 
your faith be it unto you. And their eyes opened; and Jesus straightly 
charged them, saying, see that no man know it.
In the words according to your faith be it unto you , you can see that Je -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
sus was actually appealing to the cooperation of the subconscious mind of
the blind men. Their faith was their great expectancy, their inner feeling, 
their inner conviction that something miraculous would happen, and that 
their prayer would be answered, and it was. This is the time-honored 
technique of healing, utilized alike by all healing groups throughout the 
world regardless of religious affiliation.
In the words, see that no man know it , Jesus enjoins the newly healed 
patients not to discuss their healing because they might be subjected to 
the skeptical and derogatory criticisms of the unbelieving. This might tend
to undo the benefits they had received at the hand of Jesus by depositing 
thoughts of fear, doubt and anxiety in the subconscious mind.
...for with authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits, and 
they came out. Luke 4:36 .
When the sick came to Jesus to be healed, they were healed by their faith
together with his faith and understanding of the healing power of the sub -
conscious mind. Whatever he decreed, he felt inwardly to be true. He and 
the people needing help were in the one universal, subjective mind, and 
his silent inner knowing and conviction of the healing power changed the 
negative, destructive patterns in the patients' subconscious. The resultant
healings were the automatic response to the internal mental change. His 
command was his appeal to the subconscious mind of the patients plus 
his awareness, feeling and absolute trust in the response of the subcon -
scious mind to the words, which he spoke with authority. 
Miracles At Various Shrines Throughout The World
It is an established fact that cures have taken place at various shrines 
throughout the world, such as in Japan, India, Europe and America. I 
have visited several of the famous shrines in Japan. At the world famous 
shrine called Diabutsu is a gigantic divinity of bronze where Buddha is 
seated with folded hands, and the head is inclined in an attitude of pro -
found contemplative ecstasy. It is 42 feet in height and is called the great 
Buddha. Here I saw young and old making offerings at its feet. Money, 
fruit, rice and oranges were offered. Candles were lit, incense was 
burned, and prayers of petition recited.
The guide explained the chant of a young girl as she murmured a prayer, 
bowed low, and placed two oranges as an offering. She also lit a candle. 
He said she had lost her voice, and it was restored at the shrine. She was 
thanking Buddha for restoring her voice. She had the simple faith that 
Buddha would give her back her singing voice if she followed a certain rit -
ual, fasted, and made certain offerings. All this helped to kindle faith and 
expectancy, resulting in a conditioning of her mind to the point of belief. 
Her subconscious mind responded to her belief.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
To illustrate further the power of imagination and blind belief, I will relate 
the case of a relative of mine who had tuberculosis. His lungs were badly 
diseased. His son decided to heal his father. He came home to Perth, 
Western Australia, where his father lived, and said to him that he had met
a monk who had returned from one of the healing shrines in Europe. This 
monk sold him a piece of the true cross. He said he gave the monk the 
equivalent of $500 for it.
This young man had actually picked up a splinter of wood from the side -
walk, went to the jeweler's, and had it set in a ring so that it looked real. 
He told his father that many were healed just by touching the ring or the 
cross. He inflamed and fired his father's imagination to the point that the 
old gentleman snatched the ring from him, placed it over his chest, 
prayed silently, and went to sleep. In the morning he was healed. All the 
clinic's tests proved negative. 
You know, of course, it was not the splinter of wood from the sidewalk 
that healed him. It was his imagination aroused to an intense degree, 
plus the confident expectancy of a perfect healing. Imagination was joined
to faith or subjective feeling, and the union of the two brought about a 
healing. The father never learned of the trick that had been played upon 
him. If he had, he probably would have had a relapse. He remained com -
pletely cured and passed away fifteen years later at the age of 89.
One Universal Healing Principle
it is a well known fact that all of the various schools of healing effect cures
of the most wonderful character. The most obvious conclusion, which 
strikes your mind, is that there must be some underlying principle, which 
is common to them all, namely, the subconscious mind, and the one 
process of healing is faith.       
It will now be in order to recall to your mind once more the following fun -
damental truths: 
First, that you possess mental functions which have been distinguished by
designating one the conscious mind and the other the subconscious mind.
Second, your subconscious mind is constantly amenable to the power of 
suggestion. Furthermore, your subconscious mind has complete control of
the functions, conditions and sensations of your body. 
I venture to believe that all the readers of this book are familiar with the 
fact that symptoms of almost any disease can be induced in hypnotic sub -
jects by suggestion. For example, a subject in the hypnotic state can de -
velop a high temperature, flushed face, or chills according to the nature of
the suggestion given. By experiment, you can also suggest to the person 
that he is paralyzed and cannot walk: it will be so. By illustration, you can
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
hold a cup of cold water under the nose of the hypnotic subject and tell 
him, “This is full of pepper, smell it!” He will proceed to sneeze. What do 
you think caused him to sneeze, the water or the suggestion?
If a man says he is allergic to Timothy grass, you can place a synthetic 
flower or an empty glass in front of nose, when he is in a hypnotic state, 
and tell him it is Timothy grass. He will portray the usual allergic symp -
toms. This indicates that the cause of the disease is in the mind. The 
healing of the disease can also take place mentally.
You realize that remarkable healings take place through osteopathy, chiro -
practic medicine and naturopathy, as well as through all the various reli -
gious bodies throughout the world, but it is obvious that all of these heal -
ings are brought about through the subconscious mind the only healer 
there is.
Notice how it heals a cut on your face caused by shaving. It knows exactly
how to do it. The doctor dresses the would and says, “Nature heals it!” 
Nature refers to natural law, the law of the subconscious mind, or self-
preservation, which is the function of the subconscious mind. The instinct 
of self-preservation is the first law of nature. Your strongest instinct is the
most potent of all autosuggestions.
Widely Different Theories
It would be tedious and unprofitable to discuss to any great extent the 
numerous theories advanced by different religious sects and prayer thera -
py groups. There are a great number who claim that because their theory 
produces results it is, therefore, the correct one. This, as explained in this
chapter, cannot be true.
You are aware that there are all types of healing. Franz Anton Mesmer, an 
Austrian physician (1734-1815) who practiced in Paris, discovered that by
applying magnets to the diseased body, he could cure that disease mirac -
ulously. He also performed cures with various other pieces of glass and 
metals. He discontinued this form of healing and claimed that his cures 
were due to “animal magnetism,” theorizing that this substance was pro -
jected from the healer to the patient.
His method of healing disease from then on was by hypnotism, which was
called mesmerism in his day. Other physicians said that all his healings 
were due to suggestion and nothing else.
All of these groups, such as psychiatrists, psychologists, osteopaths, chi -
ropractors, physicians and all the churches are using the one universal 
power resident in the subconscious mind. Each may proclaim the healings
are due to their theory. The process of all healing is a definite, positive, 
mental attitude, an inner attitude, or a way of thinking, called faith. Heal -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
ing is due to a confident expectancy, which acts as a powerful suggestion 
to the subconscious mind releasing its healing potency.
One man does not heal by a different power than another. It is true that 
he may have his own theory or method. There is only one process of heal -
ing and that is faith. There is only one healing power, namely, your sub -
conscious mind. Select the theory and method you prefer. You can rest 
assured, if you have faith, you shall get results.
Views Of Paracelsus
Philippus Paracelsus, a famous Swiss alchemist and physician, who lived 
from 1493 to 1541, was a great healer in his day. He stated what is now 
an obvious scientific fact when he uttered these words, “Whether the ob -
ject of your faith be real or false, you will nevertheless obtain the same 
effects. Thus, if I believed in Saint Peter's statue as I should have be -
lieved in Saint Peter himself, I shall obtain the same effects that I should 
have obtained from Saint Peter. But that is superstition. Faith, however, 
produces miracles; and whether it is true or false faith, it will always pro -
duce the same wonders.”
The views of Paracelsus were also entertained in the sixteenth century by 
Pietro Pomponazzi, an Italian philosopher and contemporary of Paracel -
sus, who said “We can easily conceive the marvelous effects, which confi -
dence and imagination can produce, particularly when both qualities are 
reciprocated between the subjects and the person who influences them. 
The cures attributed to the influence of certain relics are the effect of their
imagination and confidence. Quacks and philosophers know that if the 
bones of any skeleton were put in place of the saint's bones, the sick 
would nonetheless experience beneficial effects, if they believed that they 
were veritable relics.”
Then, if you believe in the bones of saints to heal, or if you believe in the 
healing power of certain waters, you will get results because of the pow -
erful suggestion given to your subconscious mind. It is the latter that 
does the healing.
Bernheim's Experiments
Hippolyte Bernheim, professor of medicine at Nancy, France, 1910-1919, 
was the expounder of the fact that the suggestion of the physician to the 
patient was exerted through the subconscious mind.
Bernheim, in his Suggestive Therapeutics , page 197, tells a story of a 
man with paralysis of the tongue, which had yielded to no form of treat -
ment. His doctor told the patient that he had a new instrument with which
he promised to heal him. He introduced a pocket thermometer into the 
patient's mouth. The patient imagined it to be the instrument which was 
to save him. In a few moments he cried out joyfully that he could once 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
more move his tongue freely. 
“Among our cases,” continues Bernheim, “facts of the same sort will be 
found. A young girl came into my office, having suffered from complete 
loss of speech for nearly four weeks. After making sure of the diagnosis, I
told my students that loss of speech sometimes yielded instantly to elec -
tricity, which might act simply by its suggestive influence. I sent for the 
induction apparatus. I applied my hand over the larynx and moved a little,
and said, 'Now you can speak aloud.' In an instant I made her say 'a,' 
then 'b,' then Maria.' She continued to speak distinctly; the loss of voice 
had disappeared.” Here Bernheim is showing the power of faith and ex -
pectancy on the part of the patient, which acts as a powerful suggestion 
to the subconscious mind.
Producing A Blister By Suggestion
Bernheim states that he produced a blister on the back of a patient's neck
by applying a postage stamp and suggesting to the patient that it was a 
fly-plaster. This had been confirmed by the experiments and experiences 
of many doctors in many parts of the world, which leave no doubt that 
structural changes are a possible result of oral suggestion to patients.
The Cause Of Bloody Stigmata
In Hudson's Law of Psychic Phenomena , page 153, he states, “Hemor -
rhages and bloody stigmata may be induced in certain subjects by means 
of suggestion.
“Dr M Bourru put a subject into the somnambulistic condition, and gave 
him the following suggestion: 'At four o'clock this afternoon, after the 
hypnosis, you will come into my office, sit down in the armchair, cross 
your arms upon your breast, and your nose will begin to bleed.' At the 
hour appointed the young man did as directed. Several drops of blood 
came from the left nostril.
“On another occasion the same investigator traced the patient's name on 
both his forearms with the dull point of an instrument. Then when the pa -
tient was in the somnambulistic condition, he said, 'At four o'clock this af -
ternoon you will go to sleep, and your arms will bleed along the lines 
which I have traced, and your name will appear written on your arms in 
the letters of blood.' He was watched at four o'clock and seen to fall 
asleep. On the left arm the letters stood out in bright relief and in several 
places there were drops of blood. The letters were still visible three 
months afterward, although they had gradually grown faint.”
These facts demonstrate at once the correctness of the two fundamental 
propositions previously stated, namely, the constant amenability of the 
subconscious mind to the power of suggestion and the perfect control, 
which the subconscious mind exercises over the functions, sensations and
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
conditions of the body. All the foregoing phenomena dramatize vividly ab -
normal conditions induced by suggestion, and are conclusive proof that as
a man thinketh in his heart  (subconscious mind) so is he.
Healing Points In Review
1. Remind yourself frequently that the healing power is in your own sub -
conscious mind.
2. Know that faith is like a seed planted in the ground; it grows after its 
kind. Plant the idea (seed) in your mind, water and fertilize it with ex -
pectancy and it will manifest.
3. The idea you have for a book, new invention or play is real in your 
mind. This is why you can believe you have it now. Believe in the reality 
of your idea, plan or invention, and as you do, it will become manifest. 
4. In praying for another, know that your silent inner knowing of whole -
ness, beauty and perfection can change the negative patterns of the 
other's subconscious mind and bring about wonderful results. 
5. The miraculous healings you hear about at various shrines are due to 
imagination and blind faith, which act on the subconscious mind, releasing
the healing power.
6. All disease originates in the mind. Nothing appears on the body unless 
there is a mental pattern corresponding to it.
7. The symptoms of almost any disease can be induced in you by hypnotic
suggestion. This shows you the power of your thought.
8. There is only one process of healing and that is faith. There is only one 
healing power, namely, your subconscious mind.
9. Whether the object of your faith is real or false, you will get results. 
Your subconscious mind responds to the thought in your mind. Look upon 
faith as thought in your mind and that will suffice.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
