
Ignorance of the functions and powers of the mind is the cause of all mar -
ital trouble. Friction between husband and wife can be solved by each us -
ing the law of mind correctly. By praying together they stay together. The 
contemplation of divine ideals, the study of the laws of life, the mutual 
agreement on a common purpose and plan, and the enjoyment of person -
al freedom bring about that harmonious marriage, that wedded bliss, that
sense of oneness where the two become one.
The best time to prevent divorce is before marriage. It is not wrong to try 
to get out of a very bad situation. But, why get into the bad situation in 
the first place? Would it not be better to give attention to the real cause of
marital problems, in other words, to really get at the root of the matter 
involved?
As with all other problems of men and women, the problems of divorce, 
separation, annulment and endless litigation are directly traceable to lack 
of knowledge of the working and interrelationship of the conscious and 
subconscious mind.
The Meaning Of Marriage
Marriage to be real must first be on a spiritual basis. It must be of the 
heart and the heart is the chalice of love. Honesty, sincerity, kindness and
integrity are also forms of love. Each partner should be perfectly honest 
and sincere with the other. It is not a true marriage when a man marries 
a woman for her money, social position, or to lift his ego, because this in -
dicates a lack of security, honesty and true love. Such a marriage is a 
farce, a sham and a masquerade.
When a woman says, “I am tired of working; I want to get married be -
cause I want security,” her premise is false. She is not using the laws of 
mind correctly. Her security depends upon her knowledge of the interac -
tion of the conscious and subconscious mind and its application.
For example, a woman will never lack for wealth or health if she applies 
the techniques outlined in the respective chapters of this book. Her wealth
can come to her independent of her husband, father or anyone else. A 
woman is not dependent on her husband for health, peace, joy, inspira -
tion, guidance, love, wealth, security, happiness or anything in the world. 
Her security and peace of mind come from her knowledge of the inner 
powers within her and from the constant use of the laws of her own mind 
in a constructive fashion.
How To Attract The Ideal Husband
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
You are now acquainted with the way your subconscious mind works. You 
know that whatever you impress upon it will be experienced in your 
world. Begin now to impress your subconscious mind with the qualities 
and characteristics you desire in a man.
The following is an excellent technique: Sit down at night in your arm -
chair, close your eyes, let go, relax your body, become very quiet, passive
and receptive. Talk to your subconscious mind and say to it, “I am now 
attracting a man into my experience who is hones, sincere, loyal, faithful, 
peaceful, happy and prosperous. These qualities which I admire are sink -
ing down into my subconscious mind now. As I dwell upon these charac -
teristics, they become a part of me and are embodied subconsciously.
“I know there is an irresistible law of attraction and that I attract to me a 
man according to my subconscious belief. I attract that which I feel to be 
true in my subconscious mind.
“I know I can contribute to his peace and happiness. He loves my ideals, 
and I love his ideals. He does not want to make me over, neither do I 
want to make him over. There is mutual love, freedom and respect.”
Practice this process of impregnating your subconscious. Then, you will 
have the joy of attracting to you a man possessing the qualities and char -
acteristics you mentally dwelt upon. Your subconscious intelligence will 
open up a pathway, whereby both of you will meet, according to the irre -
sistible and changeless flow of your own subconscious mind. Have a keen 
desire to give the best  that is in you of love, devotion and cooperation. 
Be receptive to this gift of love which you have given to your subconscious
mind.
How To Attract The Ideal Wife
Affirm as follows: “I now attract the right woman who is in complete ac -
cord with me. This is a spiritual union because it is divine love functioning 
through the personality of someone with whom I blend perfectly. I know I
can give to this woman love, light, peace and joy. I feel and believe I can 
make this woman's life full, complete and wonderful.
“I now decree that she possesses the following qualities and attributes: 
She is spiritual, loyal, faithful and true. She is harmonious, peaceful and 
happy. We are irresistibly attracted to each other. Only that which belongs
to love, truth and beauty can enter my experience. I accept my ideal 
companion now.”
As you think quietly and with interest on the qualities and attributes which
you admire in the companion you seek, you will build the mental equiva -
lent into your mentality. Then, the deeper currents of your subconscious 
mind will bring both of you together in divine order.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
No Need For Third Mistake
Recently a teacher said to me, “I have had three husbands and all three 
have been passive, submissive and dependent on me to make all deci -
sions and govern everything. Why do I attract such type men?”
I asked her whether she had known that her second husband was he ef -
feminate type, and she replied, “Of course not. Had I known, I would not 
have married him.” Apparently she had not learned anything from the first
mistake. The trouble was with her own personality make up. She was 
very masculine, domineering and unconsciously wanted someone who 
would be submissive and passive so that she could play the dominant 
role. All this was unconscious motivation, and her subconscious picture at -
tracted to her what she subjectively wanted. She had to learn to break 
the pattern by adopting the right prayer process.
How She Broke The Negative Pattern
the above-mentioned woman learned a simple truth. When you believe 
you can have the type of man you idealize, it is done unto you as your be -
lieve. The following is the specific prayer she used to break the old sub -
conscious pattern and attract to her the ideal mate: “I am building into 
my mentality the type of man I deeply desire. The man I attract for a 
husband is strong, powerful, loving, very masculine, successful, honest, 
loyal and faithful. He finds love and happiness with me. I love to follow 
where he leads.
“I know he wants me, and I want him. I am honest, sincere, loving and 
kind. I have wonderful gifts to offer him. They are good will, a joyous 
heart and a healthy body. He offers me the same. It is mutual, I give and 
I receive. Divine Intelligence knows where this man is, and the deeper 
wisdom of my subconscious mind is now bringing both of us together in 
its own way and we recognize each other immediately. I release this re -
quest to my subconscious mind which knows how to bring my request to 
pass. I give thanks for the perfect answer.”
She prayed in the above manner night and morning, affirming these 
truths and knowing that through frequent occupation of the mind she 
would reach the mental equivalent of that which she sought.
The Answer To Her Prayer
Several months went by. She had a great number of dates and social en -
gagements, none of which was agreeable to her. When she was about to 
question, waiver, doubt and vacillate, she reminded herself that the Infi -
nite Intelligence was bringing it to pass in its own way and that there was 
nothing to be concerned about. Her final decree in her divorce proceed -
ings was granted which brought her a great sense of release and mental 
freedom. 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
Shortly afterward she went to work as a receptionist in a doctor's office. 
She told me that the minute she saw the physician she knew he was the 
man she was praying about. Apparently he knew it too, because he pro -
posed  to her the first week she was in the office and their subsequent 
marriage was ideally happy. This physician was not the passive or submis -
sive type, but was a real man, a former football player, an outstanding 
athlete and was a deeply spiritual man though he was completely devoid 
of any sectarian or denominational affiliation.
She got what she prayed for because she claimed it mentally until she 
reached the point of saturation. In other words, she mentally and emo -
tionally united with her idea, and it become a part of her in the same way 
that an apple becomes a part of her blood stream.
Should I Get A Divorce?
Divorce is an individual problem. It cannot be generalized. In some cases,
of course, there never should have been a marriage. In some cases, di -
vorce is not the solution, no more so than marriage is the solution for a 
lonely man. Divorce may be right for one person and wrong for another. A
divorced woman may be far more sincere and noble than may of her mar -
ried sisters who perhaps are living a lie.
For example, I once talked with a woman who husband was a dope fiend, 
an ex-convict, a wife beater and a non provider. She had been told it was 
wrong to get a divorce. I explained to her that marriage is of the heart. If 
two hearts blend harmoniously, lovingly and sincerely, that is the ideal 
marriage. The pure action of the heart is love.
Following this explanation she knew what to do. She knew in her heart 
that there is no divine law which compelled her to be browbeaten, intimi -
dated and beaten because someone said, “I pronounce you man and 
wife.” If you are in doubt as to what to do, ask for guidance, knowing that
there is always an answer, and you will receive it. Follow the lead that 
comes to you in the silence of your soul. It speaks to you in peace.
Drifting Into Divorce
Recently a young couple, married only for a few months, were seeking a 
divorce. I discovered that the young man had a constant fear that his wife
would leave him. He expected rejection and he believed that she would be
unfaithful. These thoughts haunted his mind and became an obsession 
with him. His mental attitude was one of separation and suspicion. She 
felt unresponsive to him; it was his own feeling or atmosphere of loss and
separation operating through them. This brought about a condition or ac -
tion in accordance with the mental pattern behind it. There is a law of ac -
tion and reaction, or cause and effect. The thought is the action and the 
response of the subconscious mind is the reaction.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
His wife left home and asked for a divorce which is what he feared and 
believed she would do.
Divorce Begins In The Mind
Divorce takes place first in the mind; the legal proceedings follow after. 
These two young people were full of resentment, fear, suspicion and 
anger. These attitudes weaken, exhaust and debilitate the whole being. 
They learned that hate divides and that love unites. They began to realize
what they had been doing with their minds. Neither one of them knew the
law of mental action, and they were misusing their minds and bringing on 
chaos and misery. These two people went back together at my suggestion
and experimented with prayer therapy.
They began to radiate love, peace and good will to each other. Each one 
practiced radiating harmony, health, peace and love to the other and they
alternated in the reading of the Psalms every night. Their marriage is 
growing more beautiful every day.
The Nagging Wife
Many times the reason the wife nags is because she gets no attention. Of -
tentimes, it is a craving for love and affection. Give your wife attention 
and show your appreciation. Praise and exalt all her many good points. 
There is also the nagging type of woman who wants to make the man 
conform to her particular patter. This is about the quickest way in the 
world to get rid of a man.
The wife and the husband must cease being scavengers always looking at 
the petty faults or errors in each other. Let each give attention and praise 
for the constructive and wonderful qualities in the other.
The Brooding Husband
If a man begins to brood, grows morbid against his wife because of the 
things she said or did, he is, psychologically speaking, committing adul -
tery. One of the meanings of adultery is idolatry, i.e. giving attention to or
uniting mentally with that which is negative and destructive. When a man 
is silently resenting his wife and is full of hostility toward her, he is un -
faithful. He is not faithful to his marriage vows which are to love, cherish 
and honor her all the days of his life.
The man who is brooding, bitter and resentful can swallow his sharp re -
marks, abate his anger and he can go to great lengths to be considerate, 
kind and courteous. He can deftly skirt the differences. Through praise 
and mental effort, he can get out of the habit of antagonism. Then, he will
be able to get along better, not only with his wife, but with business asso -
ciates also. Assume the harmonious state and eventually you will find 
peace and harmony.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
The Great Mistake
A great mistake is to discuss your marital problems or difficulties with 
neighbors and relatives. Suppose, for example, a wife say to the neighbor,
“John never gives me any money. He treats my mother abominably, 
drinks to excess and is constantly abusive and insulting.”
Now, this wife is degrading and belittling her husband in the eyes of all 
the neighbors and relatives. He no longer appears as the ideal husband to
them. Never discuss your marital problems with anyone except a trained 
counselor. Why cause numerous people to think negatively of your mar -
riage? Moreover, as you discuss and dwell upon these shortcomings of 
your husband, you are actually creating these states within yourself. Who 
is thinking and feeling it? You are! As you think and feel, so are you.
Relatives will usually give you the wrong advice. It is usually biased and 
prejudiced because it is not given in an impersonal way. Any advice you 
receive which violates the golden rule which is a cosmic law, is not good 
or sound.
It is well to remember that no two human beings ever lived beneath the 
same roof without clashes of temperament, periods of hurts and stain. 
Never display the unhappy side of your marriage to your friends. Keep 
your quarrels to yourself. Refrain from criticism and condemnation of your
partner.
Don't Try To Make Your Wife Over
A husband must not try to make his wife into a second edition of himself. 
The tactless attempt to change her in many ways is foreign to her nature.
These attempts are always foolish and many times result in a dissolution 
of the marriage. These attempts to alter her, destroy her pride and self-
esteem, and arouse a spirit of contrariness and resentment that proves 
fatal to the marriage bond.
Adjustments are needed, of course, but if you have a good look inside 
your own mind, and study your character and behavior, you will find so 
many shortcomings; they will keep you busy the rest of your life. If you 
say, “I will make him over into what I want,” you are looking for trouble 
and the divorce court. You are asking for misery. You will have to learn 
the hard way that there is no one to change but yourself.
Pray Together & Stay Together Through Steps In Prayer
The First Step
Never carry over from one day to another accumulated irritations arising 
from little disappointments. Be sure to forgive each other for any sharp -
ness before you retire at night. The moment you awaken in the morning, 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
claim Infinite Intelligence is guiding you in all your ways. Send out loving 
thoughts of peace, harmony and love to your marriage partner, to all 
members of the family and to the whole world.
The Second Step
Say grace at breakfast. Give thanks for the wonderful food, for your abun -
dance and for all your blessings. Makes sure that no problems, worries or 
arguments shall enter into the table conversation; the same applies at 
dinner time. Say to your wife or husband, “I appreciate all you are doing 
and I radiate love and good will to you all day long.”
The Third Step
The husband and wife should alternate in praying each night. Do not take 
your marriage partner for granted. Show your appreciation and love. 
Think appreciation and good will, rather than condemnation, criticism and 
nagging. The way to build a peaceful home and a happy marriage is to 
use a foundation of love, beauty, harmony, mutual respect, faith in God 
and all things good. Read the 23rd, 27th and 91st Psalms, the 11th chapter 
of Hebrews, the 13th chapter of 1 Corinthians and other great texts  of the
Bible before going to sleep. As you practice these truths, your marriage 
will grow more and more blessed through the years.
Review Your Actions
1. Ignorance of mental and spiritual laws is the cause of all marital un -
happiness. By praying scientifically together, you stay together.
2. The best time to prevent divorce is before marriage. If you learn how 
to pray in the right way, you will attract the right mate for you.
3. Marriage is the union of a man and woman who are bound together by 
love. Their hearts beat as one and they move onward, upward and God -
ward.
4. Marriage does not bequeath happiness. People find happiness by 
dwelling on the eternal truths of God and the spiritual values of life. Then,
the man and woman can contribute to each other's happiness and joy.
5. You attract the right mate by dwelling on the qualities and characteris -
tics you admire in a woman or a man, and then your subconscious mind 
will bring you together in divine order.
6. You must build into your mentality the mental equivalent of what you 
want in a marriage partner. If you want to attract an honest, sincere and 
loving partner in life, you must be honest, sincere and loving yourself.
7. You do not have to repeat mistakes in marriage. When you really be -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
lieve you can have the type of man or woman you idealize, it is done unto
you as you believe. To believe is to accept something as true. Accept your
ideal companion now mentally.
8. Do not wonder how, why or where you will meet that mate you are 
praying for. Trust implicitly the wisdom of your subconscious mind. It has 
the “know-how,” and you don't have to assist it.
9. You are mentally divorced when you indulge in peeves, grudges, ill will 
and hostility toward your marriage partner. You are mentally dwelling with
error in the bed of your mind. Adhere to your marriage vows, “I promise 
to cherish, love and honor him (her) all the days of my life.”
10. Cease projecting fear patterns to your marriage partner. Project love, 
peace, harmony and good will and your marriage will grow more beautiful
and more wonderful through the years.
11. Radiate love, peace and good will to each other. These vibrations are 
picked up by the subconscious mind resulting in mutual trust, affection 
and respect.
12. A nagging wife is usually seeking attention and appreciation. She is 
craving for love and affection. Praise and exalt her many good points. 
Show her that you love her and appreciate her.
13. A man who loves his wife does not do anything unloving or unkind in 
word, manner or action. Love is what love does.
14. In marital problems, always seek expert advice. You would not go to a
carpenter to pull a tooth; neither should you discuss your marriage prob -
lems with relatives or friends. You should go to a trained person for coun -
sel.
15. Never try to make your wife or husband over. These attempts are al -
ways foolish and tend to destroy the pride and self esteem of the other. 
Moreover, it arouses a spirit of resentment that proves fatal to the mar -
riage bond. Cease trying to make the other a second edition of yourself.
16. Pray together and you will stay together. Scientific prayer solves all 
problems. Mentally picture your wife as she ought to be, joyous, happy, 
healthy and beautiful. See your husband as he ought to be, strong, pow -
erful, loving, harmonious and kind. Maintain this mental picture and you 
will experience the marriage made in heaven which is harmony and 
peace.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
