
Life plays no favorites. God is life, and this life-principle is flowing through
you this moment. God loves to express Himself as harmony, peace, beau -
ty, joy and abundance through you. This is called the will of God or the 
tendency of life.
If you set up resistance in your mind to the flow of life through you, this 
emotional congestion will get snarled up in your subconscious mind and 
cause all kinds of negative conditions. God has nothing to do with unhap -
py or chaotic conditions in the world. All these conditions are brought 
about by man's negative and destructive thinking. Therefore, it is silly to 
blame God for your trouble or sickness.
Many persons habitually set up mental resistance to the flow of life by ac -
cusing and reproaching God for the sin, sickness and suffering of 
mankind. Others cast blame on God for their pains, aches, loss of loved 
ones, personal tragedies and accidents. They are angry at God and they 
believe He is responsible for their misery.
As long as people entertain such negative concepts about God, they will 
experience the automatic negative reactions from their subconscious 
minds. Actually, such people do not know that they are punishing them -
selves. They must see the truth, find release, and give up all condemna -
tion, resentment and anger against anyone or any power outside them -
selves. Otherwise, they cannot go forward into a healthy, happy ore cre -
ative activity. The minute these people entertain a God of love in their 
minds and hearts, and when they believe that God is the Loving Father 
who watches over them, cares for them, guides them, sustains and 
strengthens them, this concept and belief about God or the life-principle 
will be accepted by their subconscious mind, and they will find themselves
blessed in countless ways.
Life Always Forgives You
Life forgives you when you cut your finger. The subconscious intelligence 
within you sets about immediately to repair it. New cells build bridges 
over the cut. Should you take some tainted food by error, life forgives you
and causes you to regurgitate it in order to preserve you. If you burn your
hand, the life-principle reduces the edema and congestion, and gives you 
new skin, tissue and cells. Life holds no grudges against you, and it is al -
ways forgiving you. Life brings you back to health, vitality, harmony and 
peace, if you cooperate by thinking in harmony with nature. Negative, 
hurtful, memories, bitterness and ill will clutter up and impede the free 
flow of the life-principle in you.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
How He Banished That Feeling Of Guilt
I knew a man who worked every night until about one o'clock in the 
morning. He paid no attention to his two boys or his wife. He was always 
too busy working hard. He thought people should pat him on the back be -
cause he was working so arduously and persistently past midnight every 
night. He had a blood pressure over two hundred and was full of guilt. Un -
consciously, he proceeded to punish himself by hard work and he com -
pletely ignored his children. A normal man does not do that. He is inter -
ested in his boys and in their development. He does not shut his wife out 
of his world.
I explained to him why he was working so arduously, “There is something 
eating you inside, otherwise, you would not act this way. You are punish -
ing yourself, and you have to learn to forgive yourself.” He did have a 
deep sense of guilt. It was toward a brother.
I explained to him that God was not punishing him, but that he was pun -
ishing himself. For example, if you misuse the laws of life, you will suffer 
accordingly. If you put your hand on a naked charged wire, you will get 
burned. The forces and nature are not evil; it is your use of them that de -
termines whether they have a good or evil effect. Electricity is not evil, it 
depends on how you use it, whether to burn down a structure or light up 
a home. The only sin is ignorance of the law, and the only punishment is 
the automatic reaction of man's misuse of the law.
If you misuse the principle of chemistry, you may blow up the office or the
factory. If you strike your hand on a board, you may cause your hand to 
bleed. The board is not for that purpose. Its purpose may be to lean upon
or to support your feet.
This man realized that God does not condemn or punish anyone, and that 
all his suffering was due to the reaction of his sub mind to his own nega -
tive and destructive thinking. He had cheated his brother at one time and 
the brother had now passed on. Still, he was full of remorse and guilt.
I asked him, “Would you cheat your brother now?” He said, “No.” “Did you
feel you were justified at the time?” His reply was, “Yes.” “But, you would 
not do it now?” He added, “No, I am helping others to know how to live.”
I added the following comment, “You have a greater reason and under -
standing now. Forgiveness is to forgive yourself. Forgiveness is getting 
your thoughts in line with the divine law of harmony. Self condemnation is
called hell (bondage and restriction); forgiveness is called heaven (har -
mony and peace).”
The burden of guilt and self condemnation was lifted from his mind, and 
he had a complete healing. The doctor tested his blood pressure and it 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
had become normal. The explanation was the cure.
A Murderer Learned To Forgive Himself
A man who murdered his brother in Europe visited me many years ago. 
He was suffering from great mental anguish and torture believing that 
God must punish him. He explained that his brother had been having an 
affair with his wife and that he had shot him on the spur of the moment. 
This had happened about fifteen years previous to his interview with me. 
In the meantime, this man had married an American girl and had been 
blessed with three lovely children. He was in a position where he helped 
many people and he was a transformed man.
My explanation to him was that physically and psychologically he was not 
the same man who shot his brother, since scientists inform us that every 
cell of our bodies changes every eleven months. Moreover, mentally and 
spiritually he was a new man. He was now full of love and good will for 
humanity. The “old” man who committed the crime fifteen years before 
was mentally and spiritually dead. Actually, he was condemning an inno -
cent man!
This explanation had a profound effect upon him and he said it was as if a
great weight had been lifted from his mind. He realized the significance of
the following truth in the Bible: Come now, let us reason together, saith 
the Lord: though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; 
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. Isaiah 1:18 .
Criticism Cannot Hurt You Without Your Consent
A school teacher told me that one of her associates criticized a speech she
had given, saying to her that she spoke too fast, she swallowed some of 
her words, she couldn't be heard, her diction was poor and her speech in -
effective. This teacher was furious and full of resentment toward her crit -
ic. 
She admitted to me that the criticisms were just. Her first reaction was 
really childish and she agreed that the letter was really a blessing and a 
marvelous corrective. She proceeded immediately to supplement her defi -
ciencies in her speech by enrolling in a course in public speaking at City 
College. She wrote and thanked the writer of the note for her interest, ex -
pressing appreciation for her conclusions and findings which enabled the 
teacher to correct the matter at once.
How To Be Compassionate
Suppose none of the things mentioned in the letter had been true of the 
teacher. The latter would have realized that her class material had upset 
the prejudices, superstitions, or narrow sectarian beliefs of the writer of 
the note, and that a psychologically ill person was simply pouring forth 
her resentment because a psychological boil had been hurt.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
To understand this fact is to be compassionate. The next logical step 
would be to pray for the other person's peace, harmony and understand -
ing. You cannot be hurt when you know that you are master of your 
thoughts, reactions and emotions. Emotions follow thoughts, and you 
have the power to reject all thoughts which may disturb or upset you.
Left At The Altar
Some years ago I visited a church to perform a marriage ceremony. The 
young man did not appear and at the end of two hours, the bride-to-be  
shed a few tears and then said to me, “I prayed for divine guidance. This 
might be the answer for He never faileth.”
That was her reaction – faith in God and all things good. She had no bit -
terness in her heart because as she said. “It must not have been right ac -
tion because my prayer was for right action for both of us.” Someone else 
having a similar experience would have gone into a tantrum, have had an 
emotional fit, required sedation, and perhaps needed hospitalization. Tune
in with the Infinite Intelligence within your subconscious depths, trusting 
the answer in the same way that you trusted your mother when she held 
you in her arms. This is how you can acquire poise and mental and emo -
tional health.
It Is Wrong To Marry, Sex Is Evil & I Am Evil
Some time ago I talked to a young lady aged twenty-two. She was taught
that it was a sin to dance, to play cards, to swim and to go out with men. 
She was threatened by her mother who told her she would burn eternally 
in hell fire if she disobeyed her will and her religious teachings. This girl 
wore a black dress and black stockings. She wore no rouge, lipstick or any
form of make up because her mother said that these things were sinful. 
Her mother told her that all men were evil, and that sex was of the devil 
and simply diabolic debauchery.
This girl had to learn how to forgive herself as she was full of guilt. To for -
give means to give for. She had to give up all these false beliefs for the 
truths of life and new estimate of herself. When she went out with young 
men in the office where she worked, she had a deep sense of guilt and 
thought that God would punish her. Several eligible young men proposed 
to her, but she said to me, “It is wrong to marry. Sex is evil and I am 
evil.” This was her conscience of early conditioning speaking.
She came to me once weekly for about ten weeks and I taught her the 
workings of the conscious and subconscious mind set forth in this book. 
This young girl gradually came to see that she had been completely brain -
washed, mesmerized and conditioned by an ignorant, superstitious, bigot -
ed and frustrated mother. She broke away completely from her family and
started to live a wonderful life.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
At my suggestion she dressed up and had her hair attended to. She took 
lessons in dancing from a man, and she also took driving lessons. She 
learned to swim, play cards and had a number of dates. She began to 
love life. She prayed for a divine companion by claiming that Infinite Spirit
would attract to her a man who harmonized with her thoroughly. Eventu -
ally this came to pass. As he left my office one evening, there was a man 
waiting to see me and I casually introduced them. They are now married 
and harmonize with each other perfectly.
Forgiveness Is Necessary For Healing
And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any. Mark 
11:25.
Forgiveness of others is essential to mental peace and radiant health. You 
must forgive everyone who has ever hurt you if you want perfect health 
and happiness. Forgive yourself by getting your thoughts in harmony with
divine law and order. You cannot really forgive yourself completely until 
you have forgiven others first. To refuse to forgive yourself is nothing 
more or less than spiritual pride or ignorance.
In the psychosomatic field of medicine today, it is being constantly 
stressed that resentment, condemnation of others, remorse and hostility 
are behind a host of maladies ranging from arthritis to cardiac disease. 
They point out that these sick people, who were hurt, mistreated, de -
ceived or injured, were full of resentment and hatred for those who hurt 
them. This caused inflamed and festering wounds in their subconscious 
minds. There is only one remedy. They have to cut out and discard their 
hurts, and the one and only sure way is by forgiveness.
Forgiveness Is Love In Action
The essential ingredient in the art of forgiveness is the willingness to for -
give. If you sincerely desire to forgive the other, you are fifty-one percent 
over the hurdle. I feel sure you know that to forgive the other does not 
necessarily mean that you like him or want to associate with him. You 
cannot be compelled to like someone, neither can a government legislate 
good will, love, peace or tolerance. It is quite impossible to like people be -
cause someone in Washington issues an edict to that effect. We can, how -
ever, love people without liking them.
The Bible says, Love ye one another . This, anyone can do who really 
wants to do it. Love means that you wish for the other health, happiness, 
peace, joy and all the blessings of life. There is only one prerequisite and 
that is sincerity. You are not being magnanimous when you forgive, you 
are really being self, because what you wish for the other, you are actually
wishing for yourself. The reason is that you are thinking it and you are 
feeling it. As you think and feel, so are you. Could anything be simpler 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
than that?
Technique Of Forgiveness
The following is a simple method which works wonders in your life as you 
practice it. Quiet your mind, relax and let go. Think of God and His love 
for you, and then affirm, “I fully and freely forgive (mention the name of 
the offender); I release him mentally and spiritually. I completely forgive 
everything connected with the matter in question. I am free, and he/she 
is free. It is a marvelous feeling. It is my day of general amnesty. I re -
lease anybody and everybody who has ever hurt me, and I wish for each 
and everyone health, happiness, peace and all the blessings of life. I do 
this freely, joyously and lovingly and whenever I think of the person or 
persons who hurt me, I say, 'I have released you, and all the blessings of 
life are yours.' I am free and you are free. It is wonderful!”
The great secret of true forgiveness is that once you have forgiven the 
person, it is unnecessary to repeat the prayer. Whenever the person 
comes to your mind, or the particular hurt happens to enter your mind, 
wish the delinquent well, and say, “Peace be to you.” Do this as often as 
the thought enters your mind. You will find that after a few days the 
thought of the person or experience will return less and less often, until it 
fades into nothingness.
The Acid Test For Forgiveness
There is an acid test for gold. There is also an acid test for forgiveness. If 
I should tell you something wonderful about someone who has wronged 
you, cheated you, or defrauded you, and you sizzled at hearing the good 
news about this person, the roots of hatred would still be in your subcon -
scious mind, playing havoc with you.
Let us suppose you had a painful abscess on your jaw a year ago, and you
told me about it, I would casually ask you if you had any pain now. You 
would automatically say, “Of course not, I have memory of it but no pain.”
That is the whole story. You may have a memory of the incident but no 
sting or hurt anymore. This is the acid test, and you must meet it psycho -
logically and spiritually, otherwise, you are simply deceiving yourself and 
not practicing the true art of forgiveness.
To Understand All Is To Forgive All
When man understands the creative law of his own mind, he ceases to 
blame other people and conditions for making or marring his life. He 
knows that his own thoughts and feelings create his destiny. Furthermore,
he is aware that externals are not the causes and conditioners of his life 
and his experiences. To think that others can mar your happiness, that 
you are the football of a cruel fate, that you must oppose and fight others
for a living, all these and others like them, are untenable when you un -
derstand that thoughts are things. The Bible says the same thing. For as 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
a man thinketh in his heart, so is he. Proverbs 23:7 .
Summary Of Your Aids To Forgiveness
1. God, or life, is no respecter of persons. Life plays no favorites. Life, or 
God, seems to favor you when you align yourself with the principle of har -
mony, health, joy and peace.
2. God, or life, never sends disease, sickness, accident or suffering. We 
bring these things on ourselves by our own negative thinking based upon 
the law as we sow, so shall we reap .
3. Your concept of God is the most important thing in your life. If you re -
ally believe in a God of love, your subconscious mind will respond in 
countless blessings to you. Believe in a God of love.
4. Life, or God, holds no grudge against you. Life never condemns you. 
Life heals a severe cut on your hand. Life forgives you if you burn your 
finger. It reduces the edema and restores the part to wholeness and per -
fection.
5. Your guilt complex is a false concept of God and life. God, or life, does 
not punish or judge you. You do this to yourself by your false beliefs, neg -
ative thinking and self condemnation.
6. God, or life, does not condemn or punish you. The forces of nature are 
not evil. The effect of their use depends on how you use the power within 
you. You can use electricity to kill someone or to light the house. You can 
use water to drown a child or quench his thirst. Good and evil come right 
back to the thought and purpose in man's own mind.
7. God, or life, never punishes. Man punishes himself by his false con -
cepts of God, life, and the universe. His thoughts are creative and he cre -
ates his own misery.
8. If another criticizes you, and these faults are within you, rejoice, give 
thanks and appreciate the comments. This gives you the opportunity to 
correct the particular fault.
9. You cannot be hurt by criticism when you know that you are master of 
your thoughts, reactions and emotions. This gives you the opportunity to 
pray and bless the other, thereby blessing yourself.
10. When you pray for guidance and right action, take what comes. Real -
ize it is good and very good. Then there is no cause for self pity, criticism 
or hatred.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
11. There is nothing good or bad, but thinking makes it so. There is no 
evil in sex, the desire for food, wealth or true expression. It depends on 
how you use these urges, desires and aspirations. Your desire for food can
be met without killing someone for a loaf of bread.
12. Resentment, hatred, ill will and hostility are behind a host of mal -
adies. Forgive yourself and everybody else by pouring out love, life, joy 
and good will to all those who have hurt you. Continue until such time as 
you meet them in your mind and you are at peace with them.
13. To forgive is to give something for . Give love, peace, joy, wisdom and 
all the blessings of life to the other, until there is no sting left in your 
mind. This is really the acid test of forgiveness.
14. Let us suppose you had an abscess in your jaw about a year ago. It 
was very painful. Ask yourself if it is painful now. The answer is negative. 
Likewise, if someone has hurt you, lied about and vilified you, and said all
manner of evil about you, is your thought of that person negative? Do you
sizzle when he or she comes into your mind? If so, the roots of hatred are
still there, playing havoc with you and your good. The only way is to with -
er them with love by wishing for the person all the blessings of life, until 
you can meet the person in your mind, and you can sincerely react with -
out benediction of peace and good will. This is the meaning of forgive un-
til seventy times seven .
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
