
William James, father of American psychology, said that the greatest dis -
covery of the nineteenth century was not in the realm of physical science.
The greatest discovery was the power of the subconscious touched by 
faith. In every human being is that limitless reservoir of power which can 
overcome any problem in the world.
True and lasting happiness will come into your life the day you get the 
clear realization that you can overcome any weakness the day you realize 
that your subconscious can solve your problems, heal your body and 
prosper you beyond your fondest dream.
You might have felt very happy when your child was born, when you got 
married, when you graduated from college, or when you won a great vic -
tory or a prize. You might have been very happy when you became en -
gaged to the loveliest girl or the most handsome man. You could go on 
and list innumerable experiences which have made you happy. However, 
no matter how marvelous these experiences are, they do not give real 
lasting happiness – they are transitory.
The Book of Proverbs gives the answer: Whosoever trusteth in the Lord, 
happy is he. When you trust in the Lord (the power and wisdom of your 
subconscious mind) to lead, guide, govern and direct all your ways, you 
will become poised, serene and relaxed. As you radiate love, peace and 
good will to all, you are building a superstructure of happiness for all the 
days of your life.
You Must Choose Happiness
Happiness is a state of mind. There is a phrase in the Bible which says, 
Choose ye this day whom ye will serve . You have the freedom to choose 
happiness. This may seem extraordinarily simple, and it is. Perhaps this is
why people stumble over the way to happiness; they do not see the sim -
plicity of the key to happiness. The great things of life are simple, dynam -
ic and creative. They produce well-being and happiness.
St Paul reveals to you how you can think your way into a life of dynamic 
power and happiness in these words: Finally, brethren, whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, what -
soever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things 
are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, 
think on these things. Phil, 4:8 .
How To Choose Happiness
Begin now to choose happiness. This is how you do it: When you open 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
your eyes in the morning, say to yourself, “Divine order takes charge of 
my life today and every day. All things work together for good for me to -
day. This a new and wonderful day for me. There will never be another 
day like this one. I am divinely guided all day long and whatever I do will 
prosper. Divine love surrounds me, enfolds me, and enwraps me, and I go
forth in peace. Whenever my attention wanders away from that which is 
good and constructive, I will immediately bring it back to the contempla -
tion of that which is lovely and of good report. I am a spiritual and mental
magnet attracting to myself all things which bless and prosper me. I am 
going to be a wonderful success in all my undertakings today. I am defi -
nitely going to be happy all day long.”
Start each day in this manner; then you will be choosing to be a joyous 
person.
He Made It A Habit To Be Happy
A number of years ago, I stayed for about a week in a farmer's house in 
Connemarra on the west coast of Ireland. He seemed to be always singing
and whistling and was full of humor. I asked him the secret of happiness, 
and his reply was: “It is a habit of mine to be happy. Every morning when
I awaken and every night before I go to sleep, I bless my family, the 
crops, the cattle and I thank God for the wonderful harvest.”
This farmer had made a practice of this for over forty years. As you know,
thoughts repeated regularly and systematically sink into the subconscious
mind and become habitual. He discovered that happiness is a habit.
You Must Desire To Be Happy
There is one very important point about being happy. You must sincerely 
desire to be happy. There are people who have been depressed, dejected 
and unhappy so long that were they suddenly made happy by some won -
derful, good, joyous news, they would actually be like the woman who 
said to me, “It is wrong to be so happy!” They have been so accustomed 
to the old mental patterns that they do not feel at home being happy! 
They long for the former, depressed, unhappy state.
I knew a woman in England who had rheumatism for many years. She 
would pat herself on the knee and say, “My rheumatism is bad today. I 
cannot go out. My rheumatism keeps me miserable.”
This dear elderly lady got a lot of attention from her son, daughter and 
the neighbors. She really wanted her rheumatism. She enjoyed her “mis -
ery” as he called it. This woman did not really want to be happy.
I suggested a curative procedure for her. I wrote down some biblical vers -
es and told her that if she gave attention to these truths, her mental atti -
tude would undoubtedly change and would result in her faith and confi -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
dence being restored to health. She was not interested. There seems to 
be a peculiar, mental, morbid streak in many people, whereby they seem 
to enjoy being miserable and sad.
Why Choose Unhappiness?
Many people choose unhappiness by entertaining these ideas: “Today is a 
black day; everything is going to be wrong.” “I am not going to succeed.” 
“Everyone is against me.” “Business is bad, and it is going to get worse.” 
“I'm always late.” “I never get the breaks.” “He can, but I can't.” If you 
have this attitude of mind first thing in the morning, you will attract all 
these experiences to you and you will be very unhappy.
Begin to realize that the world you live in is determined by what goes on 
in your mind. Marcus Aurelius, the great Roman philosopher and sage 
said, “A man's life is what his thoughts make of it.” Emerson, America's 
foremost philosopher, said, “A man is what he thinks all day long.” The 
thoughts you habitually entertain in your mind have the tendency to actu -
alize themselves in physical conditions.
Make certain you do not indulge in negative thoughts, defeatist thoughts, 
or unkind, depressing thoughts. Recall frequently to your mind that you 
can experience nothing outside your own mentality.
If I Had A Million Dollars, I Would Be Happy
I have visited many men in mental institutions who were millionaires, but 
they insisted they were penniless and destitute. They were incarcerated 
because of psychotic, paranoid and manic depressive tendencies. Wealth 
in and of itself will not make you happy. On the other hand, it is not a de -
terrent to happiness. Today, there are many people trying to buy happi -
ness through the purchase of radios, television sets, automobiles, a home
in the country, a private yacht and a swimming pool, but happiness can -
not be purchased or procured in that way.
The kingdom of happiness is in your thought and feeling. Too many peo -
ple have the idea that it takes something artificial to produce happiness. 
Some say, “If I were elected mayor, made president of the organization, 
promoted to general manager of the corporation, I would be happy.”
The truth is that happiness is a mental state. None of these positions 
mentioned will necessarily bequeath happiness. Your strength, joy and 
happiness consist in finding out the law of divine order and right action 
lodged in your subconscious mind and by applying these principles in all 
phases of your life.
He Found Happiness To Be The Harvest Of A Quiet Mind
Lecturing in San Francisco some years ago, I interviewed a man who was 
very unhappy and dejected over the way his business was going. He was 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
the general manager. His heart was filled with resentment toward the vice
president and the president of the organization. He claimed that they op -
posed him. Because of this internal strife, business was declining; he was 
receiving no dividends or stock bonuses.
This is how he solved his business problem: The first thing in the morning
he affirmed quietly as follows, “All those working in our corporation are 
honest, sincere, cooperative, faithful and full of good will to all. They are 
mental and spiritual links in the chain of this corporation's growth, welfare
and prosperity. I radiate love, peace and good will in my thoughts, words 
and deeds to my two associates and to all those in the company. The 
president and the vice president of our company are divinely guided in all 
their undertakings. The Infinite Intelligence of my subconscious mind 
makes all decisions through me. There is only right action in all our busi -
ness transactions and in our relationship with each other. I send the mes -
sengers of peace, love and good will before me to the office. Peace and 
harmony reign supreme in the minds and hearts of all those in the com -
pany including myself. I now go forth into a new day, full of faith, confi -
dence and trust.”
This business executive repeated the above meditation slowly three times 
in the morning, feeling the truth of what he affirmed. When fearful or an -
gry thoughts came into his mind during the day, hew would say to him -
self, “Peace, harmony and poise govern my mind at all times.”
As he continued disciplining his mind in this manner, all the harmful 
thoughts ceased to come and peace came into his mind. He reaped the 
harvest.
Subsequently, he wrote me to the effect that at the end of about two 
weeks of reordering his mind, the president and vice president called him 
into the office, praised his operations and his new constructive ideas, and 
remarked how fortunate they were in having him as a general manager. 
He was very happy in discovering that man finds happiness within himself.
The Block Or Stump Is Not Really There
I read a newspaper article some years ago which told about a horse who 
had shied when he came to a stump on the road. Subsequently, every 
time the horse came to that same stump, he shied. The farmer dug the 
stump out, burned it and leveled the old road. Yet, for twenty-five years, 
every time the horse passed the place where the former stump was, he 
shied. The horse was shying at the memory of a stump.
There is no block to your happiness save in your own thought life and 
mental imagery. Are fear or worry holding you back? Fear is a thought in 
your mind. You can dig it up this very moment by supplanting it with faith
in success, achievement and victory over all problems.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
I knew a man who failed in business. He said to me, “I made mistakes. 
I've learned a lot. I am going back into business and I will be a tremen -
dous success.” He faced up to that stump in his mind. He did not whine or
complain, but he tore up the stump of failure and through believing in his 
inner powers to back him up, he banished all fear thoughts and old de -
pressions. Believe in yourself and you will succeed and be happy.
The Happiest People
The happiest man is he who constantly brings forth and practices what is 
best in him. Happiness and virtue complement each other. The best are 
not only the happiest, but the happiest are usually the best in the art of 
living life successfully. God is the highest and best in you. Express more of
God's love, light, truth and beauty and you will become one of the happi -
est persons in the world today.
Epictetus, the Greek stoic philosopher, said, “There is but one way to tran -
quility of mind and happiness, let this, therefore, be always ready at hand
with thee, both when thou wakest early in the morning, and all day long, 
and when thou goest to late to sleep, to account no external things thine 
own, but commit all these to God.”
Summary Of Steps To Happiness
1. William James said that the greatest discovery of the nineteenth centu -
ry was the power of the subconscious mind touched by faith.
2. There is tremendous power within you. Happiness will come to you 
when you acquire a sublime confidence in this power. Then, you will make
your dreams come true.
3. You can rise victorious over any defeat and realize the cherished de -
sires of your heart through the marvelous power of your subconscious 
mind. This is the meaning of Whosoever trusteth in the Lord  (spiritual 
laws of the subconscious mind), happy is he.
4. You must choose happiness. Happiness is a habit. It is a good habit to 
ponder often on Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are hon -
est, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever 
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any 
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things. Phil. 4:8 .
5. When you open your eyes in the morning, say to yourself, I choose 
happiness today. I choose success today. I choose right action today. I 
choose love and good will for all today. I choose peace today. Pour life, 
love and interest into this affirmation, and you have chosen happiness.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
6. Give thanks for all your blessings several times  day. Furthermore, pray
for the peace, happiness and prosperity of all members of your family, 
your associates and all people everywhere.
7. you must sincerely desire to be happy. Nothing is accomplished without
desire. Desire is a wish with wings of imagination and faith. Imagine the 
fulfillment of your desire, and feel its reality, and it will come to pass. 
Happiness comes in answered prayer.
8. By constantly dwelling on thoughts of fear, worry, anger, hate and fail -
ure you will become very depressed and unhappy. Remember, your life is 
what your thoughts make of it.
9. You cannot buy happiness with all the money in the world. Some mil -
lionaires are very happy, some are very unhappy. Many people with very 
little worldly good are very happy and some are very unhappy. Some 
married people are happy and some are very unhappy. Some single peo -
ple are happy and some are very unhappy. The kingdom of happiness is in
your thought and feeling.
10. Happiness is the harvest of a quiet mind. Anchor your thoughts on 
peace, poise, security and divine guidance and your mind will be produc -
tive of happiness.
11. There is no block to your happiness. External things are not causative,
these are effects, not cause. Take your cue from the only creative princi -
ple within you. Your thought is cause, and new cause produces a new ef -
fect. Choose happiness.
12. The happiest man is he who brings forth the highest and the best in 
him. God is the highest and best in him, for the kingdom of God is within.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
