
Success means successful living. A long period of peace, joy and happi -
ness on this plane may be termed success. The eternal experience of 
these qualities is the everlasting life spoken of by Jesus. The real things of
life, such as peace, harmony, integrity, security and happiness are intan -
gible. They come from the Deep Self of man. Meditating on these qualities
builds these treasures of heaven in our subconscious.. it is where moth 
and rust do not consume, and where thieves do not break through and 
steal. Matthew 6:20 .
The Three Steps To Success
Let us discuss three steps to success. 
First Step
The first step to success is to find out the thing you love to do, then do it. 
Success is in loving your work. Although, if a man is a psychiatrist, it is 
not adequate for him to get a diploma and place it on the wall; he must 
keep up with the times, attend conventions, and continue studying the 
mind and its workings. The successful psychiatrist visits clinics and reads 
the latest scientific articles. In other words, he is informed in the most ad -
vanced methods of alleviating human suffering. The successful psychia -
trist or doctor must have the interest of his patients at heart.
Someone may say, “How can I put the first step into operation? I do not 
know what I should do.” In such a case, pray for guidance as follows: 
“The Infinite Intelligence of my subconscious mind reveals to me my true 
place in life.” Repeat this prayer quietly, positively and lovingly to your 
deeper mind. As you persist with faith and confidence, the answer will 
come to you as a feeling, a hunch or a tendency in a certain direction. It 
will come to you clearly and in peace, and as an inner silent awareness.
Second Step
The second step to success is to specialize in some particular branch of 
work and know more about it than anyone else. For example, if a young 
man chooses chemistry as his profession, he should concentrate on one of
the many branches in this field. He should give all of his time and atten -
tion to his chosen specialty. He should become sufficiently enthusiastic to 
try to know all there is available about his field; if possible, he should 
know more than anyone else. The young man should become ardently in -
terested in his work and should desire to serve the world.
He that is great among you, let him become your servant . There is a 
great contrast in this attitude of mind in comparison to that of the man 
who only wants to make a living or just “get by.” “Getting by” is not true 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
success. Man's motive must be great, nobler and more altruistic. He must 
serve others, thereby casting his bread upon the waters.
Third Step
The third step is the most important one. You must be sure that the thing 
you want to do does not redound to your success only. Your desire must 
not be selfish; it must benefit humanity. The path of a complete circuit 
must be formed. In other words, your idea must go forth with the purpose
of blessing or serving the world. It will then come back to you pressed 
down, shaken together and running over. If it is to benefit yourself exclu -
sively, the circle or complete circuit is not formed, and you may experi -
ence a short circuit in your life which may consist of limitation or sickness.
The Measure Of True Success
Some people may say, “But Mr James made a fortune in selling fraudulent
oil stock.” A man may seem to succeed for a while, but the money he ob -
tained by fraud usually takes wings and flies away.
When we rob from another, we rob from ourselves, because we are in a 
mood of lack and limitation which may manifest itself in our body, home 
life and affairs. What we think and feel, we create. We create what we be -
lieve. Even though a man may have accumulated a fortune fraudulently, 
he is not successful. There is no success without peace of mind. What 
good is man's accumulated wealth if he cannot sleep nights, is sick or has
a guilt complex?
I knew a man in London who told me of his exploits. He had been a pro -
fessional pickpocket and had amassed a large amount of money. He had a
summer home in France and lived in a royal fashion in England. His story 
was that he was in constant dread of being arrested by Scotland Yard. He 
had many inner disorders which were undoubtedly caused by his constant
fear and deep-seated guilt complex. He knew he had done wrong. This 
deep sense of guilt attracted all kinds of trouble to him. Subsequently, he 
voluntarily surrendered to the police and served a prison sentence. After 
his release from prison, he sought psychological and spiritual counsel and 
became transformed. He went to work and became an honest, law-abid -
ing citizen. He found what he loved to do and was happy.
A successful person loves his work and expresses himself fully. Success is 
contingent upon a higher ideal than the mere accumulation of riches. The 
man of success is the man who possesses great psychological and spiritu -
al understanding. Many of the great industrialists today depend upon the 
correct use of the subconscious minds for their success.
There was an article published some years ago about Flagler, an oil mag -
nate. He admitted that the secret of his success was his ability to see a 
project in its completion. For instance, in his case, he closed his eyes, 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
imagined a big oil industry, saw trains running on tracks, heard whistles 
blowing and saw smoke. Having seen and felt the fulfillment of his prayer,
his subconscious mind brought about its realization. If you imagine an ob -
jective clearly, you will be provided with the necessities, in ways you know
not of, through the wonder-working power of your subconscious mind.
In considering the three steps to success you must never forget the un -
derlying power of the creative forces of your subconscious mind. This is 
the energy in back of all steps in any plan of success. Your thought is cre -
ative. Thought fused with feeling becomes a subjective faith or belief, and
according to your belief it is done unto you. Matthew 9:29 .
A knowledge of a mighty force in you which is capable of bringing to pass 
all your desires gives you confidence and a sense of peace. Whatever your
field of action may be, you should learn the laws of your subconscious 
mind. When you know how to apply the powers of your mind, and when 
you are expressing yourself fully and giving of your talents to others, you 
are on the sure path to true success. If you are about God's business, or 
any part of it, God, by His very nature, is for you, so who can be against 
you? With this understanding there is no power in heaven or on earth to 
withhold success from you.
How He Made His Dream Come True
A movie actor told me that he had very little education, but he had a 
dream as a boy of becoming a successful movie actor. Out in the field 
mowing hay, driving the cows home or even when milking them he said, 
“I would constantly imagine I saw my name in big lights at a large the -
ater. I kept this up for years until finally I ran away from home. I got ex -
tra jobs in the motion picture field and the day finally came when I saw 
my name in great, big lights as I did when I was a boy!” Then he added, 
“I know the power of sustained imagination to bring success.”
His Dream Pharmacy Became A Reality
Thirty years ago I knew a young pharmacist who was receiving forty dol -
lars a week plus commission on sales, “After twenty-five years,” he said to
me, “I will get a pension and retire.”
I said to this young man, “Why don't you own your own store? Get out of 
this place. Raise your sights! Have a dream for your children. Maybe your 
son wants to be a doctor, perhaps your daughter desires to be a great 
musician.”
His answer was that he had no money! He began to awaken to the fact 
that whatever he could conceive as true, he could give conception.
The first step toward his goal was his awakening to the powers of his sub -
conscious mind which I briefly elaborated on for his benefit. His second 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
step was his realization that if he could succeed in conveying an idea to 
his subconscious mind, the latter would somehow bring it to pass.
He began to imagine that he was in his own store. He mentally arranged 
the bottles, dispensed prescriptions and imagined several clerks in the 
store waiting on customers. He also visualized a big bank balance. Men -
tally he worked in that imaginary store. Like a good actor he lived the 
role. Act as though I am, and I will be . This pharmacist put himself whole -
heartedly into the act, living, moving and acting on the assumption that 
he owned the store.
The sequel was interesting. He was discharged from his position. He found
new employment with a large chain store, became manager, and later on,
district manager. He saved enough money in four years to provide a down
payment on a drugstore of his own. He called it his “Dream Pharmacy.”
“It was,” he said, “exactly the store I saw in my imagination.” He became 
a recognized success in his chosen field and was happy doing what he 
loved to do.
Using The Subconscious Mind In Business
Some years ago I gave a lecture to a group of businessman on the pow -
ers of imagination and the subconscious mind. In this lecture I pointed 
out how Goethe used his imagination wisely when confronted with difficul -
ties and predicaments.
His biographers point out that he was accustomed to fill many hours qui -
etly holding imaginary conversations. It is well known that his custom was
to imagine one of his friends before him in a chair answering him in the 
right way. In other words, if he were concerned over any problems, he 
imagined his friends giving him the right or appropriate answer, accompa -
nied with the usual gestures and tonal qualities of the voice, and he made
the entire imaginary scene as real and as vivid as possible.
One of the men present at my lecture was a young stockbroker. He pro -
ceeded to adopt the technique of Goethe. He began to have mental, 
imaginary conversations with a multimillionaire banker friend of his who 
used to congratulate him on his wise and sound judgment and compli -
ment him on his purchase of the right stocks. He used to dramatize this 
imaginary conversation until he had psychologically fixed it as a form of 
belief in his mind.
The broker's inner talking and controlled imagination certainly agreed with
his aim which was to make sound investments for his clients. His main 
purpose was to make money for his clients and to see them prosper fi -
nancially by his wise counsel. He is still using his subconscious mind in his
business, and he is a brilliant success in his field of endeavor.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
Boy Of Sixteen Years Turns Failure Into Success
A young boy who was attending high school said to me, “I am getting 
very poor grades. My memory is failing, I do not know what is the mat -
ter.” I discovered that the only thing wrong with this boy was his attitude, 
which was one of indifference and resentment toward some of his teach -
ers and fellow students. I taught him how to use his subconscious mind, 
and how to succeed in his studies.
He began to affirm certain truths several times a day particularly at night 
prior to sleep, and also in the morning after awakening. These are the 
best times to impregnate the subconscious mind.
He affirmed as follows: “I realize that my subconscious mind is a store -
house of memory. It retains everything I read and hear from my teachers.
I have a perfect memory and the Infinite Intelligence in my subconscious 
mind constantly reveals to me everything I need to know at all my exami -
nations, whether written or oral. I radiate love and good will to all my 
teachers and fellow students. I sincerely wish for them success and all 
good things.”
This young man is now enjoying a greater freedom than he has ever 
known. He is now receiving all “A's.” he constantly imagines the teachers 
and his mother congratulating him on his success in his studies.
How To Become Successful In Buying and Selling
In buying and selling, remember that your conscious mind is the starter 
and your subconscious mind is the motor. You must start the motor to en -
able it to perform its work. Your conscious mind is the dynamo that awak -
ens the power of your subconscious mind.
The first step in conveying your clarified desire, idea or image to the 
deeper mind is to relax, immobilize the attention, get still and be quiet. 
This quiet, relaxed and peaceful attitude of mind prevents extraneous 
matter and false ideas from interfering with your mental absorption of 
your ideal. Furthermore in the quiet, passive and receptive attitude of 
mind, effort is reduced to a minimum.
The second step is to begin to imagine the reality of that which you de -
sire. For example, you may wish to buy a home, and in your relaxed state
of mind affirm as follows: “The Infinite Intelligence of my subconscious 
ind is all-wise. It reveals to me now the ideal home which is central, ideal,
is in a lovely environment, meets all my requirements and is commensu -
rate with my income. I am now turning this request over to my subcon -
scious mind, and I know it responds according to the nature of my re -
quest. I release this request with absolute faith and confidence in the 
same way that a farmer deposits a seed in the ground, trusting implicitly 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
in the laws of growth.”
The answer to your prayer may come through an advertisement in the pa -
per, through a friend, or you may be guided directly to a particular home 
which is exactly what you are seeking. There are many ways by which 
your prayer may be answered. The principle knowledge, in which you may
place your confidence, is that the answer always comes, provided you 
trust the working of your deeper mind.
You may wish to sell a home, land, or any kind of property. In private 
consultation with real estate brokers I have told them of the way I sold 
my own home on Orlando Avenue in Log Angeles. Many of them have ap -
plied the technique I used with remarkable and speedy results. I placed a 
sign which read, “For sale by owner,” in the garden in front of my home. 
The day after, I said to myself as I was going to sleep, “Supposing you 
sold your house, what would you do?” 
I answered my own question and I said, “I would take that sign down and
throw it into the garage.” In my imagination I took hold of the sign, pulled
it up from the ground, placed it on my shoulder, went to the garage, 
threw it on the floor and said jokingly to the sign, “I don't need you any -
more!” I felt the inner satisfaction of it all, realizing it was finished.
The next day a man gave me a deposit of $1,000 and said to me, “Take 
your sign down. We will go into escrow now.”
Immediately I pulled the sign up and took it to the garage. The outer ac -
tion conformed to the inner. There is nothing new about this. As within, so
without, meaning according to the image impressed on your subconscious
mind, so it is on the objective screen of life. The outside mirrors the in -
side. External action follows internal action.
Here is another very popular method used in selling homes, land or any 
kind of property. Affirm slowly, quietly and feelingly as follows: “Infinite 
intelligence attracts to me the buyer for this home who wants and who 
prospers in it. This buyer may look at many other homes, but mine is the 
only one he wants and will buy, because he is guided by the Infinite Intel -
ligence within him. I now the buyer is right, the time is right and the price
is right. Everything about it is right. The deeper currents of my subcon -
scious mind are now in operation bringing both of us together in divine or -
der. I know that it is so.” 
Remember always that what you are seeking is also seeking you, and 
whenever you want to sell a home or property of any kind, there is always
someone who wants what you have to offer. By using the powers of your 
subconscious mind correctly, you free your mind of all sense of competitor
and anxiety in buying and selling.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
How She Succeeded In Getting What She Wanted
There is a young lady who regularly comes to my lectures and classes. 
She had to change buses three times; it took her one and a half hours 
each time to come to the lectures. In one lecture I explained how a young
man needed a car in his work and received one.
She went home and experimented as outlined in my lecture. Here is her 
letter in part, narrating her application of my method, and published with 
her permission:
Dear Dr Murphy,
This is how I received a Cadillac car -  I wanted one to come to the lec -
tures regularly. In my imagination I went through the identical process I 
would go through if I were actually driving a car. I went to the showroom 
and the salesman took me for a ride in one. I also drove it several blocks.
I claimed the Cadillac car as my own over and over again. I kept the men -
tal picture of getting into the car, driving it, feeling the upholstery etc., 
consistently for over two weeks. Last week I drove to your lectures in a 
Cadillac. My uncle in Inglewood passed away and left me his Cadillac and 
his entire estate.
A Success Technique Employed By Many Outstanding Executives &
Businessmen
There are many prominent who quietly use the abstract term, “success,” 
over and over many times a day until they reach a conviction that success
is theirs. They know that the idea of success contains all the essential ele -
ments of success. Likewise, you can begin now to repeat the word, “suc -
cess,” to yourself with faith and conviction. Your subconscious mind will 
accept it as true of you and you will be under a subconscious compulsion 
to succeed.
You are compelled to express your subjective beliefs, impressions and 
convictions. What does success imply to you? You want, undoubtedly, to 
be successful in your home life and in your relationship with others. You 
wish to be outstanding in your chosen work or profession. You wish to 
possess a beautiful home and all the money you need to live comfortably 
and happily. You want to be successful in your prayer life and in your con -
tact with the powers of your subconscious mind.
You are a businessman also because you are in the business of living. Be -
come a successful businessman by imagining yourself doing what you 
long to do, and possessing the things you long to possess. Become imagi -
native, mentally participate in the reality of the successful state. Make a 
habit of it. Go to sleep feeling successful every night, and perfectly satis -
fied, and you will eventually succeed in implanting the idea of success in 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
your subconscious mind. Believe you were born to succeed and wonders 
will happen as you pray!
Profitable Pointers
1. Success means successful living. When you are peaceful, happy, joyous
and doing what you love to do, you are successful.
2. Find out what you love to do, then do it. If you don't know your true 
expression, ask for guidance and the lead will come.
 
3. Specialize in your particular field and try to know more about it than 
anyone else.
4. A successful man is not selfish. His main desire in life is to serve hu -
manity.
 
5. There is no true success without peace of mind.
6. A successful man possesses great psychological and spiritual under -
standing.
7. If you imagine an objective clearly, you will be provided with the neces -
sities through the wonder-working power of your subconscious mind.
8. Your thought fused with feeling becomes a subjective belief, and ac-
cording to your belief is it done unto you .
9. The power of sustained imagination draws forth the miracle-working 
powers of your subconscious mind.
10. If you are seeking promotion in your work, imagine your employer, 
supervisor or loved one congratulating you on your promotion. Make the 
picture vivid and real. Hear the voice, see the gestures and feel the reality
of it all. Continue to do this frequently and through frequent occupancy of 
your mind, you will experience the joy of the answered prayer.
11. Your subconscious mind is a storehouse of memory. For a perfect 
memory, affirm frequently: “The Infinite Intelligence of my subconscious 
mind reveals to me everything I need to know at all times, everywhere.
12. If you wish to sell a home or property of any kind, affirm slowly, qui -
etly and feelingly as follows: “Infinite Intelligence attracts to me the buyer
for this house or property, who wants it, and who prospers in it.” Sustain 
the awareness and the deeper currents of your subconscious mind will 
bring it to pass.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
13. The idea of success contains all the elements of success. Repeat the 
word “success,” to yourself frequently with faith and conviction and you 
will be under a subconscious compulsion to succeed.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
