
If you are having difficulties, if you are trying to make ends meet, it 
means you have not convinced your subconscious mind that you will al -
ways have plenty and some to spare. You know men and women who 
work a few hours a week and make fabulous sums of money. They do not 
strive or slave hard. Do not believe the story that the only way you can 
become wealthy is by the sweat of your brow and hard labor. It is not so; 
the effortless way of life is the best. Do the thing you love to do and do it 
for the joy and thrill of it.
I know an executive in Los Angeles who receives a salary of $75,000 
yearly. Last year he went on a nine month cruise seeing the world and its 
beauty spots. He said to me that he had succeeded in convincing his sub -
conscious mind that he is worth that much money. He told me that many 
men in his organization getting about one hundred dollars a week knew 
more about the business than he did, and could manage it better, but 
they had no ambition, no creative ideas and were not interested in the 
wonders of their subconscious mind.
Wealth Is Of The Mind
Wealth is simply a subconscious conviction on the part of the individual. 
You will not become a millionaire by saying, “I am a millionaire, I am a 
millionaire.” You will grow into a wealth consciousness by building into 
your mentality the idea of wealth and abundance.
Your Invisible Means Of Support
The trouble with most people is that they have no invisible means of sup -
port. When business falls away, the stock market drops or they lost their 
investments, the seem helpless. The reason for such insecurity is that 
they do not know how to tap the subconscious mind. They are unac -
quainted with the inexhaustible storehouse within.
A man with a poverty type mind finds himself in poverty-stricken condi -
tions. Another man with a mind filled with ideas of wealth is surrounded 
with everything he needs. It was never intended that man should lead a 
life of indigence. You can wealth, everything you need and plenty to 
spare. Your words have power to cleanse your mind of wrong ideas and to
instill right ideas in their place.
The Ideal Method For Building A Wealth Consciousness
Perhaps you are saying as you read this chapter, “I need wealth and suc -
cess.” This is what you do: Repeat for about five minutes to yourself three
or four times a day, “Wealth - Success.” These words have tremendous 
power. They represent the inner power of the subconscious mind. Anchor 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
your mind on this substantial power within you; then conditions and cir -
cumstances corresponding to their nature and quality will be manifested 
in your life. You are not saying, “I am wealthy,” you are dwelling on real 
powers within you. There is no conflict in the mind when you say, 
“Wealth.” Furthermore, the feeling of wealth will well up within you as you
dwell on the idea of wealth.
The feeling of wealth produces wealth; keep this in mind at all times. Your
subconscious mind is like a bank, a sort of universal financial institution. 
It magnifies whatever you deposit or impress upon it whether it is the 
idea of wealth or of poverty. Choose wealth.
Why Your Affirmations For Wealth Fail
I have talked to many people during the past thirty-five years whose usu -
al complaint is, “I have said for weeks and months, 'I am wealthy, I am 
prosperous,' and nothing has happened.” I discovered that when they 
said, “I am wealthy, I am prosperous,” they felt that they were lying to 
themselves.
One man told me, “I have affirmed that I am prosperous until I am tired. 
Things are now worse. I knew when I made the statement that it was ob -
viously not true.” His statements were rejected by the conscious mind, 
and the very opposite of what he outwardly affirmed and claimed was 
made manifest.
Your affirmation succeeds best when it is specific and when it does not 
produce a mental conflict or argument; hence the statements made by 
this man made matters worse because they suggested his lack. Your sub -
conscious accepts what you really feel to be true, not just idle words or 
statements. The dominant idea or belief is always accepted by the sub -
conscious mind.
How To Avoid Mental Conflict
The following is the ideal way to overcome this conflict for those who have
this difficulty. Make this practical statement frequently, particularly prior 
to sleep: “By day and by night I am being prospered in all of my interests.
“ This affirmation will not arouse any argument because it does not con -
tradict your subconscious mind's impression of financial lack.
I suggested to one businessman whose sales and finances were very low 
and who was greatly worried, that he sit down in his office, become quiet,
and repeat this statement over and over again: “My sales are improving 
every day.” This statement engaged the cooperation of the conscious and 
subconscious mind; results followed.
Don't Sign Blank Checks
You sign blank checks when you make such statements as, “There is not 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
enough to go around.” “There is a shortage.” “I will lose the house be -
cause of the mortgage,” etc. If you are full of fear about the future, you 
are also writing a blank check and attracting negative conditions to you. 
Your subconscious mind takes your fear and negative statement as your 
request and proceeds in its own way to bring obstacles, delays, lack and 
limitation to your life.
Your Subconscious Gives You Compound Interest
To him that hath the feeling of wealth, more wealth shall be added; to 
him that hath the feeling of lack, more lack shall be added. Your subcon -
scious multiplies and magnifies whatever you deposit in it. Every morning 
as you awaken deposit thoughts of prosperity, success, wealth and peace.
Dwell upon these concepts. Busy you mind with them as often as possi -
ble. These constructive thoughts will find their way as deposits in your 
subconscious mind, and bring forth abundance and prosperity.
Why Nothing Happened
I can hear you saying, “Oh, I did that and nothing happened.” You did not 
get results because you indulged in fear thoughts perhaps ten minutes 
later and neutralized the good you had affirmed. When you place a seed 
in the ground, you do not dig it up. You let it take root and grow. Sup -
pose, for example, you are going to say, “I shall not be able to make that 
payment.” Before you get further than, “I shall...” stop the sentence  and 
dwell on a constructive statement, such as, “By day and by night I am 
prospered in all my ways.”
True Source Of Wealth
Your subconscious mind is never short of ideas. There are within it an infi -
nite number of ideas ready to flow into your conscious mind and appear 
as cash in your pocketbook in countless ways. This process will continue 
to go on in your mind regardless of whether the stock market goes up or 
down, or whether the pound sterling or dollar drops in value. Your wealth 
is never truly dependent on bonds, stocks or money in the bank; these 
are really only symbols necessary and useful, of course, but only symbols.
The point I want to emphasize is that if you convince your subconscious 
mind that wealth is yours, and that it is always circulating in your life, you
will always and inevitably have it, regardless of the form it takes.
Trying To Make Ends Meet & The Real Cause
There are people who claim that they are always trying to make ends 
meet. They seem to have a great struggle to meet their obligations. Have 
you listened to their conversation? In many instances their conversation 
runs along this vein. They are constantly condemning those who have 
succeeded in life and who have raised their heads above the crowd. Per -
haps they are saying, “Oh, that fellow has a racket; he is ruthless; he is a
crook.” This is why they lack; they are condemning the thing they desire 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
and want. The reason they speak critically of their more prosperous asso -
ciates is because they are envious and covetous of the others prosperity. 
The quickest way to cause wealth to take wings and fly away is to criticize
and condemn others who have more wealth than you.
A Common Stumbling Block
There is one emotion which is the cause of the lack of wealth in the lives 
of many. Most people learn this the hard way. It is envy. For example, if 
you see a competitor depositing large sums on money in the bank and 
you have only a meager amount to deposit, does it make you envious? 
The way to overcome this emotion is to say to yourself, “Isn't it wonder -
ful! I rejoice in that man's prosperity. I wish for him greater and greater 
wealth.”
To entertain envious thoughts is devastating because it places you in a 
very negative position; therefore, wealth flows from you instead of to you.
If you are ever annoyed or irritated by the prosperity or great wealth of 
another, claim immediately that you truly wish for him greater wealth in 
every possible way. This will neutralize the negative thoughts in your mind
and cause an ever-greater measure of wealth to flow to you by the law of 
your own subconscious mind.
Rubbing Out A Great Mental Block to Wealth
If you are worried and critical about someone who you claim is making 
money dishonestly, cease worrying about him. You know such a person is 
using the law of mind negatively; the law of mind takes care of him. Be 
careful not to criticize him for the reasons previously indicated. Remem -
ber: the block or obstacle to wealth is in your own mind. You can now de -
stroy that mental block. This you may do by getting on mental good 
terms with everyone. 
Sleep & Grow Rich
As you got to sleep at night, practice the following technique. Repeat the 
word, “Wealth,” quietly, easily and feelingly. Do this over and over again, 
just like a lullaby. Lull yourself to sleep with the one word, “Wealth.” You 
should be amazed at the result. Wealth should flow to you in avalanches 
of abundance. This is another example of the magic power of your sub -
conscious mind.
Serve Yourself With The Powers Of Your Mind
1. Decide to be wealthy the easy way, with the infallible aid of your sub -
conscious mind.
2. Trying to accumulate wealth by the sweat of your brow and hard labor 
is one way to become the richest man in the graveyard. You do not have 
to strive or slave hard.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
3. Wealth is a subconscious conviction. Build into your mentality the idea 
of wealth.
4. The trouble with most people is that they have no invisible means of 
support.
5. Repeat the word, “Wealth,” to yourself slowly and quietly for about five 
minutes prior to sleep and your subconscious mind will bring wealth to 
pass in your experience.
6. The feeling of wealth produces wealth. Keep that in mind at all times.
7. Your conscious and subconscious mind must agree. Your subconscious 
accepts what you really feel to be true. The dominant idea is always ac -
cepted by your subconscious mind. The dominant idea should be wealth, 
not poverty. 
8. You can overcome any mental conflict regarding wealth by affirming 
frequently, “By day and by night I am being prospered in all of my inter -
ests.” 
9. Increase your sales by repeating this statement over and over again, 
“My sales are improving every day; I am advancing, progressing and get -
ting wealthier every day.”
10. Stop writing blank checks, such as, “There is not enough to go 
around,” or “There is a shortage,” etc. Such statements magnify and mul -
tiply your loss.
11. Deposit thoughts of prosperity, wealth and success in your subcon -
scious mind, and the latter will give you compound interest.
12. What you consciously affirm, you must not mentally deny a few mo -
ments later. This will neutralize the good you have affirmed.
13. Your true source of wealth consists of the ideas in your mind. You can 
have an idea worth millions of dollars. Your subconscious will give you the
idea you seek.
14. Envy and jealousy are stumbling blocks to the flow of wealth. Rejoice 
in the prosperity of others.
15. the block to wealth is in your own ind. Destroy that block now by get -
ting on good mental terms with everyone.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
