
Everyone is definitely concerned with the healing of bodily conditions and 
human affairs. What is it that heals? Where is this healing power? These 
are questions asked by everyone. The answer is that this healing power is
in the subconscious mind of each person, and a changed mental attitude 
on the part of the sick person releases this healing power.
No mental or religious science practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or 
medical doctor ever healed a patient. There is an old saying, “The doctor 
dressed the wound, but God heals it.” The psychologist or psychiatrist 
proceeds to remove the mental blocks in the patient so that the healing 
principle may be released, restoring the patient to health. Likewise, the 
surgeon removes the physical block enabling the healing currents to func -
tion normally. No physician, surgeon or mental science practitioner claims 
that “he healed the patient.” The one healing power is called by many 
names: Nature, Life, God, Creative Intelligence and Subconscious Power. 
As previously outlined, there are many different methods used to remove 
the mental, emotional and physical blocks, which inhibit the flow of the 
healing life principle animating all of us. The healing principle resident in 
your subconscious mind can and will, if properly directed by you or some 
other person, heal your mind and body of all disease. This healing princi -
ple is operative in all men regardless of creed, color or race. You do not 
have to belong to some particular church in order to use and participate in
this healing process. Your subconscious will heal the burn or cut on your 
hand even though you profess to be an atheist or agnostic.
The modern mental therapeutic procedure is based on the truth that the 
infinite intelligence and power of your subconscious mind responds ac -
cording to your faith. The mental science practitioner or minister follows 
the injunction of the Bible, i.e. he goes into his closet and shuts the door, 
which means he still his mind, relaxes, lets go and thinks of the infinite 
healing presence within him. He closes the door of his mind to all outside 
distractions as well as appearances, and then he quietly and knowingly 
turns over his request or desire to his subconscious mind, realizing that 
the intelligence of his mind will answer him according to his specific 
needs. 
The most wonderful thing to know is this:  Imagine the end desired and 
feel its reality; then the infinite life principle will respond to your con -
scious choice and your conscious request. This is the meaning of believe 
you have received, and you shall receive. This is what the modern mental 
scientist does when he practices prayer therapy.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
One Process Of Healing
There is only one universal healing principle operating through everything 
– the cat, the dog, the tree, the grass, the wind, the earth – for every -
thing is alive. This life principle operates through the animal, vegetable 
and mineral kingdoms as instinct and the law of growth. Man is conscious -
ly aware of this life principle, and he can consciously direct it to bless him -
self in countless ways.
There are many different approaches, techniques and methods in using 
the universal power, but there is only process of healing, which is faith, 
for according to your faith is it done unto you .
The Law of Belief
All religions of the world represent forms of belief, and these beliefs are 
explained in many ways. The law of life is belief. What do you believe 
about yourself, life and the universe? It is done unto you as you believe .
Belief is a thought in your mind, which causes the power of your subcon -
scious to be distributed into all phases of your life according to your think -
ing habits. You must realize the Bible is not talking about your belief in 
some ritual, ceremony, form, institution, man or formula. It is talking 
about belief itself. 
The belief of your mind is simply the thought of your mind. If thou canst 
believe, all things are possible to him that believeth. Mark 9:23 .
It is foolish to believe in something to hurt of harm you. Remember, it is 
not the thing believed in that hurts or harms you, but the belief or 
thought in your mind, which creates the result. All your experiences, all 
your actions, and all the events and circumstances of your life are but the
reflections and reactions to your own thought.
Prayer Therapy Is The Combined Function Of The Conscious & 
Subconscious Mind Scientifically Directed
Prayer therapy is the synchronized, harmonious and intelligent function of
the conscious and subconscious levels of mind specifically directed for a 
definite purpose. In scientific prayer or prayer therapy, you must know 
what you are doing and why you are doing it. You trust the law of healing.
Prayer therapy is sometimes referred to as mental treatment, and another
term is scientific prayer. 
In prayer therapy you consciously choose a certain idea, mental picture or
plan, which you desire to experience. You realize your capacity to convey 
this idea or mental image to your subconscious by feeling the reality of 
the state assumed. As you remain faithful in your mental attitude, your 
prayer will be answered. Prayer therapy is a definite mental action for a 
definite specific purpose. 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
Let us suppose that you decide to heal a certain difficulty by prayer thera -
py. You are aware that your problem or sickness, whatever it may be, 
must be caused by negative thoughts charged with fear and lodged in 
your subconscious mind, and that if you can succeed in cleansing your 
mind of these thoughts, you will get a healing.
You, therefore, turn to the healing power within your own subconscious 
mind and remind yourself of its infinite power and intelligence and its ca -
pacity to heal all conditions. As you dwell on these truths, your fear will 
begin to dissolve, and the recollection of these truths also corrects the er -
roneous beliefs. You give thanks for the healing that you know will come 
and then you keep you mind off the difficulty until you feel guided, after 
an interval, to pray again. While you are praying, you absolutely refuse to
give any power to the negative conditions or to admit for a second that 
the healing will not come. This attitude of mind brings about the harmo -
nious union of the conscious and subconscious mind, which releases the 
healing power.
Faith Healing, What It Means, & How Blind Faith Works
What is popularly termed faith healing is not the faith mentioned in the 
Bible, which means a knowledge of the interaction of the conscious and 
subconscious mind. A faith healer is one who heals without any real scien -
tific understanding of the powers and forces involved. He may claim that 
he has a special gift of healing, and the sick person's blind belief in him or
his powers may bring results.
The voodoo doctor in South Africa and other parts of the world may heal 
by incantations, or a person may be healed by touching the so-called 
bones of saints, or anything else which cause the patients to honestly be -
lieve in the method or process.
Any method which cause you to move from fear and worry to faith and 
expectancy will heal. There are many persons, each of whom claims that 
because his personal theory produces results, it is, therefore, the correct 
one. This, as already explained in this chapter, cannot be true.
To illustrate how blind faith works: You will recall our discussion of the 
Swiss physician, Franz Anton Mesmer. In 1776, he claimed many cures 
when he stroked diseased bodies with artificial magnets. Later on, he 
threw away his magnets and evolved the theory of animal magnetism. 
This he held to be a fluid, which pervades the universe, but is most active 
in the human organism.
He claimed that his magnetic fluid, which was going forth from him to his 
patients, healed them. People flocked to him and many wonderful cures 
were effected.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
Mesmer moved to Paris, and while there the Government appointed a 
commission composed of physicians and members of the Academy of Sci -
ence, of which Benjamin Franklin was a member, to investigate his cures. 
The report admitted the leading facts claimed by Mesmer, but held that 
there was no evidence to prove the correctness of his magnetic fluid theo -
ry and said the effects were due to the imagination of the patients.
Soon after this, Mesmer was driven into exile, and died in 1815. Shortly 
afterwards, Dr Braid of Manchester undertook to show that magnetic fluid 
had nothing to do with the production of the healings of Dr Mesmer. Dr 
Braid discovered that patients could be thrown into hypnotic sleep by sug -
gestion, during which many of the well known phenomena ascribed to 
magnetism by Mesmer could be produced.
You can readily see that all these cures were undoubtedly brought about 
by the active imagination of the patients together with a powerful sugges -
tion of health to their subconscious minds. All this could be termed blind 
faith as there was no understanding in those days as to how the cures 
were brought about.
Subjective Faith & What It Means
You will recall the proposition which need not be repeated at length, that 
the subjective or subconscious mind of an individual is as amenable to the
control of his own conscious or objective mind as it is by the suggestions 
of another. It follows that whatever may be your objective belief, if you 
will assume to have faith actively or passively, your subconscious mind 
will be controlled by the suggestions, and your desire will be fulfilled.
The faith required in mental healings is a purely subj faith, and is attain -
able upon the cessation of active opposition on the part of the objective or
conscious mind.
In the healing of the body it is, of course, desirable to secure the concur -
rent faith of both the conscious and subconscious mind. However, it is not 
always essential if you will enter into a state of passivity and receptivity 
by relaxing the mind and the body and getting into a sleepy state. In this 
drowsy state your passivity becomes receptive to subjective impression.
Recently, I was asked by a man, “How is it that I got a healing through a 
minister? I did not believe what he said when he told me that there is no 
such thing as disease and that matter does not exist.” 
This man at first thought his intelligence was being insulted, and he 
protested against such a palpable absurdity. The explanation is simple. He
was quieted by soothing words and told to get into a perfectly passive 
condition, to say nothing, and think of nothing for the time being. His 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
minister also became passive and affirmed quietly, peacefully and con -
stantly for about one half hour that this man would have perfect health, 
peace, harmony and wholeness. He felt immense relief and was restored 
to health.
It is easy to see that his subjective faith had been made manifest by his 
passivity under treatment and the suggestions of perfect healthfulness by 
the minister were conveyed to his subconscious mind. The two subjective 
minds were then en rapport.
The minister was not handicapped by antagonistic autosuggestions of the 
patient arising from objective doubt of the power of the healer or the cor -
rectness of the theory. In this sleepy, drowsy state the conscious mind re -
sistance is reduced to a minimum and results followed. The subconscious 
mind of the patient being necessarily controlled by such suggestion exer -
cised its functions in accordance therewith, and a healing followed.
The Meaning Of Absent Treatment
Suppose you learned that your mother was sick in New York City and you 
lived in Los Angeles. Your mother would not be physically present where 
you are, but you could pray for her. It is the Father within which doeth 
the work.
The creative law of mind (subconscious mind) serves you and will do the 
work. Its response to you is automatic. Your treatment is for the purpose 
of inducing an inner realization of health and harmony in your mentality. 
This inner realization, acting through the subconscious mind, operates 
through your mother's subconscious mind as there is but one creative 
mind. Your thoughts of health, vitality and perfection operate through the 
one universal subjective mind, and set a law of motion on the subjective 
side of life, which manifest through her body as a healing.
In the mind principle there is no time or space. It is the same mind that 
operates through your mother no matter where she may be. In reality 
there is no absent treatment as opposed to present treatment for the uni -
versal mind is omnipresent. You do not try to send out thoughts or hold a 
thought. Your treatment is a conscious movement of thought and as you 
become conscious of the qualities of health, well-being and relaxation, 
these qualities will be resurrected in the experience of your mother, and 
results will follow.
The following is a perfect example of what is called absent treatment. Re -
cently, a listener of our radio program in Los Angeles prayed as follows for
her mother in New York who had a coronary thrombosis: “The healing 
presence is right where my mother is. Her bodily condition is but a reflec -
tion of her thought-life, like shadows cast on the screen. I know that in 
order to change the images on the screen I must change the projection 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
reel. My mind is the projection reel, and I know project in my own mind 
the image of wholeness, harmony and perfect health for my mother. The 
infinite healing presence, which crated my mother's body and all her or -
gans, is now saturating every atom of her being, and river of peace flows 
through every cell of her body. The doctors are divinely guided and direct -
ed, and whoever touches my mother is guided to do the right thing. I 
know that disease has not ultimate reality; if it had, no one could be 
healed. I now align myself with the infinite principle of love and life, and I 
know and decree that harmony, health and peace are now being ex -
pressed in my mother's body.”
She prayed in the above manner several times daily, and her mother had 
a most remarkable recovery after a few days, much to the amazement of 
her specialist. He complimented her on her great faith in the power of 
God. 
The conclusion, arrived at in the daughter's mind, set the creative law of 
mind in motion on the subjective side of life, which manifested itself 
through her mother's body as perfect health and harmony. What the 
daughter felt as true about her mother was simultaneously resurrected in 
the experience of her mother.
Releasing The Kinetic Action Of The Subconscious Mind
A psychologist friend of mind told me that one of his lungs was infected. X
rays and analysis showed the presence of tuberculosis. At night being go -
ing to sleep he would quietly affirm, “Every cell, nerve, tissue and muscle 
of my lungs are not being made whole, pure and perfect. My whole body 
is being restored to health and harmony.”
These are not his exact words, but they represent the essence of what he 
affirmed. A complete healing followed in about a month's time. Subse -
quent X rays showed a perfect healing.
I wanted to know his method, so I asked him why he repeated the words 
prior to sleep. Here is his reply, “The kinetic action of the subconscious 
mind continues thought your sleep time period. Hence, give the subcon -
scious mind something good to work on as you drop off into slumber.” 
This was very wise answer. In thinking of harmony and perfect health, he 
never mentioned his trouble by name.
I strongly suggest that you cease talking about your ailments or giving 
them a name. The only sap from which they draw life is your attention 
and fear of them. Like the above mentioned psychologist, become a men -
tal surgeon. Then your troubles will be cu off like dead branches are 
pruned from a tree.
If you are constantly naming your aches and symptoms, you inhibit the 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
kinetic action, which means the release of the healing power and energy 
of your subconscious mind. Furthermore, by the law of your own mind, 
these imaginings tend to take shape, As the thing I greatly feared . Fill 
your mind with the great truths of life and walk forward in the light of 
love.
Summary of Your Aids to Health
1. Find out what it is that heals you. Realize that correct directions given 
to the subconscious mind will heal your mind and body.
2. Develop a definite plan for turning over your requests or desires to 
your subconscious mind.
3. Imagine the end desired and feel its reality. Follow it through and you 
will get definite results.
4. Decide what belief is. Know that belief is a thought in your mind, and 
what you think you create.
5. It is foolish to believe in sickness and something to hurt or harm you. 
Believe in perfect health, prosperity, peace, wealth and divine guidance.
6. Great and noble thoughts upon which you habitually dwell become 
great acts.
7. Apply the power of prayer therapy in your life. Choose a certain plan, 
idea or mental picture. Mentally and emotionally unite with that idea and 
as you remain faithful to your mental attitude, your prayer will be an -
swered.
8. Always remember, if you really want the power to heal, you can have it
through faith, which means a knowledge of the working of your conscious 
and subconscious mind. Faith comes with understanding.
9. Blind faith means that a person may get results in healing without any 
scientific understanding of the powers and forces involved.
10. Learn to pray for your loved ones who my be ill. Quiet your mind and 
your thoughts of health, vitality and perfection, operating through the one
universal subjective mind, will be felt and resurrected in the mind of your 
loved one.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
