
The power of your subconscious is enormous. It inspires you, it guides 
you and it reveals to you names, facts and scenes from the storehouse of 
memory. Your subconscious started your heartbeat, controls the circula -
tion of your blood, regulates your digestion, assimilation and elimination. 
When you eat a piece of bread, your subconscious mind transmutes it into
tissue, muscle, bone and blood. This process is beyond the ken of the wis -
est man who walks the earth. Your subconscious mind controls all vital 
processes and functions of your body and knows the answer to all prob -
lems.
Your subconscious mind never sleeps, and never rests. It is always on the 
job. You can discover the miracle-working power of your subconscious by 
plainly stating to your subconscious prior to sleep that you wish a certain 
specific thing accomplished. You will be delighted to discover that forces 
within you will be “released,” leading to the desired result. Here, then, is a
source of power and wisdom which places you in touch with omnipotence,
or the power that moves the world, guides the planets in their course and 
causes the sun to shine. 
Your subconscious mind is the source of your ideals, aspirations and altru -
istic urges. It was through the subconscious mind that Shakespeare per -
ceived great truths hidden from the average man of his day. Undoubtedly,
it was the response of his subconscious mind that caused the Greek sculp -
tor, Phidias, to portray beauty, order, symmetry and proportion in marble 
and bronze. It enabled the Italian artist, Raphael, to paint Madonnas, and 
Ludwig van Beethoven to compose symphonies.
In 1955 I lectured at the Yoga Forest University, Rishikesh, India, and 
there I chatted with a visiting surgeon from Bombay. He told me about Dr
James Esdaille, a Scotch surgeon, who worked in Bengal before ether or 
other modern methods of anesthesia were discovered. Between 1843 and 
1846, Dr Esdaille performed about four hundred major operations on the 
eye, ear and throat. All operations were conducted under mental anesthe -
sia only. This Indian doctor at Rishikesh informed me that the postopera -
tive mortality rate of patients operated on by Dr Esdaille was extremely 
low, probably two or three percent. Patients felt no pain and there were 
no deaths during the operations.
Dr Esdaille suggested to the subconscious minds of all his patients, who 
were in a hypnotic state, that no infection or septic condition would devel -
op. You must remember that this was before Louis Pasteur, Joseph Lister 
and others who pointed out the bacterial origin of disease and causes of 
infection due to unsterilized and virulent organisms.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
This Indian surgeon said that the reason for the low mortality rate and the
general absence of infection, which was reduced to a minimum, was un -
doubtedly due to the suggestions of Dr Esdaille to the subconscious minds
of his patients. They responded according to the nature of his suggestion. 
It is simply wonderful, when you conceive how a surgeon, over one hun -
dred and twenty years ago, discovered the miraculous wonder-working 
powers of the subconscious mind. Doesn't it cause you to be seized with a
sort of mystic awe when you stop and think of the transcendental powers 
of your subconscious mind? Consider its extrasensory perceptions, such 
as its capacity for clairvoyance and clairaudience, its independence of 
time and space, its capacity to render you free from all pain and suffering,
and its capacity to get the answer to all problems, be they what they may.
All these and many more reveal to you that there is a power and an intel -
ligence within you that far transcends your intellect, causing you to mar -
vel at the wonders of it all. All these experiences cause you to rejoice and 
believe in the miracle-working powers of your own subconscious mind.
Your Subconscious Is Your Book Of Life
Whatever thoughts, beliefs, opinions, theories or dogmas you write, en -
grave, or impress on your subconscious mind, you shall experience them 
as the objective manifestation of circumstances, conditions and events. 
What you write on the inside, you will experience on the outside. You 
have two sides to your life, objective and subjective, visible and invisible, 
thought and its manifestation.
Your thought is received by your brain, which is the organ of your con -
scious reasoning mind. When your conscious or objective mind accepts 
the thought completely, it is sent to the solar plexus, called the brain of 
your mind, where it becomes flesh and is made manifest in your experi -
ence.
As previously outlined, your subconscious cannot argue. It acts only from 
what you write on it. It accepts your verdict of the conclusions of your 
conscious mind as final. This is why you are always writing on the book of
life, because your thoughts become your experiences. The American es -
sayist, Ralph Waldo Emerson said, “Man is what he thinks all day long.”
What Is Impressed In The Subconscious Is Expressed
William James, the father of American psychology, said that the power to 
move the world is in your subconscious mind. Your subconscious mind is 
one with infinite intelligence and boundless wisdom. It is fed by hidden 
springs, and is called the law of life. Whatever you impress upon your 
subconscious mind, the latter will move heaven and earth to bring it to 
pass. You must, therefore, impress it with right ideas and constructive 
thoughts.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
The reason there is so much chaos and misery in the world is because 
people do not understand the interaction of their conscious and subcon -
scious minds. When these two principles work in accord, in concord, in 
peace and synchronously together, you will have health, happiness, peace
and joy. There is no sickness or discord when the conscious and subcon -
scious work together harmoniously and peacefully.
The tomb of Hermes was opened with great expectancy and a sense of 
wonder because people believed that the greatest secret of the ages was 
contained therein. The secret was as within, so without; as above, so be -
low.
In other words, whatever is impressed in your subconscious mind is ex -
pressed on the screen of space. This same truth was proclaimed by 
Moses, Isaiah, Jesus, Buddha, Zoroaster, Laotze and all the illumined 
seers of the ages. Whatever you feel as true subjectively is expressed as 
conditions, experiences and events. Motion and emotion must balance. As
in heaven (your own mind), so on earth (in your body and environment). 
This is the great law of life.
You will find throughout all nature the law of action and reaction, of rest 
and motion. These two must balance, then there will be harmony and 
equilibrium. You are here to let the life principle flow through you rhyth -
mically and harmoniously. The intake and the outgo must be equal. The 
impression and the expression must be equal. All your frustration is due 
to unfulfilled desire.
If you think negatively, destructively and viciously, these thoughts gener -
ate destructive emotions, which must be expressed and find an outlet. 
These emotions, being of a negative nature, are frequently expressed as 
ulcers, heart trouble, tension and anxieties.
What is your idea or feeling about yourself now? Every part of your being 
expresses that idea. Your vitality, body, financial status, friends and social 
status represent a perfect reflection of the idea you have of yourself. This 
is the real meaning of what is impressed in your subconscious mind, and 
which is expressed in all phases of your life.
We injure ourselves by the negative ideas which we entertain. How often 
have you wounded yourself by getting angry, fearful, jealous or vengeful? 
These are the poisons that enter your subconscious mind. You were not 
born with these negative attitudes. Feed your subconscious mind life-giv -
ing thoughts and you will wipe out all the negative patterns lodged there -
in. As you continue to do this, all the past will be wiped out and remem -
bered no more.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
The Subconscious Heals A Malignancy Of The Skin
A personal healing will ever be the most convincing evidence of the heal -
ing power of the subconscious mind. Over forty years ago I resolved a 
malignancy of the skin through prayer. Medical therapy had failed to check
the growth, and it was getting progressively worse. 
A clergyman, with a deep psychological knowledge, explained to me the 
inner meaning of the 139th Psalm wherein it says, In thy book all my 
members were written which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet 
there was none of them . He explained that the term “book” meant my 
subconscious mind, which fashioned and molded all my organs from an 
invisible cell. He also pointed out that inasmuch as my subconscious mind
made my body, it could also recreate it and heal it according to the per -
fect pattern within it.
This clergyman showed me his watch and said, “This had a maker, and 
the watchmaker had to have the idea first in mind before the watch be -
came an objective reality, and if the watch was out of order, the watch -
maker could fix it.” My friend reminded me that the subconscious intelli -
gence, which created my body, was like a watchmaker, and it also knew 
exactly how to heal, restore and direct all the vital functions and process -
es of my body, but that I had to give it the perfect idea of health. This 
would act as cause, and the effect would be a healing.
I prayed in a very simple was as follows:”My body and all its organs were 
created by the infinite intelligence in my subconscious mind. It knows how
to heal me, its wisdom fashioned all my organs, tissues, muscles and 
bones. This infinite healing presence within me is now transforming every 
atom of my being making me whole and perfect now. I give thanks for the
healing I know is taking place now. Wonderful are the works of the cre -
ative intelligence within me.” 
I prayed aloud for about five minutes two or three times a day repeating 
the above simple prayer. In about three months my skin was whole and 
perfect.
As you can see, all I did was give life-giving patterns of wholeness, beau -
ty and perfection to my subconscious mind, thereby obliterating the nega -
tive images and patterns of thought lodged in my subconscious mind, 
which were the cause of all my trouble. Nothing appears on your body ex -
cept when the mental equivalent is first in your mind, and as you change 
your mind by drenching it with incessant affirmatives, you change your 
body. This is the basis of all healing... Marvelous are thy works; and that 
my soul (subconscious mind)  knoweth right well. Psalm 139:14 .
How The Subconscious Controls All Functions Of The Body
While you are awake or sound asleep upon your bed, the ceaseless, tire -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
less action of your subconscious mind controls all the vital organs of your 
body without the help of your conscious mind. For example, while you are
asleep your heart continues to beat rhythmically, your lungs do not rest, 
and the process of inhalation and exhalation, whereby your blood absorbs
fresh air, goes on just the same as when you are awake. Your subcon -
scious controls your digestive processes and glandular secretions, as well 
as all the other mysterious operations of your body. The hair on your face 
continues to grow whether you are asleep or awake. Scientists tell us that
the skin secretes much more perspiration during sleep than during the 
waking hours. Your eyes, ears and other senses are active during sleep. 
For instance, many of our great scientists have received answers to per -
plexing problems while they were asleep. They saw the answers in a 
dream.
Oftentimes your conscious mind interferes with the normal rhythm of the 
heart, lungs and functioning of the stomach and intestines by worry, anxi -
ety, fear and depression. These patterns of thought interfere with the har -
monious functioning of your subconscious mind. When mentally disturbed,
the best procedure is to let go, relax and still the wheels of your thought 
processes. Speak to your subconscious mind, telling it to take over in 
peace, harmony and divine order. You will find that all the functions of 
your body will become normal again. Be sure to speak to your subcon -
scious mind with authority and conviction and it will conform to your com -
mand.
Your subconscious seeks to preserve your life and restore you to health at
all costs. It causes you to love your children, which also illustrates an in -
stinctive desire to preserve all life. Let us suppose you accidentally ate 
some bad food. Your subconscious mind would cause you to regurgitate it.
If you inadvertently took some poison, your subconscious powers would 
proceed to neutralize it. If you completely entrusted yourself to its won -
der-working power, you would be entirely restored to health. 
How To Get The Subconscious To Work For You
The first thing to realize is that your subconscious mind is always working.
It is active night and day, whether you act upon it or not. Your subcon -
scious is the builder of your body, but you cannot consciously perceive or 
hear that inner silent process. Your business is with your conscious mind 
and not your subconscious mind. Just keep your conscious mind busy with
the expectation of the best and make sure the thoughts you habitually 
think are based on whatsoever things are lovely, true, just and of good 
report. Begin now to take care of your conscious mind, knowing in your 
hear and soul that your subconscious mind is always expressing, repro -
ducing and manifesting according to your habitual thinking.
Remember, just as water takes the shape of the pipe it flows through, the 
life principle in you flows through you according to the nature of your 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
thoughts. Claim that the healing presence in your subconscious is flowing 
through you as harmony, health, peace, joy and abundance. Think of it as
a living intelligence, a lovely companion on the way. Firmly believe it is 
continually flowing through you vivifying, inspiring and prospering you. It 
will respond exactly this way. It is done unto you, as you believe.
Healing Principle Of The Subconscious Restores Atrophied Optic 
Nerves
There is the well known, duly authenticated case of Madame Bire of 
France, recorded in the archives of the medical department of Lourdes, 
France. She was blind; the optic nerves were atrophied and useless. She 
visited Lourdes and had what she termed a miraculous healing. Ruth 
Cranston, a Protestant young lady who investigated and wrote about heal -
ings at Lourdes in McCall's magazine, November, 1955, writes about 
Madame Bire as follows: “At Lourdes she regained her sight incredibly, 
with the optic nerves still lifeless and useless, as several doctors could 
testify after repeated examinations. A month later, upon re-examination, 
it was found that the seeing mechanism had been restored to normal. But
at first, so far as medical examination could tell, she was seeing with 
'dead eyes.'”
I have visited Lourdes several times where I, too, witnessed some heal -
ings, and of course, as we shall explain in the next chapter, there is no 
doubt that healings take place at many shrines throughout the world, 
Christian and non-Christian.
Madame Bire, to whom we just referred, was not healed by the waters of 
the shrine, but by her own subconscious mind, which responded to her 
belief. The healing principle within her subconscious mind responded to 
the nature of her thought. Belief is a thought in the subconscious mind. It
means to accept something as true. The thought accepted executes itself 
automatically. Undoubtedly, Madame Bire went to the shrine with ex -
pectancy and great faith, knowing in her heart she would receive a heal -
ing. Her subconscious mind, which created the eye, can certainly bring a 
dead nerve back to life. What the creative principle created, it can recre -
ate. According to your belief is it done unto you .
How To Convey The Idea Of Perfect Health To Your Subconscious 
Mind
A Protestant minister I knew in Johannesburg, South Africa, told me the 
method he used to convey the idea of perfect health to his subconscious 
mind. He had cancer of the lung. His technique, as given to me in his own
handwriting, is exactly as follows: “Several times a day I would make cer -
tain that I was completely relaxed mentally and physically. I relaxed my 
body by speaking to it as follows, 'my heart and lungs are relaxed, my 
head is relaxed, my whole being is completely relaxed.' After about five 
minutes I would be in a sleepy drowsy state, and then I affirmed the fol -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
lowing truth, 'The perfection of God is now being expressed through me. 
The idea of perfect health is now filling my subconscious mind. The image 
God has of me is a perfect image, and my subconscious mind recreates 
my body in perfect accordance with the perfect image held in the mind of 
God.'” This minister had a remarkable healing. This is a simple, easy way 
of conveying the idea of perfect health to your subconscious mind.
Another wonderful way to convey the idea of health to your subconscious 
mind is through disciplined or scientific imagination. I told a man who was
suffering from functional paralysis to make a vivid picture of himself walk -
ing around in his office, touching the desk, answering the telephone and 
doing all the things he ordinarily would do if he were healed. I explained 
to him that this idea and mental picture of perfect health would be ac -
cepted by his subconscious mind.
He lived the role and actually felt himself back in the office. He knew that 
he was giving his subconscious mind something definite to work upon. His
subconscious mind was the film upon which the picture was impressed. 
One day, after several weeks of frequent conditioning of the mind with 
this mental picture, the telephone rang by prearrangement and kept ring -
ing while his wife and nurse were out. The telephone was about twelve 
feet away, but nevertheless he managed to answer it. He was healed at 
that hour. The healing power of his subconscious mind responded to his 
mental imagery and a healing followed.
This man had a mental block which prevented impulses from the brain 
reaching his legs; therefore, he said he could not walk. When he shifted 
his attention to the healing power within him, the power flowed through 
his focused attention, enabling him to walk. Whatsoever ye shall ask in 
prayer, believing, ye shall receive. Matthew 21:22 .
Ideas Worth Remembering
1. Your subconscious mind controls all the vital processes of your body 
and knows the answer to all problems.
2. Prior to sleep, turn over a specific request to your subconscious mind 
and prove its miracle-working power to yourself.
3. Whatever you impress on your subconscious mind is expressed on the 
screen of space as conditions, experiences and events. Therefore, you 
should carefully watch all ideas and thoughts entertained in your con -
scious mind. 
4. The law of action and reaction is universal. Your thought is action and 
the reaction is the automatic response of your subconscious mind to your 
thought. Watch your thoughts!
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
5. All frustration is due to unfulfilled desires. If you dwell on obstacles, 
delays and difficulties, your subconscious mind responds accordingly and 
you are blocking your own good.
6. The Life Principle will flow through you rhythmically and harmoniously if
you consciously affirm: “I believe that the subconscious power, which 
gave me this desire, is now fulfilling it through me.” This dissolves all con -
flicts.
7. You can interfere with the normal rhythm of your heart, lungs and oth -
er organs by worry, anxiety and fear. Feed your subconscious with 
thoughts of harmony, health and peace and all the functions of your body 
will become normal again.
8. Keep your conscious mind busy with the expectation of the best and 
your subconscious will faithfully reproduce your habitual thinking.
9. Imagine the happy ending or solution to your problem, feel the thrill of 
accomplishment; and what you imagine and feel will be accepted by your 
subconscious mind and bring it to pass. 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
