The Lesson of Evil
Unrest and pain and sorrow are the shadows of life. There is no heart in 
all the world that has not felt the sting of pain, no mind that has not been
tossed upon the dark waters of trouble, no eye that has not wept the hot, 
blinding tears of unspeakable anguish. There is no household where the 
Great Destroyers, disease and death, have not entered, severing heart 
from heart, and casting over all the dark pall of sorrow. In the strong, and
apparently indestructible meshes of evil all are more or less fast caught, 
and pain, unhappiness, and misfortune wait upon mankind. 
With the object of escaping, or in some way mitigating this 
overshadowing gloom, men and women rush blindly into innumerable 
devices, pathways by which they fondly hope to enter into a happiness 
which will not pass away. Such are the drunkard and the harlot, who revel
in sensual excitements; such is the exclusive aesthete, who shuts himself 
out from the sorrows of the world, and surrounds himself with enervating 
luxuries; such is he who thirsts for wealth or fame, and subordinates all 
things to the achievement of that object; and such are they who seek 
consolation in the performance of religious rites. 
And to all the happiness sought seems to come, and the soul, for a time, 
is lulled into a sweet security, and an intoxicating forgetfulness of the 
existence of evil ; but the day of disease comes at last, or some great 
sorrow, temptation, or misfortune breaks suddenly in on the unfortified 
soul, and the fabric of its fancied happiness is torn to shreds. 
So over the head of every personal joy hangs the Damocletian sword of 
pain, ready, at any moment, to fall and crush the soul of him who is 
unprotected by knowledge. 
The child cries to be a man or woman; the man and woman sigh for the 
lost felicity of childhood. The poor man chafes under the chains of poverty
by which he is bound, and the rich man often lives in fear of poverty, or 
scours the world in search of an elusive shadow he calls happiness. 
Sometimes the soul feels that it has found a secure peace and happiness 
in adopting a certain religion, in embracing an intellectual philosophy, or 
in building up an intellectual or artistic ideal; but some over-powering 
temptation proves the religion to be inadequate or insufficient; the 
theoretical philosophy is found to be a useless prop; or in a moment, the 
idealistic statue upon which the devotee has for years been laboring, is 
shattered into fragments at his feet. 
Is there, then, no way of escape from pain and sorrow? Are there no 
means by which the bonds of evil may be broken? Is permanent 
happiness, secure prosperity, and abiding peace a foolish dream? No, 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 7 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
there is a way, and I speak it with gladness, by which evil can be slain for 
ever; there is a process by which disease, poverty, or any adverse 
condition or circumstance can be put on one side never to return; there is
a method by which a permanent prosperity can be secured, free from all 
fear of the return of adversity, and there is a practice by which unbroken 
and unending peace and bliss can be partaken of and realized. And the 
beginning of the way which leads to this glorious realization is the 
acquirement of a right understanding of the nature of evil. 
It is not sufficient to deny or ignore evil; it must be understood. It is not 
enough to pray to God to remove the evil; you must find out why it is 
there, and what lesson it has for you. It is of no avail to fret and fume and
chafe at the chains which bind you; you must know why and how you are 
bound. Therefore, reader, you must get outside yourself, and must begin 
to examine and understand yourself. You must cease to be a disobedient 
child in the school of experience, and must begin to learn, with humility 
and patience, the lessons that are set for your edification and ultimate 
perfection; for evil, when rightly understood, is found to be, not an 
unlimited power or principle in the universe, but a passing phase of 
human experience, and it therefore becomes a teacher to those who are 
willing to learn. Evil is not an abstract something outside yourself; it is an 
experience in your own heart, and by patiently examining and rectifying 
your heart you will be gradually led into the discovery of the origin and 
nature of evil, which will necessarily be followed by its complete 
eradication. 
All evil is corrective and remedial, and is therefore not permanent. It is 
rooted in ignorance, ignorance of the true nature and relation of things, 
and so long as we remain in that state of ignorance, we remain subject to
evil. There is r~ 'in the universe which is not the result of ignorance, and 
which would not, if we were ready and willing to learn its lesson, lead us 
to higher wisdom, and then vanish away. But men remain in evil, and it 
does not pass away because men are not willing or prepared to learn the 
lesson which it came to teach them. I knew a child who, every night when
its mother took it to bed, cried to be allowed to play with the candle ; and
one night, when the mother was off guard for a moment, the child took 
hold of the candle; the inevitable result followed, and the child never 
wished to play with the candle again. By its one foolish act it learned, and
learned perfectly the lesson of obedience, and entered into the knowledge
that fire burns. And this incident is a complete illustration of the nature, 
meaning, and ultimate result of all sin and evil. As the child suffered 
through its own ignorance of the real nature of fire, so older children 
suffer through their ignorance of the real nature of the things which they 
weep for and strive after, and which harm them when they are secured; 
the only difference being that in the latter case the ignorance and evil are 
more deeply rooted and obscure.
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 8 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
Evil has always been symbolized by darkness, and Good by light, and 
hidden within the symbol is contained the perfect interpretation, the 
reality; for, just as light always floods the universe, and darkness is only a
mere speck or shadow cast by a small body intercepting a few rays of the 
illimitable light, so the Light of the Supreme Good is the positive and life-
giving power which floods the universe, and evil the insignificant shadow 
cast by the self that intercepts and shuts off the illuminating rays which 
strive for entrance. When night folds the world in its black impenetrable 
mantle, no matter how dense the darkness, it covers but the small space 
of half our little planet, while the whole universe is ablaze with living light,
and every soul knows that it will awake in the light in the morning. Know, 
then, that when the dark night of sorrow, pain, or misfortune settles down
upon your soul, and you stumble along with weary and uncertain steps, 
that you are merely intercepting your own personal desires between 
yourself and the boundless light of joy and bliss, and the dark shadow 
that covers you is cast by none and nothing but yourself. And just as the 
darkness without is but a negative shadow, an unreality which comes 
from nowhere, goes to nowhere, and has no abiding dwelling-place, so 
the darkness within is equally a negative shadow passing over the 
evolving and Light-born soul. 
“But," I fancy I hear someone say, 'why pass through the darkness of evil 
at all?" Because, by ignorance, you have chosen to do so, and because, 
by doing so, you may understand both good and evil, and may the more 
appreciate the light by having passed through the darkness. As evil is the 
direct outcome of ignorance, so, when the lessons of evil are fully learned,
ignorance passes away, and wisdom takes its place. But as a disobedient 
child refuses to learn its lessons at school, so it is possible to refuse to 
learn the lessons of experience, and thus to remain in continual darkness,
and to suffer continually recurring punishments in the form of disease, 
disappointment, and sorrow. He, therefore, who would shake himself free 
of the evil which encompasses him, must be willing and ready to learn, 
and must be prepared to undergo that disciplinary process without which 
no grain of wisdom or abiding happiness and peace can be secured. 
A man may shut himself up in a dark room, and deny that the light exists,
but it is everywhere without, and darkness exists only in his own little 
room. So you may shut out the light of Truth, or you may begin to pull 
down the walls of prejudice, self-seeking and error which you have built 
around yourself, and so let in the glorious and omnipresent Light. 
By earnest self-examination strive to realize, and not merely hold as a 
theory, that evil is a passing phase, a self-created shadow; that all your 
pains, sorrows and misfortunes have come to you by a process of 
undeviating and absolutely perfect law; have come to you because you 
deserve and require them, and that by first enduring, and then 
understanding them, you may be made stronger, wiser, nobler. When you 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 9 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
have fully entered into this realization, you will be in a position to mold 
your own circumstances, to transmute all evil into good and to weave, 
with a master hand, the fabric of your destiny. 
What of the night, O Watchman! see'st thou yet 
The glimmering dawn upon the mountain heights, 
The golden Herald of the Light of lights, 
Are his fair feet upon the hilltops set? 
Cometh he yet to chase away the gloom, 
And with it all the demons of the Night? 
Strike yet his darting rays upon thy sight? 
Hear'st thou his voice, the sound of error's doom? 
The Morning cometh, lover of the Light; 
E 'en now He gilds with gold the mountain 's brow, 
Dimly I see the path whereon e'en now 
His shining feet are set toward the Night. 
Darkness shall pass away, and all the things 
That love the darkness, and that hate the Light 
Shall disappear for ever with the Night: 
Rejoice! for thus the speeding Herald sings. 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven