The Realization of Prosperity 
It is granted only to the heart that abounds with integrity, trust, 
generosity and love to realize true prosperity. The heart that is not 
possessed of these qualities cannot know prosperity, for prosperity, like 
happiness, is not an outward possession, but an inward realization. The 
greedy man may become a millionaire, but he will always be wretched, 
and mean, and poor, and will even consider himself outwardly poor so 
long as there is a man in the world who is richer than himself, whilst the 
upright, the open-handed and loving will realize a full and rich prosperity, 
even though their outward possessions may be small. "He is poor who is 
dissatisfied; he is rich who is contented with what he has," and he is 
richer who is generous with what he has. 
When we contemplate the fact that the universe is abounding in all good 
things, material as well as spiritual, and compare it with man's blind 
eagerness to secure a few gold coins, or a few acres of dirt, it is then that
we realize how dark and ignorant selfishness is ; it is then that we know 
that self-seeking is self-destruction. 
Nature gives all, without reservation, and loses nothing; man, grasping 
all, loses everything. 
If you would realize true prosperity do not settle down, as many have 
done, into the belief that if you do right everything will go wrong. Do not 
allow the word "competition" to shake your faith in the supremacy of 
righteousness. I care not what men may say about the 'laws of 
competition,' for do I not know the unchangeable Law, which shall one 
day put them all to rout, and which puts them to rout even now in the 
heart and life of the righteous man ? And knowing this Law I can 
contemplate all dishonesty with undisturbed repose, for I know where 
certain destruction awaits it. 
Under all circumstances do that which you believe to be right, and trust 
the Law ; trust the Divine Power that is imminent in the universe, and it 
will never desert you, and you will always be protected. By such a trust all
your losses will be converted into gains, and all curses which threaten will
be transmuted into blessings. Never let go of integrity, generosity, and 
love, for these, coupled with energy, will lift you into the truly prosperous 
state. Do not believe the world when it tells you that you must always 
attend to 'number one' first, and to others afterwards. To do this is not to 
think of others at all, but only of one's own comforts. To those who 
practice this the day will come when they will be deserted by all, and 
when they cry out in their loneliness and anguish there will be no one to 
hear and help them. To consider one's self before all others is to cramp 
and warp and hinder every noble and divine impulse. Let your soul 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 45 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
expand, let your heart reach out to others in loving and generous warmth,
and great and lasting will be your joy, and all prosperity will come to you. 
Those who have wandered from the highway of righteousness guard 
themselves against competition; those who always pursue the right need 
not to trouble about such defense. This is no empty statement. There are 
men today who, by the power of integrity and faith, have defied all 
competition, and who, without swerving in the least from their methods, 
when competed with, have risen steadily into prosperity, whilst those who
tried to undermine them have fallen back defeated. 
To possess those inward qualities which constitute goodness is to be 
armored against all the powers of evil, and to be doubly protected in 
every time of trial; and to build oneself up in those qualities is to build up 
a success which cannot be shaken, and to enter into a prosperity which 
will endure forever. 
The White Robe of the Heart Invisible 
Is stained with sin and sorrow, grief and pain, 
And all repentant pools and springs of prayer 
Shall not avail to wash it white again. 
While in the path of ignorance I walk, 
The stains of error will not cease to cling; 
Defilements mark the crooked path of self, 
Where anguish lurks and disappointments sting. 
Knowledge and wisdom only can avail 
To purify and make my garment clean, 
For therein lie love 's waters ; therein rests 
Peace undisturbed, eternal, and serene. 
Sin and repentance is the path of pain, 
Knowledge and wisdom is the path of Peace ; 
By the near way of practice I will find 
Where bliss begins, how pains and sorrows cease. 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 46 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
Self shall depart, and Truth shall take its place ; 
The Changeless One, the Indivisible 
Shall take up His abode in me, and cleanse 
The White Robe of the Heart Invisible. 
I hope you enjoyed reading From Poverty to Power by James Allen.
Click For More Free Books by James Allen .
For more Free PDF Books  on the Law of Attraction and Metaphysics visit 
the Law of Attraction Haven .
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven