The Secret of Abounding Happiness 
Great is the thirst for happiness, and equally great is the lack of 
happiness. The majority of the poor long for riches, believing that their 
possession would bring them supreme and lasting happiness. Many who 
are rich, having gratified every desire and whim, suffer from ennui and 
repletion, and are farther from the possession of happiness even than the 
very poor. If we reflect upon this state of things it will ultimately lead us 
to a knowledge of the all-important truth that happiness is not derived 
from mere outward possessions, nor misery from the lack of them; for if 
this were so, we should find the poor always miserable, and the rich 
always happy, whereas the reverse is frequently the case. Some of the 
most wretched people whom I have known were those who were 
surrounded with riches and luxury, whilst some of the brightest and 
happiest people I have met were possessed of only the barest necessities 
of life. Many men who have accumulated riches have confessed that the 
selfish gratification which followed the acquisition of riches has robbed life
of its sweetness, and that they were never so happy as when they were 
poor. 
What, then, is happiness, and how is it to be secured ? Is it a figment, a 
delusion, and is suffering alone perennial? 
We shall find, after earnest observation and reflection, that all, except 
those who have entered the way of wisdom, believe that happiness is only
to be obtained by the gratification of desire. It is this belief, rooted in the 
soil of ignorance, and continually watered by selfish cravings, that is the 
cause of all the misery in the world. And I do not limit the word desire to 
the grosser animal cravings; it extends to the higher psychic realm, where
far more powerful, subtle, and insidious cravings hold in bondage the 
intellectual and refined, depriving them of all that beauty, harmony, and 
purity of soul whose expression is happiness. 
Most people will admit that selfishness is the cause of all the unhappiness 
in the world, but they fall under the soul-destroying delusion that it is 
somebody else's selfishness, and not their own. When you are willing to 
admit that all your unhappiness is the result of your own selfishness you 
will not be far from the gates of Paradise; but so long as you are 
convinced that it is the selfishness of others that is robbing you of joy, so 
long will you remain a prisoner in your self-created purgatory. 
Happiness is that inward state of perfect satisfaction which is joy and 
peace, and from which all desire is eliminated. The satisfaction which 
results from gratified desire is brief and illusionary, and is always followed 
by an increased demand for gratification. Desire is as insatiable as the 
ocean, and clamors louder and louder as its demands are attended to. It 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 40 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
claims ever-increasing service from its deluded devotees, until at last they
are struck down with physical or mental anguish, and are hurled into the 
purifying fires of suffering. Desire is the region of hell, and all torments 
are centered there. The giving up of desire is the realization of heaven, 
and all delights await the pilgrim there.
'I sent my soul through the invisible, 
Some letter of that after life to spell, 
And by-and-by my soul returned to me, 
And whispered, ' I myself am heaven and hell.' 
Heaven and hell are inward states. Sink into self and all its gratifications, 
and you sink into hell; rise above self into that state of consciousness 
which is the utter denial and forgetfulness of self, and you enter heaven. 
Self is blind, without judgment, not possessed of true knowledge, and 
always leads to suffering. Correct perception, unbiased judgment, and 
true knowledge belong only to the divine state, and only in so far as you 
realize this divine consciousness can you know what real happiness is. So 
long as you persist in selfishly seeking for our own personal happiness, so
long will happiness elude you, and you will be sowing the seeds of 
wretchedness. In so far as you succeed in losing yourself in the service of 
others, in that measure will happiness come to you, and you will reap a 
harvest of bliss. 
'It is in loving, not in being loved, 
The heart is blessed; 
It is in giving, not in seeking gifts, 
We find our quest. 
Whatever be thy longing or thy need, 
That do thou give; 
So shall thy soul be fed, and thou indeed 
Shalt truly live.'
Cling to self, and you cling to sorrow; relinquish self, and you enter into 
peace. To seek selfishly is not only to lose happiness, but even that which 
we believe to be the source of happiness. See how the glutton is 
continually looking about for a new delicacy wherewith to stimulate his 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 41 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
deadened appetite; and how, bloated, burdened, and diseased, scarcely 
any food at last is eaten with pleasure. Whereas, he who has mastered 
his appetite, and not only does not seek, but never thinks of gustatory 
pleasure, finds delight in the most frugal meal. The angel-form of 
happiness, which men, looking through the eyes of self, imagine they see 
in gratified desire, when clasped is always found to be the skeleton of 
misery. Truly, 'He that seeketh his life shall lose it, and he that loseth his 
life shall find it. ' 
Abiding happiness will come to you when, ceasing to selfishly cling, you 
are willing to give up. When you are willing to lose, unreservedly that 
impermanent thing which is so dear to you, and which, whether you cling 
to it or not, will one day be snatched from you, then you will find that that
which seemed to you like a painful loss, turns out to be a supreme gain. 
To give up in order to gain, than this there is no greater delusion, nor no 
more prolific source of misery; but to be willing to yield up and to suffer 
loss, this is indeed the Way of Life. 
How is it possible to find real happiness by centering ourselves in those 
things which, by their very nature, must pass away? Abiding and real 
happiness can only be found by centering ourselves in that which is 
permanent. Rise, therefore, above the clinging to and the craving for 
impermanent things, and you will then enter into a consciousness of the 
Eternal, and as, rising above self, and by growing more and more into the
spirit of purity, self-sacrifice and universal Love, you become centered in 
that consciousness, you will realize that happiness which has no reaction, 
and which can never be taken from you. 
The heart that has reached utter self-forgetfulness in its love for others 
has not only become possessed of the highest happiness but has entered 
into immortality, for it has realized the Divine. Look back upon your life, 
and you will find that the moments of supremest happiness were those in 
which you uttered some word, or performed some act, of compassion or 
self-denying love. 
Spiritually, happiness and harmony are synonymous. Harmony is one 
phase of the Great Law whose spiritual expression is love. All selfishness 
is discord, and to be selfish is to be out of harmony with the Divine order. 
As we realize that all-embracing love which is the negation of self, we put 
ourselves in harmony with the divine music, the universal song, and that 
ineffable melody which is true happiness becomes our own. 
Men and women are rushing hither and thither in the blind search for 
happiness, and cannot find it; nor ever will until they recognize that 
happiness is already within them and round about them, filling the 
universe, and that they, in their selfish searching are shutting themselves 
out from it. 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 42 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
I followed happiness to make her mine, 
Past towering oak and swinging ivy vine. 
She fled, I chased, o'er slanting hill and dale, 
O'er fields and meadows, in the purpling vale; 
Pursuing rapidly o'er dashing stream, 
I scaled the dizzy cliffs where eagles scream; 
I traversed swiftly every land and sea, 
But always happiness eluded me.
Exhausted, fainting, I pursued no more, 
But sank to rest upon a barren shore. 
One came and asked for food, and one for alms; 
I placed the bread and gold in bony palms. 
One came for sympathy, and one for rest; 
I shared with every needy one my best; 
When, lo ! sweet Happiness, with form divine, 
Stood by me, whispering softly, ' I am thine'.
These beautiful lines of Burleigh's express the secret of all abounding 
happiness. Sacrifice the personal and transient, and you rise at once into 
the impersonal and permanent. Give up that narrow cramped self that 
seeks to render all things subservient to its own petty interests, and you 
will enter into the company of the angels, into the very heart and essence
of universal Love. Forget yourself entirely in the sorrows of others and in 
ministering to others, and divine happiness will emancipate you from all 
sorrow and suffering. 
"Taking the first step with a good thought, the second with a good word, 
and the third with a good deed, I entered Paradise." And you also may 
enter into Paradise by pursuing the same course. It is not beyond, it is 
here. It is realized only by the unselfish. It is known in its fullness only to 
the pure in heart. 
If you have not realized this unbounded happiness you may begin to 
actualize it by ever holding before you the lofty ideal of unselfish love, 
and aspiring towards it. Aspiration or prayer is desire turned upward. It is 
the soul turning toward its Divine source, where alone permanent 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 43 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
satisfaction can be found. By aspiration the destructive forces of desire 
are transmuted into divine and all-preserving energy. To aspire is to make
an effort to shake off the trammels of desire; it is the prodigal made wise 
by loneliness and suffering, returning to his Father's Mansion. 
As you rise above the sordid self; as you break, one after another, the 
chains that bind you, will you realize the joy of giving, as distinguished 
from the misery of grasping — giving of your substance; giving of your 
intellect; giving of the love and light that is growing within you. You will 
then understand that it is indeed “more blessed to give than to receive." 
But the giving must be of the heart without any taint of self, without 
desire for reward. The gift of pure love is always attended with bliss. If, 
after you have given, you are wounded because you are not thanked or 
flattered, or your name put in the paper, know then that your gift was 
prompted by vanity and not by love, and you were merely giving in order 
to get; were not really giving, but grasping. 
Lose yourself in the welfare of others; forget yourself in all that you do; 
this is the secret of abounding happiness. Ever be on the watch to guard 
against selfishness, and learn faithfully the divine lessons of inward 
sacrifice; so shall you climb the highest heights of happiness, and shall 
remain in the never clouded sunshine of universal joy, clothed in the 
shining garment of immortality. 
Are you searching for the happiness that does not fade away? 
Are you looking for the joy that lives, and leaves no grievous day? 
Are you panting for the waterbrooks of Love, and Life, and Peace? 
Then let all dark desires depart, and selfish seeking cease. 
Are you ling 'ring in the paths of pain, grief - haunted, stricken sore? 
Are you wand 'ring in the ways that wound your weary feet the more? 
Are you sighing for the Resting-Place where tears and sorrows cease? 
Then sacrifice your selfish heart and find the Heart of Peace.
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven