The Way Out of Undesirable Conditions
Having seen and realized that evil is but a passing shadow thrown, by the 
intercepting self, across the transcendent Form of the Eternal Good, and 
that the world is a mirror in which each sees a reflection of himself, we 
now ascend, by firm and easy steps, to that plane of perception whereon 
is seen and realized the Vision of the Law. With this realization comes the 
knowledge that everything is included in a ceaseless interaction of cause 
and effect, and that nothing can possibly be divorced from law. From the 
most trivial thought, word, or act of man, up to the groupings of the 
celestial bodies, law reigns supreme. No arbitrary condition can, even for 
one moment, exist, for such a condition would be a denial and an 
annihilation of law. Every condition of life is, therefore, bound up in an 
orderly and harmonious sequence, and the secret and cause of every 
condition is contained within itself. The law, "Whatsoever a man sows that
shall he also reap," is inscribed in flaming letters upon the portal of 
Eternity, and none can deny it, none can cheat it, none can escape it. He 
who puts his hand in the fire must suffer the burning until such time as it 
has worked itself out, and neither curses nor prayers can avail to alter it. 
And precisely the same law governs the realm of mind. Hatred, anger, 
jealousy, envy, lust, covetousness, all these are fires which burn, and 
whoever even so much as touches them must suffer the torments of 
burning. All these conditions of mind are rightly called "evil," for they are 
the efforts of the soul to subvert, in its ignorance, the law, and they, 
therefore, lead to chaos and confusion within, and are sooner or later 
actualized in the outward circumstances as disease, failure, and 
misfortune, coupled with grief, pain, and despair. Whereas love, 
gentleness, goodwill, purity, are cooling airs which breathe peace upon 
the soul that wooes them, and, being in harmony with the Eternal Law, 
they become actualized in the form of health, peaceful surroundings, and 
undeviating success and good fortune. 
A thorough understanding of this Great Law which permeates the universe
leads to the acquirement of that state of mind known as obedience. To 
know that justice, harmony, and love are supreme in the universe is 
likewise to know that all adverse and painful conditions are the result of 
our own disobedience to that Law. Such knowledge leads to strength and 
power, and it is upon such knowledge alone that a true life and an 
enduring success and happiness can be built. To be patient under all 
circumstances, and to accept all conditions as necessary factors in your 
training, is to rise superior to all painful conditions, and to overcome them
with an overcoming which is sure, and which leaves no fear of their 
return, for by the power of obedience to law they are utterly slain. Such 
an obedient one is working in harmony with the law, has in fact, identified
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 16 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
himself with the law, and whatsoever he conquers he conquers for ever; 
whatsoever he builds can never be destroyed. 
The cause of all power, as of all weakness, is within: the secret of all 
happiness as of all misery is likewise within. There is no progress apart 
from unfoldment within, and no sure foothold of prosperity or peace 
except by orderly advancement in knowledge. 
You say you are chained - by circumstances; you cry out for better 
opportunities, for a wider scope, for improved physical conditions, and 
perhaps you inwardly curse the fate that binds you hand and foot. It is for
you that I write; it is to you that I speak. Listen, and let my words burn 
themselves into your heart, for that which I say to you is truth: — You 
may bring about that improved condition in your outward life which you 
desire, if you will unswervingly resolve to improve your inner life. I know 
this pathway looks barren at its commencement (truth always does, it is 
only error and delusion which are at first inviting and fascinating,) but if 
you undertake to walk it; if you veeringly discipline your mind, eradicating
your weaknesses, and allowing your soul-forces and spiritual powers to 
unfold themselves, you will be astonished at the magical changes which 
will be brought about in your outward life. As you proceed, golden 
opportunities will be strewn across your path, and the power and 
judgment to properly utilize them will spring up within you. Genial friends 
will come unbidden to you; sympathetic souls will be drawn to you as the 
needle is to the magnet; and books and all outward aids that you require 
will come to you unsought. 
Perhaps the chains of poverty hang heavily upon you, and you are 
friendless and alone, and you long with an intense longing that your load 
may be lightened; but the load continues, and you seem to be enveloped 
in an ever-increasing darkness. Perhaps you complain, you bewail your 
lot; you blame your birth, your parents, your employer, or the unjust 
Powers who have bestowed upon you so undeservedly poverty and 
hardship, and upon another affluence and ease. Cease your complaining 
and fretting; none of these things which you blame are the cause of your 
poverty; the cause is within yourself, and where the cause is, there is the 
remedy. The very fact that you are a complainer, shows that you deserve 
your lot; shows that you lack that faith which is the ground of all effort 
and progress. There is no room for a complainer in a universe of law, and 
worry is soul-suicide. By your very attitude of mind you are strengthening
the chains which bind you, and are drawing about you the darkness by 
which you are enveloped. Alter your outlook upon life, and your outward 
life will alter. Build yourself up in the faith and knowledge, and make 
yourself worthy of better surroundings and wider opportunities. Be sure, 
first of all, that you are making the best of what you have. Do not delude 
yourself into supposing that you can step into greater advantages whilst 
overlooking smaller ones, for if you could, the advantage would be 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 17 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
impermanent and you would quickly fall back again in order to learn the 
lesson which you had neglected. As the child at school must master one 
standard before passing on to the next, so, before you can have that 
greater good which you so desire, must you faithfully employ that which 
you already possess. The parable of 
the talents is a beautiful story illustrative of this truth, for does it not 
plainly show that if we misuse, neglect, or degrade that which we 
possess, be it ever so mean and insignificant, even that little will be taken
from us, for, by our conduct we show that we are unworthy of it. 
Perhaps you are living in a small cottage, and are surrounded by 
unhealthy and vicious influences. You desire a larger and more sanitary 
residence. Then you must fit yourself for such a residence by first of all 
making your cottage as far as possible a little paradise. Keep it spotlessly 
clean. Make it look as pretty and sweet as your limited means will allow. 
Cook your plain food with all care, and arrange your humble table as 
tastefully as you possibly can. If you cannot afford a carpet, let your 
rooms be carpeted with smiles and welcomes, fastened down with the 
nails of kind words driven in with the hammer of patience. Such a carpet 
will not fade in the sun, and constant use will never wear it away. 
By so ennobling your present surroundings you will rise above them, and 
above the need of them, and at the right time you will pass on into the 
better house and surroundings which have all along been waiting for you, 
and which you have fitted yourself to occupy. 
Perhaps you desire more time for thought and effort, and feel that your 
hours of labor are too hard and long. Then see to it that you are utilizing 
to the fullest possible extent what little spare time you have. It is useless 
to desire more time, if you are already wasting what little you have; for 
you would only grow more indolent and indifferent. 
Even poverty and lack of time and leisure are not the evils that you 
imagine they are, and if they hinder you in your progress, it is because 
you have clothed them in your own weaknesses, and the evil that you see
in them is really in yourself. Endeavor to fully and completely realize that 
in so far as you shape and mold your mind, you are the maker of your 
destiny, and as, by the transmuting power of self-discipline you realize 
this more and more, you will come to see that these so-called evils may 
be converted into blessings. You will then utilize your poverty for the 
cultivation of patience, hope and courage; and your lack of time in the 
gaining of promptness of action and decision of mind, by seizing the 
precious moments as they present themselves for your acceptance. As in 
the rankest soil the most beautiful flowers are grown, so in the dark soil 
of poverty the choicest flowers of humanity have developed and bloomed.
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 18 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
Where there are difficulties to cope with, and unsatisfactory conditions to 
overcome, there virtue most flourishes and manifests its glory. It may be 
that you are in the employ of a tyrannous master or mistress, and you 
feel that you are harshly treated. Look upon this also as necessary to your
training. Return your employer's unkindness with gentleness and 
forgiveness. Practice unceasingly patience and self-control. Turn the 
disadvantage to account by utilizing it for the gaining of mental and 
spiritual strength, and by your silent example and influence you will thus 
be teaching your employer, will be helping him to grow ashamed of his 
conduct, and will, at the same time, be lifting yourself up to that height of
spiritual attainment by which you will be enabled to step into new and 
more congenial surroundings at the time when they are presented to you.
Do not complain that you are a slave, but lift yourself up, by noble 
conduct, above the plane of slavery. Before complaining that you are a 
slave to another, be sure that you are not a slave to self. Look within; look
searchingly, and have no mercy upon yourself. You will find there, 
perchance, slavish thoughts, slavish desires, and in your daily life and 
conduct slavish habits. Conquer these; cease to be a slave to self, and no 
man will have the power to enslave you. As you overcome self, you will 
overcome all adverse conditions, and every difficulty will fall before you. 
Do not complain that you are oppressed by the rich. Are you sure that if 
you gained riches you would not be an oppressor yourself? Remember 
that there is the Eternal Law which is absolutely just, and that he who 
oppresses today must himself be oppressed tomorrow; and from this 
there is no way of escape. And perhaps you, yesterday (in some former 
existence) were rich and an oppressor, and that you are now merely 
paying off the debt which you owe to the Great Law. Practice, therefore, 
fortitude and faith. Dwell constantly in mind upon the Eternal Justice, the 
Eternal Good. Endeavor to lift yourself above the personal and the 
transitory into the impersonal and permanent. Shake off the delusion that
you are being injured or oppressed by another, and try to realize, by a 
profounder comprehension of your inner life, and the laws which govern 
that life, that you are only really injured by what is within you. There is no
practice more degrading, debasing, and soul-destroying than that of self-
pity. Cast it out from you. While such a canker is feeding upon your heart 
you can never expect to grow into a fuller life. Cease from the 
condemnation of others, and begin to condemn yourself. Condone none of
your acts, desires or thoughts that will not bear comparison with spotless 
purity, or endure the light of sinless good. By so doing you will be building
your house upon the rock of the Eternal, and all that is required for your 
happiness and well-being will come to you in its own time. 
There is positively no way of permanently rising above poverty, or any 
undesirable condition, except by eradicating those selfish and negative 
conditions within, of which these are the reflection, and by virtue of which
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 19 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
they continue. The way to true riches is to enrich the soul by the 
acquisition of virtue. Outside of real heart-virtue there is neither 
prosperity nor power, but only the appearances of these. I am aware that 
men make money who have acquired no measure of virtue, and have 
little desire to do so; but such money does not constitute true riches, and 
its possession is transitory and feverish. Here is David's testimony: — " 
For I was envious at the foolish when I saw the prosperity of the wicked 
Their eyes stand out with fatness; they have more than heart could wish 
Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in 
innocency. . . .When I thought to know this it was too painful for me; until
I went into the sanctuary of God, then understood I their end." The 
prosperity of the wicked was a great trial to David until he went into the 
sanctuary of God, and then he knew their end. You likewise may go into 
that sanctuary. It is within you. It is that "state of consciousness which 
remains when all that is sordid, and personal, and impermanent is risen 
above, and universal and eternal principles are realized. That is the God 
state of consciousness; it is the sanctuary of the Most High. When by long
strife and self-discipline, you have succeeded in entering the door of that 
holy Temple, you will perceive, with unobstructed vision, the end and fruit
of all human thought and endeavor, both good and evil. You will then no 
longer relax your faith when you see the immoral man accumulating 
outward riches, for you will know that he must come again to poverty and
degradation. The rich man who is barren of virtue is, in reality, poor, and 
as surely as the waters of the river are drifting to the ocean, so surely is 
he, in the midst of all his riches, drifting towards poverty and misfortune; 
and though he die rich, yet must he return to reap the bitter fruit of all of 
his immorality. And though he become rich many times, yet as many 
times must he be thrown back into poverty, until, by long experience and 
suffering he conquers the poverty within. But the man who is outwardly 
poor, yet rich in virtue, is truly rich, and, in the midst of all his poverty he 
is surely traveling towards prosperity; and abounding joy and bliss await 
his coming. 
If you would become truly and permanently prosperous, you must first 
become virtuous. It is therefore unwise to aim directly at prosperity, to 
make it the one object of life, to reach out greedily for it. To do this is to 
ultimately defeat yourself. But rather aim at self-perfection, make useful 
and unselfish service the object of your life, and ever reach out hands of 
faith towards the supreme and unalterable Good. 
You say you desire wealth, not for your own sake, but in order to do good 
with it, and to bless others. If this is your real motive in desiring wealth, 
then wealth will come to you; for you are strong and unselfish indeed if, in
the midst of riches, you are willing to look upon yourself as steward and 
not as owner. But examine well your motive, for in the majority of 
instances where money is desired for the admitted object of blessing 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 20 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
others, the real underlying motive is a love of popularity, and a desire to 
pose as a philanthropist or reformer. If you are not doing good with what 
little you have, depend upon it the more money you got the more selfish 
you would become, and all the good you appeared to do with your money,
if you attempted to do any, would be so much insinuating self-laudation. 
If your real desire is to do good, there is no need to wait for money 
before you do it; you can do it now, this very moment, and just where 
you are. If you are really as unselfish as you believe yourself to be, you 
will show it by sacrificing yourself for others now. No matter how poor you
are, there is room for self-sacrifice, for did not the widow put her all into 
the treasury? The heart that truly desires to do good does not wait for 
money before doing it, but comes to the altar of sacrifice, and, leaving 
there the unworthy elements of self, goes out and breathes upon neighbor
and stranger, friend and enemy alike, the breath of blessedness. 
As the effect is related to the cause, so is prosperity and power related to 
the inward good, and poverty and weakness to the inward evil. 
Money does not constitute true wealth, nor position, nor power, and to 
rely upon it alone is to stand upon a slippery place. 
Your true wealth is your stock of virtue, and your true power the uses to 
which you put it. Rectify your heart, and you will rectify your life. Lust, 
hatred, anger, vanity, pride, covetousness, self-indulgence, self-seeking, 
obstinacy, — all these are poverty and weakness; whereas, love, purity, 
gentleness, meekness, patience, compassion, generosity, self-
forgetfulness, and self-renunciation, — all these are wealth and power. 
As the elements of poverty and weakness are overcome, an irresistible 
and all-conquering power is evolved from within, and he who succeeds in 
establishing himself in the highest virtue, brings the whole world to his 
feet. 
But the rich, as well as the poor, have their undesirable conditions, and 
are frequently farther removed from happiness than the poor. And here 
we see how happiness depends, not upon outward aids or possessions, 
but upon the inward life. Perhaps you are an employer, and you have 
endless trouble with those whom you employ, and when you do get good 
and faithful servants they quickly leave you. As a result you are beginning
to lose, or have completely lost, your faith in human nature. You try to 
remedy matters by giving better wages, and by allowing certain liberties, 
yet matters remain unaltered. Let me advise you. The secret of all your 
trouble is not in your servants, it is in yourself) and if you look within, 
with a humble and sincere desire to discover and eradicate your error, you
will, sooner or later, find the origin of all your unhappiness. It may be 
some selfish desire, or lurking suspicion, or unkind attitude of mind which 
sends out its poison upon those about you, and reacts upon yourself, even
though you may not show it in your manner or speech. Think of your 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 21 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
servants with kindness, consider their happiness and comfort, and never 
demand of them that extremity of service which you yourself would not 
care to perform were you in their place. Rare and beautiful is that humility
of soul by which a servant entirely forgets himself in his master's good; 
but far rarer, and beautiful with a divine beauty, is that nobility of soul by 
which a man, forgetting his own happiness, seeks the happiness of those 
who are under his authority, and who depend upon him for their bodily 
sustenance. And such a man's happiness is increased tenfold, nor does he
need to complain of those whom he employs. Said a well-known and 
extensive employer of labor, who never needs to dismiss an employer: " I 
have always had the happiest relations with my workpeople. If you ask 
me how it is to be accounted for, I can only say that it has been my aim 
from the first to do to them as I would wish to be done by." Herein lies 
the secret by which all desirable conditions are secured, and all that are 
undesirable are overcome. Do you say that you are lonely and unloved, 
and have" not a friend in the world"? Then, I pray you, for the sake of 
your own happiness, blame nobody but yourself. Be friendly towards 
others, and friends will soon flock round you. Make yourself pure and 
lovable, and you will be loved by all. 
Whatever conditions are rendering your life burdensome, you may pass 
out of and beyond them by developing and utilizing within you the 
transforming power of self-purification and self-conquest. Be it the 
poverty which galls (and remember that the poverty upon which I have 
been dilating is that poverty which is a source of misery, and not that 
voluntary poverty which is the glory of emancipated souls), or the riches 
which burden, or the many misfortunes, griefs, and annoyances which 
form the dark background in the web of life, you may overcome them by 
overcoming the selfish elements within which give them life. 
It matters not that by the unfailing Law there are past thoughts and acts 
to work out and to atone for, as, by the same law, we are setting in 
motion, during every moment of our life, fresh thoughts and acts, and we 
have the power to make them good or ill. Nor does it follow that if a man 
(reaping what he has sown) must lose money or forfeit position, that he 
must also lose his fortitude or forfeit his uprightness, and it is in these 
that his wealth and power and happiness are to be found. 
He who clings to self is his own enemy, and is surrounded by enemies. He
who relinquishes self is his own savior, and is surrounded by friends like a 
protecting belt. Before the divine radiance of a pure heart all darkness 
vanishes and all clouds melt away, and he who has conquered self has 
conquered the universe. Come, then, out of your poverty; come out of 
your pain; come out of your troubles, and sighings, and complainings, 
and heartaches, and loneliness by coming out of yourself. Let the old 
tattered garment of your petty selfishness fall from you, and put on the 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 22 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
new garment of universal Love. You will then realize the inward heaven, 
and it will be reflected in all your outward life. 
He who sets his foot firmly upon the path of self-conquest, who walks, 
aided by the staff of Faith, the highway of self-sacrifice, will assuredly 
achieve the highest prosperity, and will reap abounding and enduring joy 
and bliss. 
To them that seek the highest good
All things subserve the wisest ends;
Nought comes as ill, and wisdom lends
Wings to all shapes of evil brood.
The dark'ning sorrow veils a Star 
That waits to shine with gladsome light; 
Hell waits on heaven; and after night 
Comes golden glory from afar. 
Defeats are steps by which we climb 
With purer aim to nobler ends; 
Loss leads to gain, and joy attends 
True footsteps up the hills of time. 
Pain leads to paths of holy bliss, 
To thoughts and words and deeds divine; 
And clouds that gloom and rays that shine, 
Along life's upward highway kiss. 
Misfortune does but cloud the way 
Whose end and summit in the sky 
Of bright success, sunkiss'd and high, 
Awaits our seeking and our stay. 
The heavy pall of doubts and fears 
That clouds the Valley of our hopes, 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 23 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
The shades with which the spirit copes, 
The bitter harvesting of tears, 
The heartaches, miseries, and griefs,
 
The bruisings born of broken ties, 
All these are steps by which we rise 
To living ways of sound beliefs. 
Love, pitying, watchful, runs to meet 
The Pilgrim from the Land of Fate; 
All glory and all good await 
The coming of obedient feet. 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven