The Silent Power of Thought:
Controlling and Directing One's Forces
The most powerful forces in the universe are the silent forces; and in 
accordance with the intensity of its power does a force become beneficent
when rightly directed, and destructive when wrongly employed. This is a 
common knowledge in regard to the mechanical forces, such as steam, 
electricity, etc., but few have yet learned to apply this knowledge to the 
realm of mind, where the thought-forces (most powerful of all) are 
continually being generated and sent forth as currents of salvation or 
destruction. 
At this stage of his evolution, man has entered into the possession of 
these forces, and the whole trend of his present advancement is their 
complete subjugation. All the wisdom possible to man on this material 
earth is to be found only in complete self-mastery, and the command, ' ' 
Love your enemies, "resolves itself into an exhortation to enter here and 
now, into the possession of that sublime wisdom by taking hold of, 
mastering and transmuting, those mind forces to which man is now 
slavishly subject, and by which he is helplessly borne, like a straw on the 
stream, upon the currents of selfishness. 
The Hebrew prophets, with their perfect knowledge of the Supreme Law, 
always related outward events to inward thought, and associated national 
disaster or success with the thoughts and desires that dominated the 
nation at the time. The knowledge of the causal power of thought is the 
basis of all their prophecies, as it is the basis of all real wisdom and 
power. National events are simply the working out of the psychic forces of
the nation. Wars, plagues, and famines are the meeting and clashing of 
wrongly-directed thought-forces, the culminating points at which 
destruction steps in as the agent of the Law. It is foolish to ascribe war to 
the influence of one man, or to one body of men. It is the crowning horror
of national selfishness. 
It is the silent and conquering thought-forces which bring all things into 
manifestation. The universe grew out of thought. Matter in its last 
analysis is found to be merely objectivized thought. All men's 
accomplishments were first wrought out in thought, and then 
objectivized, The author, the inventor, the architect, first builds up his 
work in thought, and having perfected it in all its parts as a complete and 
harmonious whole upon the thought-plane, he then commences to 
materialize it, to bring it down to the material or sense-plane. 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 25 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
When the thought-forces are directed in harmony with the over-ruling 
Law, they are up-building and preservative, but when subverted they 
become disintegrating and self-destructive. 
To adjust all your thoughts to a perfect and unswerving faith in the 
omnipotence and supremacy of Good, is to cooperate with that Good, and
to realize within yourself the solution and destruction of all evil. Believe 
and ye shall live. And here we have the true meaning of salvation; 
salvation from the darkness and negation of evil, by entering into, and 
realizing the living light of the Eternal Good. 
Where there is fear, worry, anxiety, doubt, trouble, chagrin, or 
disappointment, there is ignorance and lack of faith. All these conditions 
of mind are the direct outcome of selfishness, and are based upon an 
inherent belief in the power and supremacy of evil; they therefore 
constitute practical atheism; and to live in, and become subject to, these 
negative and soul-destroying conditions of mind is the only real atheism. 
It is salvation from such conditions that the race needs, and let no man 
boast of salvation whilst he is their helpless and obedient slave. To fear or
to worry is as sinful as to curse, for how can one fear or worry if he 
intrinsically believes in the Eternal Justice, the Omnipotent Good, the 
Boundless Love? To fear, to worry, to doubt, is to deny, to disbelieve. 
It is from such states of mind that all weakness and failure proceed, for 
they represent the annulling and disintegrating of the positive thought-
forces which would otherwise speed to their object with power, and bring 
about their own beneficent results. 
To overcome these negative conditions is to enter into a life of power, is to
cease to be a slave, and to become a master, and there is only one way 
by which they can be overcome, and that is by steady and persistent 
growth in inward knowledge. To mentally deny evil is not sufficient; it 
must, by daily practice, be risen above and understood. To mentally affirm
the good is inadequate; it must, by unswerving endeavor, be entered into 
and comprehended. 
The intelligent practice of self-control, quickly leads to a knowledge of 
one's interior thought-forces, and, later on, to the acquisition of that 
power by which they are rightly employed and directed. In the measure 
that you master self, that you control your mental forces instead of being 
controlled by them, in just such measure will you master affairs and 
outward circumstances. 
Show me a man under whose touch everything crumbles away, and who 
cannot retain success even when it is placed in his hands, and I will show 
you a man who dwells continually in those conditions of mind which are 
the very negation of power. To be for ever wallowing in the bogs of doubt,
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 26 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
to be drawn continually into the quicksands of fear, or blown ceaselessly 
about by the winds of anxiety, is to be a slave, and to live the life of a 
slave, even though success and influence be for ever knocking at your 
door seeking for admittance. Such a man, being without faith and without
self-government, is incapable of the right government of his affairs, and is
a slave to circumstances; in reality a slave to himself. Such are taught by 
affliction, and ultimately pass from weakness to strength by the stress of 
bitter experience. 
Faith and purpose constitute the motive-power of life. There is nothing 
that a strong faith and an unflinching purpose may not accomplish. By the
daily exercise of silent faith, the thought-forces are gathered together, 
and by the daily strengthening of silent purpose, those forces are directed
toward the object of accomplishment. 
Whatever your position in life may be, before you can hope to enter into 
any measure of success, usefulness, and power, you must learn how to 
focus your thought-forces by cultivating calmness and repose. It may be 
that you are a business man, and you are suddenly confronted with some 
overwhelming difficulty or probable disaster. You grow fearful and 
anxious, and are at your wit's end. To persist in such a state of mind 
would be fatal, for when anxiety steps in, correct judgment passes out. 
Now if you will take advantage of a quiet hour or two in the early morning
or at night, and go away to some solitary spot, or to some room in your 
house where you know you will be absolutely free from intrusion, and, 
having seated yourself in an easy attitude, you forcibly direct your mind 
right away from the object of anxiety by dwelling upon something in your 
life that is pleasing and bliss-giving, a calm, reposeful strength will 
gradually steal into your mind, and your anxiety will pass away. Upon the 
instant that you find your mind reverting to the lower plane of worry bring
it back again, and re-establish it on the plane of peace and strength. 
When this is fully accomplished, you may then concentrate your whole 
mind upon the solution of your difficulty, and what was intricate and 
insurmountable to you in your hour of anxiety will be made plain and 
easy, and you will see, with that clear vision and perfect judgment which 
belong only to a calm and untroubled mind, the right course to pursue 
and the proper end to be brought about. It may be that you will have to 
try day after day before you will be able to perfectly calm your mind, but 
if you persevere you will certainly accomplish it. And the course which is 
presented to you in that hour of calmness must be carried out. Doubtless 
when you are again involved in the business of the day, and worries again
creep in and begin to dominate you, you will begin to think that the 
course is a wrong or foolish one, but do not heed such suggestions. Be 
guided absolutely and entirely by the vision of calmness, and not by the 
shadows of anxiety. The hour of calmness is the hour of illumination and 
correct judgment. By such a course of mental discipline the scattered 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 27 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
thought-forces are reunited, and directed, like the rays of the search-
light, upon the problem at issue, with the result that it gives way before 
them. 
There is no difficulty, however great, but will yield before a calm and 
powerful concentration of thought, and no legitimate object but may be 
speedily actualized by the intelligent use and direction of one's soul-
forces. 
Not until you have gone deeply and searchingly into your inner nature, 
and have overcome many enemies that lurk there, can you have any 
approximate conception of the subtle power of thought, of its inseparable 
relation to outward and material things, or of its magical potency, when 
rightly poised and directed, in readjusting and transforming the life-
conditions. 
Every thought you think is a force sent out, and in accordance with its 
nature and intensity will it go out to seek a lodgement in minds receptive 
to it, and will react upon yourself for good or evil. There is ceaseless 
reciprocity between mind and mind, and a continual interchange of 
thought-forces. Selfish and disturbing thoughts are so many malignant 
and destructive forces, messengers of evil, sent out to stimulate and 
augment the evil in other minds, which in turn send them back upon you 
with added power. While thoughts that are calm, pure, and unselfish are 
so many angelic messengers sent out into the world with health, healing, 
and blessedness upon their wings, counteracting the evil forces; pouring 
the oil of joy upon the troubled waters of anxiety and sorrow, and 
restoring to broken hearts their heritage of immortality. Think good 
thoughts, and they will quickly become actualized in your outward life in 
the form of good conditions. Control your soul-forces, and you will be able
to shape your outward life as you will. The difference between a savior 
and a sinner is this, that the one has a perfect control of all the forces 
within him; the other is dominated and controlled by them. 
There is absolutely no other way to true power and abiding peace, but by 
self-control, self-government, self-purification. To be at the mercy of your 
disposition is to be impotent, unhappy, and of little real use in the world. 
The conquest of your petty likes and dislikes, your capricious loves and 
hates, your fits of anger, suspicion, jealousy, and all the changing moods 
to which you are more or less helplessly subject, this is the task you have
before you if you would weave into the web of life the golden threads of 
happiness and prosperity. In so far as you are enslaved by the changing 
moods within you, will you need to depend upon others and upon outward
aids as you walk through life. If you would walk firmly and securely, and 
would accomplish any achievement, you must learn to rise above and 
control all such disturbing and retarding vibrations. You must daily 
practice the habit of putting your mind at rest, ' * going into the silence," 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 28 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
as it is commonly called. This is a method of replacing a troubled thought 
with one of peace, a thought of weakness with one of strength. . Until you
succeed in doing this you cannot hope to direct your mental forces upon 
the problems and pursuits of life with any appreciable measure of 
success. It is a process of diverting one's scattered forces into one 
powerful channel. Just as a useless marsh may be converted into a field 
of golden corn or a fruitful garden by draining and directing the scattered 
and harmful streams into one well-cut channel, so, he who acquires 
calmness, and subdues and directs the thought-currents within himself, 
saves his soul, and fructifies his heart and life. 
As you succeed in gaining mastery over your impulses and thoughts you 
will begin to feel, growing up within you, a new and silent power, and a 
settled feeling of composure and strength will remain with you. Your 
latent powers will begin to unfold themselves, and whereas formerly your 
efforts were weak and ineffectual, you will now be able to work with that 
calm confidence which commands success. And along with this new power
and strength, there will be awakened within you that interior illumination 
known as "intuition," and you will walk no longer in darkness and 
speculation, but in light and certainty. With the development of this soul-
vision, judgment and mental penetration will be incalculably increased, 
and there will evolve within you that prophetic vision by the aid of which 
you will be able to sense coming events, and to forecast, with remarkable 
accuracy, the result of your efforts. And in just the measure that you alter
from within will your outlook upon life alter; and as you alter your mental 
attitude towards others they will alter in their attitude and conduct toward
you. As you rise above the lower, debilitating, and destructive thought-
forces, you will come in contact with the positive, strengthening, and up-
building currents generated by strong, pure, and noble minds, your 
happiness will be immeasurably intensified, and you will begin to realize 
the joy, strength, and power, which are born only of self-mastery. And this
joy, strength, and power will be continually radiating from you, and 
without any effort on your part, nay, though you are utterly unconscious 
of it, strong people will be drawn toward you, influence will be put into 
your hands, and in accordance with your altered thought-world will 
outward events shape themselves. 
“A man's foes are they of his own household," and he who would be 
useful, strong, and happy, must cease to be a passive receptacle for the 
negative, beggarly, and impure streams of thought; and as a wise 
householder commands his servants and invites his guests, so must he 
learn to command his desires, and to say, with authority, what thoughts 
he shall admit into the mansion of his soul. Even a very partial success in 
self-mastery adds greatly to one's power, and he who succeeds in 
perfecting this divine accomplishment, enters into possession of 
undreamed-of wisdom and inward strength and peace, and realizes that 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 29 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
all the forces of the universe aid and protect his footsteps Who is master 
of his soul. 
Would you scale the highest heaven, 
Would you pierce the lowest hell, — 
Live in dreams of constant beauty, 
Or in basest thinkings dwell. 
For your thoughts are heaven above you, 
And your thoughts are hell below; 
Bliss is not, except in thinking, 
Torment nought but thought can know. 
Worlds would vanish but for thinking ; 
Glory is not but in dreams ; 
And the Drama of the ages 
From the Thought Eternal streams. 
Dignity and shame and sorrow, 
Pain and anguish, love and hate 
Are but maskings of the mighty 
Pulsing Thought that governs Fate. 
As the colors of the rainbow 
Makes the one uncolored beam, 
So the universal changes 
Make the One Eternal Dream. 
And the Dream is all within you, 
And the Dreamer waiteth long 
For the Morning to awake him 
To the living thought and strong. 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 30 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
That shall make the ideal real, 
Make to vanish dreams of hell 
In the highest, holiest heaven 
Where the pure and perfect dwell. 
Evil is the thought that thinks it ; 
Good, the thought that makes it so ; 
Light and darkness, sin and pureness 
Likewise out of thinking grow. 
Dwell in thought upon the Grandest, 
And the Grandest you shall see ; 
Fix your mind upon the Highest, 
And the Highest you shall be. 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven