The Secret of Health, Success and Power
We all remember with what intense delight, as children, we listened to the
never tiring fairytale. How eagerly we followed the fluctuating fortunes of 
the good boy or girl, ever protected, in the hour of crisis, from the evil 
machinations of the scheming witch, the cruel giant, or the wicked king. 
And our little hearts never faltered for the fate of the hero or heroine, nor 
did we doubt their ultimate triumph over all their enemies, for we knew 
that the fairies were infallible, and that they would never desert those 
who had consecrated themselves to the good and the true. And what 
unspeakable joy pulsated within us when the Fairy-Queen, bringing all her
magic to bear at the critical moment, scattered all the darkness and 
trouble, and granted them the complete satisfaction of all their hopes, 
and they were " happy ever after.' ' 
With the accumulating years, and an ever-increasing intimacy with the 
so-called ' ' realities" of life, our beautiful fairy-world became obliterated, 
and its wonderful inhabitants were relegated, in the archives of memory, 
to the shadowy and unreal. And we thought we were wise and strong in 
thus leaving for ever the land of childish dreams, but as we re-become 
little children in the wondrous world of wisdom, we shall return again to 
the inspiring dreams of childhood and find that they are, after all, 
realities. 
The fairy-folk, so small and nearly always invisible, yet possessed of an 
all-conquering and magical power, who bestow upon the good, health, 
wealth, and happiness, along with all the gifts of nature in lavish 
profusion, start again into reality and become immortalized in the soul-
realm of him who, by growth in wisdom, has entered into a knowledge of 
the power of thought, and the laws which govern the inner world of being.
To him the fairies live again as thought-people, thought-messengers, 
thought-powers working in harmony with the over-ruling Good. And they 
who, day by day, endeavor to harmonize their hearts with the heart of the
Supreme Good, do in reality acquire true health, wealth, and happiness. 
There is no protection to compare with goodness, and by ll goodness" I do
not mean a mere outward conformity to the rules of morality; I mean 
pure thought, noble aspiration, unselfish love, and freedom from 
vainglory. To dwell continually in good thoughts, is to throw around 
oneself a psychic atmosphere of sweetness and power which leaves its 
impress upon all who come in contact with it. 
As the rising sun puts to rout the helpless shadows, so are all the 
impotent forces of evil put to flight by the searching rays of positive 
thought which shine forth from a heart made strong in purity and faith. 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 32 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
Where there is sterling faith and uncompromising purity there is health, 
there is success, there is power. In such a one, disease, failure, and 
disaster can find no lodgement, for there is nothing on which they can 
feed. 
Even physical conditions are largely determined by mental states, and to 
this truth the scientific world is rapidly being drawn. The old, materialistic 
belief that a man is what his body makes him, is rapidly passing away, 
and is being replaced by the inspiring belief that man is superior to his 
body, and that his body is what he makes it by the power of thought. Men
everywhere are ceasing to believe that a man is despairing because he is 
dyspeptic, and are coming to understand that he is dyspeptic because he 
is despairing, and in the near future, the fact that all disease has its origin
in the mind will become common knowledge. 
There is no evil in the universe but has its root and origin in the mind, 
and sin, sickness, sorrow, and affliction do not, in reality, belong to the 
universal order, are not inherent in the nature of things, but are the direct
outcome of our ignorance of the right relations of things. 
According to tradition, there once lived, in India, a school of philosophers 
who led a life of such absolute purity and simplicity that they commonly 
reached the age of one hundred and fifty years, and to fall sick was 
looked upon by them as an unpardonable disgrace, for it was considered 
to indicate a violation of law. 
The sooner we realize and acknowledge that sickness, far from being the 
arbitrary visitation of an offended God, or the test of an unwise 
Providence, is the result of our own error or sin, the sooner shall we enter
upon the highway of health. Disease comes to those who attract it, to 
those whose minds and bodies are receptive to it, and flees from those 
whose strong, pure, and positive thought-sphere generates healing and 
life-giving currents. 
If you are given to anger, worry, jealousy, greed, or any other 
inharmonious state of mind, and expect perfect physical health, you are 
expecting the impossible, for you are continually sowing the seeds of 
disease in your mind. Such conditions of mind are carefully shunned by 
the wise man, for he knows them to be far more dangerous than a bad 
drain or an infected house. 
If you would be free from all physical aches and pains, and would enjoy 
perfect physical harmony, then put your mind in order, and harmonize 
your thoughts. Think joyful thoughts; think loving thoughts ; let the elixir 
of goodwill course through your veins, and you will need no other 
medicine. Put away your jealousies, your suspicions, your worries, your 
hatreds, your selfish indulgences, and you will put away your dyspepsia, 
your biliousness, your nervousness and aching joints. If you will persist in 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 33 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
clinging to these debilitating and demoralizing habits of mind, then do not
complain when your body is laid low with sickness. 
The following story illustrates the close relation that exists between habits
of mind and bodily conditions: — A certain man was afflicted with a 
painful disease, and he tried one physician after another, but all to no 
purpose. He then visited towns which were famous for their curative 
waters, and after having bathed in them all, his disease was more painful 
than ever. One night he dreamed that a Presence came to him and said, ' 
' Brother, hast thou tried all the means of cure?" and he replied, "I have 
tried all." "Nay," said the Presence, " Come with me, and I will show thee 
a healing bath which has escaped thy notice." The afflicted man followed, 
and the Presence led him to a clear pool of water, and said, " Plunge 
thyself in this water and thou shalt surely recover, ' ' and thereupon 
vanished. The man plunged into the water, and on coming out, lo! his 
disease had left him, and at the same moment he saw written above the 
pool the word 'Renounce. ' ' Upon waking, the full meaning of his dream 
flashed across his mind, and looking within he discovered that he had, all 
along, been a victim to a sinful indulgence, and he vowed that he would 
renounce it for ever. He carried out his vow, and from that day his 
affliction began to leave him, and in a short time he was completely 
restored to health. 
Many people complain that they have broken down through overwork. In 
the majority of such cases the breakdown is more frequently the result of 
foolishly wasted energy. If you would secure health you must learn to 
work without friction. To become anxious or excited, or to worry over 
needless details is to invite a breakdown. Work, whether of brain or body, 
is beneficial and health-giving, and the man who can work with a steady 
and calm persistence, freed from all anxiety and worry, and with his mind 
utterly oblivious to all but the work he has in hand, will not only 
accomplish far more than the man who is always hurried and anxious, but
he will retain his health, a boon which the other quickly forfeits. 
True health and true success go together, for they are inseparably 
intertwined in the thought-realm. As mental harmony produces bodily 
health, so it also leads to a harmonious sequence in the actual working 
out of one's plans. Order your thoughts and you will order your life. Pour 
the oil of tranquility upon the turbulent waters of the passions and 
prejudices, and the tempests of misfortune, howsoever they may 
threaten, will be powerless to wreck the barque of your soul, as it threads
its way across the ocean of life. And if that barque be piloted by a cheerful
and never-failing faith its course will be doubly sure, and many perils will 
pass it by which would otherwise attack it. By the power of faith every 
enduring work is accomplished. Faith in the Supreme; faith in the over-
ruling Law; faith in your work, and in your power to accomplish that work,
— here is the rock upon which you must build if you would achieve, if you 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 34 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
would stand and not fall. To follow, under all circumstances, the highest 
promptings within you; to be always true to the divine self; to rely upon 
the inward Light, the inward Voice, and to pursue your purpose with a 
fearless and restful heart, believing that the future will yield unto you the 
meed of every thought and effort; knowing that the laws of the universe 
can never fail, and that your own will come back to you with 
mathematical exactitude, this is faith and the living of faith. By the power 
of such a faith the dark waters of uncertainty are divided, every mountain
of difficulty crumbles away, and the believing soul passes on unharmed. 
Strive, O reader! to acquire, above everything, the priceless possession of
this dauntless faith, for it is the talisman of happiness, of success, of 
peace, of power, of all that makes life great and superior to suffering. 
Build upon such a faith, and you build upon the Rock of the Eternal, and 
with the materials of the Eternal, and the structure that you erect will 
never be dissolved, for it will transcend all the accumulations of material 
luxuries and riches, the end of which is dust. Whether you are hurled into 
the depths of sorrow or lifted upon the heights of joy, ever retain your 
hold upon this faith, ever return to it as your rock of refuge, and keep 
your feet firmly planted upon its immortal and immovable base. Centered 
in such a faith, you will become possessed of such a spiritual strength as 
will shatter, like so many toys of glass, all the forces of evil that are 
hurled against you, and you will achieve a success such as the mere 
striver after worldly gain can never know or even dream of. "If ye have 
faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only do this, . . . but if ye shall say unto 
this mountain, be thou removed and be thou cast into the sea, it shall be 
done. " 
There are those today, men and women tabernacled in flesh and blood, 
who have realized this faith, who live in it and by it day by day, and who, 
having put it to the uttermost test, have entered into the possession of its
glory and peace. Such have sent out the word of command, and the 
mountains of sorrow and disappointment, of mental weariness and 
physical pain have passed from them, and have been cast into the sea of 
oblivion. 
If you will become possessed of this faith you will not need to trouble 
about your success or failure, and success will come. You will not need to 
become anxious about results, but will work joyfully and peacefully, 
knowing that right thoughts and right efforts will inevitably bring about 
right results. 
I know a lady who has entered into many blissful satisfactions, and 
recently a friend remarked to her, "Oh, how fortunate you are! You only 
have to wish for a thing, and it comes to you.' 'And it did, indeed, appear 
so on the surface; but in reality all the blessedness that has entered into 
this woman's life is the direct outcome of the inward state of blessedness 
which she has, throughout life, been cultivating and training toward 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 35 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
perfection. Mere wishing brings nothing but disappointment; it is living 
that tells. The foolish wish and grumble; the wise, work and wait. And this
woman had worked; worked without and within, but especially within 
upon heart and soul; and with the invisible hands of the spirit she had 
built up, with the precious stones of faith, hope, joy, devotion, and love, a
fair temple of light, whose glorifying radiance was ever round about her. It
beamed in her eye; it shone through her countenance; it vibrated in her 
voice; and all who came into her presence felt its captivating spell. 
And as with her, so with you. Your success, your failure, your influence, 
your whole life you carry about with you, for your dominant trends of 
thought are the determining factors in your destiny. Send forth loving, 
stainless, and happy thoughts, and blessings will fall into your hands, and 
your table will be spread with the cloth of peace. Send forth hateful, 
impure, and unhappy thoughts, and curses will rain down upon you, and 
fear and unrest will wait upon your pillow. You are the unconditional 
maker of your fate, be that fate what it may. Every moment you are 
sending forth from you the influences which will make or mar your life. 
Let your heart grow large and loving and unselfish, and great and lasting 
will be your influence and success, even though you make little money. 
Confine it within the narrow limits of self-interest, and even though you 
become a millionaire your influence and success, at the final reckoning 
will be found to be utterly insignificant. 
Cultivate, then, this pure and unselfish spirit, and combine with purity and
faith, singleness of purpose, and you are evolving from within the 
elements, not only of abounding health and enduring success, but of 
greatness and power. 
If your present position is distasteful to you, and your heart is not in your 
work, nevertheless perform your duties with scrupulous diligence, and 
whilst resting your mind in the idea that the better position and greater 
opportunities are waiting for you, ever keep an active mental outlook for 
budding possibilities, so that when the critical moment arrives, and the 
new channel presents itself, you will step into it with your mind fully 
prepared for the undertaking, and with that intelligence and foresight 
which is born of mental discipline. 
Whatever your task may be, concentrate your whole mind upon it, throw 
into it all the energy of which you are capable. The faultless completion of
small tasks leads inevitably to larger tasks. See to it that you rise by 
steady climbing, and you will never fall. And herein lies the secret of true 
power. Learn, by constant practice, how to husband your resources, and 
to concentrate them, at any moment, upon a given point. The foolish 
waste all their mental and spiritual energy in frivolity, foolish chatter, or 
selfish argument, not to mention wasteful physical excesses. 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 36 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
If you would acquire overcoming power you must cultivate poise and 
passivity. You must be able to stand alone. All power is associated with 
immovability. The mountain, the massive rock, the storm-tried oak, all 
speak to us of power, because of their combined solitary grandeur and 
defiant fixity; while the shifting sand, the yielding twig, and the waving 
reed speak to us of weakness, because they are movable and non-
resistant, and are utterly useless when detached from their fellows. He is 
the man of power who, when all his fellows are swayed by some emotion 
or passion, remains calm and unmoved. 
He only is fitted to command and control who has succeeded in 
commanding and controlling himself. The hysterical, the fearful, the 
thoughtless and frivolous, let such seek company, or they will fall for lack 
of support; but the calm, the fearless, the thoughtful, and grave, let such 
seek the solitude of the forest, the desert, and the mountain top, and to 
their power more power will be added, and they will more and more 
successfully stem the psychic currents and whirlpools which engulf 
mankind. 
Passion is not power; it is the abuse of power, the dispersion of power. 
Passion is like a furious storm which beats fiercely and wildly upon the 
embattled rock, whilst power is like the rock itself, which remains silent 
and unmoved through it all. That was a manifestation of true power when 
Martin Luther, wearied with the persuasions of his fearful friends, who 
were doubtful as to his safety should he go to Worms, replied, " If there 
were as many devils in Worms as there are tiles on the housetops I would
go." And when Benjamin Disraeli broke down in his first Parliamentary 
speech, and brought upon himself the derision of the House, that was an 
exhibition of germinal power when he exclaimed, 'The day will come when
you will consider it an honor to listen to me. ' ' 
When that young man, whom I knew, passing through continual reverses 
and misfortunes, was mocked by his friends and told to desist from 
further effort, and he replied, ' ' The time is not far distant when you will 
marvel at my good fortune and success,' ' he showed that he was 
possessed of that silent and irresistible power which has taken him over 
innumerable difficulties, and crowned his life with success. 
If you have not this power, you may acquire it by practice, and the 
beginning of power is likewise the beginning of wisdom. You must 
commence by overcoming those purposeless trivialities to which you have
hitherto been a willing victim. Boisterous and uncontrolled laughter, 
slander and idle talk, and joking merely to raise a laugh, all these things 
must be put on one side as so much waste of valuable energy. St. Paul 
never showed his wonderful insight into the hidden laws of human 
progress to greater advantage than when he warned the Ephesians 
against ' ' Foolish talking and jesting which is not convenient, ' 'for, to 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 37 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
dwell habitually in such practices is to destroy all spiritual power and life. 
As you succeed in rendering yourself impervious to such mental 
dissipations you will begin to understand what true power is, and you will 
then commence to grapple with the more powerful desires and appetites 
which hold your soul in bondage, and bar the way to power, and your 
further progress will then be made clear. 
Above all be of single aim; have a legitimate and useful purpose, and 
devote yourself unreservedly to it. Let nothing draw you aside; remember
that "The double-minded man is unstable in all his ways.' 'Be eager to 
learn, but slow to beg. Have a thorough understanding of your work, and 
let it be your own ; and as you proceed, ever following the inward Guide, 
the infallible Voice, you will pass on from victory to victory, and will rise 
step by step to higher resting-places, and your ever-broadening outlook 
will gradually reveal to you the essential beauty and purpose of life. Self-
purified, health will be yours; faith-protected, success will be yours; self-
governed, power will be yours, and all that you do will prosper, for, 
ceasing to be a disjointed unit, self-enslaved, you will be in harmony with 
the Great Law, working no longer against, but with, the Universal Life, the
Eternal Good. And what health you gain it will remain with you; what 
success you achieve will be beyond all human computation, and will never
pass away; and what influence and power you wield will continue to 
increase throughout the ages, for it will be a part of that unchangeable 
Principle which supports the universe. 
This, then, is the secret of health, — a pure heart and a well-ordered 
mind; this is the secret of success, — an unfaltering faith, and a wisely-
directed purpose; and to rein in, with unfaltering will, the dark steed of 
desire, this is the secret of power. 
All ways are waiting for my feet to tread, 
The light and dark, the living and the dead, 
The broad and narrow way, the high and low, 
The good and bad, and with quick step or slow, 
I now may enter any way I will, 
And find, by walking, which is good, which ill. 
And all good things my wandering feet await, 
If I but come, with vow inviolate, 
Unto the narrow, high and holy way 
Of heart-born purity, and therein stay ; 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 38 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
Walking, secure from him who taunts and scorns, 
To flowery meads, across the path of thorns. 
And I may stand where health, success, and power 
Await my coming, if, each fleeting hour, 
I cling to love and patience; and abide 
With stainlessness; and never step aside
From high integrity ; so shall I see 
At last the land of immortality. 
And I may seek and find; I may achieve; 
I may not claim, but, losing, may retrieve. 
The law bends not for me, but I must bend 
Unto the law, if I would reach the end 
Of my afflictions, if I would restore 
My soul to Light and Life, and weep no more. 
Not mine the arrogant and selfish claim 
To all good things ; be mine the lowly aim 
To seek and find, to know and comprehend, 
And wisdom-ward all holy footsteps wend. 
Nothing is mine to claim or to command, 
But all is mine to know and understand. 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven