Chapter XX
How To Stay Young In Spirit Forever
Your subconscious mind never grows old. It is timeless, ageless and end -
less. It is a part of the universal mind of God which was never born and it 
will never die.
Fatigue or old age cannot be predicated on any spiritual quality or power. 
Patience, kindness, veracity, humility, good will, peace harmony and 
brotherly love are attributes and qualities which never grow old. If you 
continue to generate these qualities here on this plane of life, you will al -
ways remain young in spirit.
I remember reading an article in one of our magazines some years ago 
which stated that a group of eminent medical men at the De Courcy Clin -
ic, in Cincinnati, Ohio, reported that years alone are not responsible for 
bringing about degenerative disorders. These same physicians stated that
is is the fear of time, not time itself, that has a harmful aging effect on 
our minds and bodies, and that the neurotic fear of the effects of time 
may well be the cause of premature aging.
During the many years of my public life, I have had occasion to study the 
biographies of the famous men and women who have continued their pro -
ductive activities into the years well beyond the normal span of life. Some
of them achieve their greatness in old age. At the same time, has been 
my privilege to meet and to know countless individuals of no prominence 
who, in their lesser sphere, belonged to those hardy mortals who have 
proved that old age of itself does not destroy the creative powers of the 
mind and body.
He Had Grown Old In His Thought Life
A few years ago I called on an old friend in London, England. He was over
80 years of age, very ill and obviously was yielding to his advancing 
years. Our conversation revealed his physical weakness, his sense of frus -
tration and a general deterioration almost approaching lifelessness. His 
cry was that he was useless and that no one wanted him. With an expres -
sion of hopelessness he betrayed his false philosophy, “We are born, grow
up, become old, good for nothing, and that's the end.”
This mental attitude of futility and worthlessness was the chief reason for 
his sickness. He was looking forward only to senescence, and after that – 
nothing. Indeed, he had grown old in his thought life, and his subcon -
scious mind brought about all the evidence of his habitual thinking.
Age Is The Dawn Of Wisdom
Unfortunately, many people have the same attitude as this unhappy man. 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
They are afraid of what they term “old age,” the end and extinction which 
really means that they are afraid of life. Yet, life is endless. Age is not the 
flight of years, but the dawn of wisdom.
Wisdom is an awareness of the tremendous spiritual powers in your sub -
conscious mind and the knowledge of how to apply these powers to lead a
full and happy life. Get it out of your head once and for all that 65, 75 or 
85 years of age is synonymous with the end for you or anybody else. It 
can be the beginning of a glorious, fruitful, active and most productive life
pattern, better than you have ever experienced. Believe this, expect it, 
and your subconscious will bring it to pass.
Welcome The Change
Old age is not a tragic occurrence. What we call the aging process is really
change. It is to be welcomed joyfully and gladly as each phase of human 
life is a step forward on the path, which has no end. Man has powers, 
which transcend his bodily powers. He has senses, which transcend his 
five physical senses.
Scientists today are finding positive indisputable evidence that something 
conscious in man can leave his present body and travel thousands of 
miles to see, hear, touch and speak to people even though his physical 
body never leaves the couch on which it reclines.
Man's life is spiritual and eternal. He need never grow old for life, or God, 
cannot grow old. The Bible says that God is life. Life is self renewing, eter -
nal, indestructible and is the reality of all men.
Evidence For Survival
The evidence gathered by the psychical research societies both in Great 
Britain and America is overwhelming. You may go into any large metro -
politan library and get volumes on The Proceedings of the Psychical Re -
search Society based on findings of distinguished scientists on survival 
following so called death. You will find a startling report on scientific ex -
periments establishing the reality of life after death in The Case for Psy -
chic Survival by Hereward Carrington, Director of the American Psychical 
Institute.
Life Is
A woman asked Thomas Edison, the electrical wizard, “Mr Edison, what is 
electricity?”
He replied, “Madame, electricity is. Use it.”
Electricity is a name we give an invisible power which we do not fully 
comprehend, but we learn all we can about the principle of electricity and 
its uses. We use it in countless ways.
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
The scientist cannot see an electron with his eyes, yet he accepts it as a 
scientific fact, because it is the only valid conclusion, which coincides with 
his other experimental evidence. We cannot see life. However, we know 
we are alive. Life is, and we are here to express it in all its beauty and 
glory.
Mind & Spirit Do Not Grow Old
The Bible says, And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only
true God. John 17:3 .
The man who thinks or believes that the earthly cycle of birth, adoles -
cence, youth, maturity and old age is all there is to life is indeed to be 
pitied. Such a man has no anchor, no hope, no vision and to him life has 
no meaning.
This type of belief brings frustration, stagnation, cynicism and a sense of 
hopelessness resulting in neurosis and mental aberrations of all kinds. If 
you cannot play a fast game of tennis, or swim as fast as your son, or if 
your body has slowed down, or you walk with a slow step, remember life 
is always clothing itself anew. What men call death is but a journey to a 
new city in another dimension of life.
I say to men and women in my lectures that they should accept what we 
call old age gracefully. Age has its own glory, beauty and wisdom, which 
belong to it. Peace, love, joy, beauty, happiness, wisdom, good will and 
understanding are qualities which never grow old or die.
Ralph Waldo Emerson, poet and philosopher, said, “We do not count a 
man's years until he has nothing else to count.” Your character, the quality
of your mind, your faith and your convictions are not subject to decay.
You Are As Young As You Think You Are
I give public lectures in Caxton Hall, London, England, every few years 
and following one of these lectures, a surgeon said to me, “I am 84 years 
of age, I operate every morning, visit patients in the afternoons, and I 
write for medical and other scientific journals in the evening.”
His attitude was that he was as useful as he believed himself to be, and 
that he was as young as his thoughts. He said to me, “It's true what you 
said, 'Man is as strong as he thinks he is, and as valuable as he thinks he 
is.'”
This surgeon has not surrendered to advancing years. He knows that he is
immortal. His final comment to me was, “If I should pass on tomorrow, I 
would be operating on people in the next dimension, not with a surgeon's 
scalpel, but with mental and spiritual surgery.”
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
Your Gray Hairs Are An Asset
Don't ever quite a job and say, “I am retired; I am old; I am finished.” 
That would be stagnation, death, and you would be finished. Some men 
are old at 30, while others are young at 80. The mind is the master 
weaver, the architect, the designer and the sculptor. George Bernard 
Shaw as active at 90, and the artistic quality of his mind had not relaxed 
from active duty.
I meet men and women who tell me that some employers almost slam 
the door in their faces when they say they are over 40. this attitude on 
the part of the employers is to be considered cold, callous, evil and com -
pletely void of compassion and understanding. The total emphasis seems 
to be on youth, i.e., you must be under 35 years of age to receive consid -
eration. The reasoning behind this is certainly very shallow. If the employ -
er would stop and think, he would realize that the man or woman was not
selling his age or gray hair, rather, he was willing to give of his talents, his
experience and his wisdom gathered through years of experience in the 
market place of life.
Age Is An Asset
Your age should be a distinct asset to any organization, because of your 
practice and application through the years of the principles of the Golden 
Rule and the law of love and good will. Your gray hair, if you have any 
should stand for greater wisdom, skill and understanding. Your emotional 
and spiritual maturity should be a tremendous blessing to any organiza -
tion. 
A man should not be asked to resign when he is 65 years of age. That is 
the time of life when he could be most useful in handling personnel prob -
lems, making plans for the future, making decisions and guiding others in 
the realm of creative ideas based on his experience and insight into the 
nature of the business.
Be Your Age
A motion picture writer in Hollywood told me that he had to write scripts, 
which would cater to the twelve year old mind. This is a tragic state of af -
fairs if the great masses of people are expected to become emotionally 
and spiritually mature. It means that the emphasis is placed on youth in 
spite of the fact that youth stands for inexperience, lack of discernment 
and hasty judgment.
I Can Keep Up With The Best Of Them
I am now thinking of a man 65 years of age who is trying frantically to 
keep young. He swims with young men every Sunday, goes on long hikes,
plays tennis and boasts of his prowess and physical powers, saying, 
“Look, I can keep up with the best of them.”
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
He should remember the great truth: As a man thinketh in his heart, so is
he. Prov. 23:7.
Diets, exercises, and games of all kinds will not keep this man young. It is
necessary for him to observe that the grows old or remains young in ac -
cordance with his processes of thinking. Your subconscious mind is condi -
tioned by your thoughts. If your thoughts are constantly on the beautiful, 
the noble and the good, you will remain young regardless of the chrono -
logical years.
Fear Of Old Age
Job said, The things which I greatly feared is come upon me . There are 
many people who fear old age and are uncertain about the future, be -
cause they anticipate mental and physical deterioration as the years ad -
vance. What they think and feel comes to pass.
You grow old when you lose interest in life, when you cease to dream, to 
hunger after new truths and to search for new worlds to conquer. When 
your mind is open to new ideas, new interests and when you raise the 
curtain and let in the sunshine and inspiration of new truths of life and the
universe, you will be young and vital.
You Have Much To Give
If you are 65 or 95 years of age, realize you have much to give. You can 
help stabilize, advise and direct the younger generation. You can give the 
benefit of your knowledge, your experience and your wisdom. You can al -
ways look ahead for at all times you are gazing into infinite life. You will 
find that you can never cease to unveil the glories and wonders of life. Try
to learn something new every moment of the day, and you will find your 
mind will always be young.
One Hundred & Ten Years Old
Some years ago while lecturing in Bombay, India, I was introduced to a 
man who said he was 110 years old. He had the most beautiful face I 
have ever seen. He seemed transfigured by the radiance of an inner light.
There was a rare beauty in his eyes indicating he had grown old in years 
with gladness and with no indicating that his mind had dimmed its lights.
Retirement – A New Venture
Be sure that your mind never retires. It must be a parachute which is no 
good unless it opens up. Be open and receptive to new ideas. I have seen 
men of 65 and 70 retire. They seemed to rot away, and in a few months 
passed on. They obviously felt that life was at an end.
Retirement can be a new venture, a new challenge, a new path, the be -
ginning of the fulfillment of a long dream. It is inexpressibly depressing to
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
hear a man say, “What shall I do now that I am retired?” He is saying in 
effect, “I am mentally and physically dead. My mind is bankrupt of ideas.”
All this is a false picture. The real truth is that you can accomplish more 
at 90 than you did at 60, because each day you are growing in wisdom 
and understanding of life and the universe through your new studies and 
interest.
He Graduated To A Better Job
An executive, who lives near me, was forced to retire a few months ago 
because he had reached the age of 65. He said to me, “I look upon my 
retirement as promotion from kindergarten to the first grade.” He philoso -
phized in this manner: He said that when he left high school, he went up 
the ladder by going to college. He realized this was a step forward in his 
education and understanding of life in general. Likewise, he added, now 
he could do the things he had always wanted to do, and therefore, his re -
tirement was still another step forward on the ladder of life and wisdom.
He came to the wise conclusion that he was no longer going to concen -
trate on making a living. Now he was going to give all his attention to liv -
ing life. He is an amateur photographer, and he took additional courses on
the subject. He took a trip around the world and took movies of famous 
places. He now lectures before various groups, lodges and clubs and is in 
popular demand.
There are countless ways of taking an interest in something worthwhile 
outside yourself. Become enthusiastic over new creative ideas, make spir -
itual progress and continue to learn and to grow. In this manner you re -
main young in heart, because you are hungering and thirsting after new 
truths, and your body will reflect your thinking at all times.
You Must Be A Producer & Not A Prisoner Of Society
The newspapers are taking cognizance of the fact that the voting popula -
tion of the elderly in California elections is increasing by leaps and 
bounds. This means that their voices will be heard in the legislature of the
state and also in the halls of Congress. I believe there will be enacted a 
federal law prohibiting employers from discrimination against men and 
women because of age.
A man of 65 years may be younger mentally, physically and psychologi -
cally than many men at 30. it is stupid and ridiculous to tell a man he 
cannot be hired because he is over 40. It is like saying to him that he is 
ready for the scrap heap or the junk pile.
What is a man of 40 or over to do? Must he bury his talents and hide his 
light under a bushel? Men, who are deprived and prevented from working 
because of age, must be sustained by government treasuries at county, 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
state and federal levels. The many organizations who refuse to hire them 
and benefit from their wisdom and experience will be taxed to support 
them. This is a form of financial suicide.
Man is here to enjoy the fruit of his labor, and he is here to be a producer 
and not a prisoner of society which compels him to idleness.
Man's body slows down gradually as he advances through the years, but 
his conscious mind can be made much more active, alert, alive and quick -
ened by the inspiration from his subconscious mind. His mind, in reality, 
never grows old. Job said, Oh that I were as in months past, as in the 
days when God preserved me; When his candle shined upon my head, 
and when by his light I walked through darkness; As I was in the days of 
my youth, when the secret of God was upon my tabernacle. Job 29:2-4 .
Secret Of Youth
To recapture the days of your youth, feel the miraculous, healing, self re -
newing power of your subconscious mind moving through your whole be -
ing. Know and feel that you are inspired, lifted up, rejuvenated, revital -
ized and recharged spiritually. You can bubble over with enthusiasm and 
joy, as in the days of your youth, for the simple reason that you can al -
ways mentally and emotionally recapture the joyous state.
The candle, which shines upon your head, is divine intelligence and re -
veals to you everything you need to know; it enables you to affirm the 
presence of your good, regardless of appearances. You walk by the guid -
ance of your subconscious mind, because you know that the dawn ap -
pears and the shadows flee away.
Get A Vision
Instead of saying, “I am old,” say, “I am wise in the way of the divine life.”
Don't let the corporation, newspapers or statistics hold a picture before 
you of old age, declining years, decrepitude, senility and uselessness. Re -
ject it, for it is a lie. Refuse to be hypnotized by such propaganda. Affirm 
life not death. Get a vision of yourself as happy, radiant, successful, 
serene and powerful.
Your Mind Does Not Grow Old
Former President Herbert Hoover, now 88 years old, is very active and is 
performing monumental work. I interviewed him a few years ago in his 
suite at the Waldorf-Astoria, New York City. I found him healthy, happy, 
vigorous and full of life and enthusiasm. He was keeping several secre -
taries busy handling his correspondence and was himself writing books of 
a political and historical nature. Like all great men, I found him affable, 
genial, amiable, loving and most understanding.
His mental acumen and sagacity gave me the thrill of a lifetime. He is a 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
deeply religious man and is full of faith in God and in the triumph of the 
eternal truth of life. He was subjected to a barrage of criticism and con -
demnation in the years of the great depression, but he weathered the 
storm and did not grow old in hatred, resentment, ill will and bitterness. 
On the contrary, he went into the silence of his soul and communing with 
the divine presence within him, he found peace, which is the power at the
heart of God.
His Mind Active At Ninety-Nine
My father learned the French language at 65 years of age, and became an
authority on it at 70. He made a study of Gaelic when he was over 60, 
and became an acknowledge and famous teacher of the subject. He as -
sisted my sister in a school of higher learning and continued to do so until
he passed away at 99. His mind was as clear at 99 as it was when he was 
20. Moreover, his handwriting and his reasoning powers had improved 
with age. Truly, you are as old as you think and feel.
We Need Our Senior Citizens
Marcus Porcius Cato, the Roman patriot, learned Greek at 80. Madame 
Ernestine Schumann-Heink, the great German American contralto, 
reached the pinnacle of her musical success after she became a grand -
mother. It is wonderful to behold the accomplishments of the oldsters. 
General Douglas MacArthur, Harry S Truman, General Dwight David Eisen -
hower, and American financier, Bernard Baruch are interesting, active and 
contributing their talents and wisdom to the world.
The Greek philosopher, Socrates, learned to play musical instruments 
when he was 80 years old. Michelangelo was painting his greatest canvas -
es at 80. At 80, Cios Simonides won the prize for poetry, Johann von 
Goethe finished Faust and Leopold von Ranke commenced his History of 
the World, which he finished at 92.
Alfred Tennyson wrote a magnificent poem Crossing the Bar , at 83. Issac 
Newton was hard at work close to 85. At 88 John Wesley was directing, 
preaching and guiding Methodism. We have several men of 95 years who 
come to my lectures, and they tell me they are in better health now than 
they were at 20.
Let us place our senior citizens in high places and give them every oppor -
tunity to bring forth the flowers of Paradise.
If you are retired, get interested in the laws of life and the wonders of 
your subconscious mind. Do something you have always wanted to do. 
Study new subject and investigate new ideas.
Pray as follows: As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth 
my soul after thee, O God. Psalm 42:1 . 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
The Fruits Of Old Age
His flesh shall be fresher than a child's; he shall return to the days of his 
youth. Job 33:25 .
Old age really means the contemplation of the truths of God from the 
highest standpoint. Realize that you are on an endless journey, a series of
important steps in the ceaseless, tireless, endless ocean of life. Then, with
the Psalmist you will say, T hey shall bring forth fruit in old age; they shall 
be fat and flourishing. Psalm 92:14 .
But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, gentleness, good -
ness, faith, meekness, temperance; against such there is no law. Gala -
tians 5:22-23.
You are a child of infinite life, which knows no end, and you are a child of 
eternity.
Profitable Pointers
1. Patience, kindness, love, good will, joy, happiness, wisdom and under -
standing are qualities which never grow old. Cultivate them and express 
them and remain young in mind and body.
2. Some research physicians say that the neurotic fear of the effects of 
time may well be the cause of premature aging.
3. Age is not the flight of years; it is the dawn of wisdom in the mind of 
man.
4. The most productive years of your life can be from 65 to 95.
5. Welcome the advancing years. It means you are moving higher on the 
path of life which has no end.
6. God is life and that is your life now. Life is self renewing, eternal and 
indestructible and is the reality of all men. You life forever because your 
life is God's life.
 
7. Evidence of survival after death is overwhelming. Study Proceedings of 
Psychical Research Society of Great Britain and America  in your library. 
The work is based on the scientific research by outstanding scientists for 
over 75 years.
8. You cannot see your mind, but you know you have a mind. You cannot 
see spirit, but you know that the spirit of the game, the spirit of the artist,
the spirit of the musician and the spirit of the speaker is real. Likewise, 
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
the spirit of goodness, truth and beauty moving in your mind and heart 
are real. You cannot see life, but you know you are alive.
9. Old age may be called the contemplation of the truths of God from the 
highest standpoint. The joys of old age are greater than those of youth. 
Your mind is engaged in spiritual and mental athletics. Nature slows down
your body so that you may have the opportunity to meditate on things di -
vine.
10. we do not count a man's years until he has nothing else to count. 
Your faith and convictions are not subject to decay.
11. you are as young as you think you are. You are as strong as you think
you are. You are as useful as you think you are. You are as young as your 
thoughts.
12. Your gray hairs are an asset. You are not selling your gray hairs. You 
are selling your talent, abilities and wisdom which you have garnered 
through the years.
13. Diet and exercise won't keep you young. As a man thinketh, so is he .
14. Fear of old age can bring about physical and mental deterioration. The
thing I greatly feared has come upon me .
15. You grow old when you cease to dream, and when you lose interest in
life. You grow old if you are irritable, crotchety, petulant and cantanker -
ous. Fill your mind with the truths of God and radiate the sunshine of His 
love – this is youth.
16. Look ahead, for at all times you are gazing into infinite life.
17. Your retirement is a new venture. Take up new studies and new inter -
ests. You can now do the things you always wanted to do when you were 
so busy making a living. Give your attention to living life. 
18. Become a producer and not a prisoner of society. Don't hide your light
under a bushel.
19. The secret of youth is love, joy, inner peace and laughter. In Him 
there is fullness of joy. In Him there is no darkness at all.  
20. You are needed. Some of the great philosophers, artists, scientists, 
writers and others accomplished their greatest work after they were 80 
years old.
21. The fruits of old age are love, joy, peace, patience, gentleness, good -
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven
ness, faith, meekness and temperance.
22. You are a child of infinite life which knows no end. You are a child of 
eternity. You are wonderful!
I hope you have enjoyed reading The Power of Your Subconscious Mind by
Dr Joseph Murphy .
Click for More Free Books by Joseph Murphy .
For More Free PDF Books  on the Law of Attraction and Metaphysics Visit 
the Law of Attraction Haven .
More Free Books Law of Attraction Haven