Chapter Two
The World a Reflex of Mental States
What you are, so is your world. Everything in the universe is resolved into
your own inward experience. It matters little what is without, for it is all a
reflection of your own state of consciousness. It matters everything what 
you are within, for everything without will be mirrored and colored 
accordingly. 
All that you positively know is contained in your own experience; all that 
you ever will know must pass through the gateway of experience, and so 
become part of yourself. 
Your own thoughts, desires, and aspirations comprise your world, and, to 
you, all that there is in the universe of beauty and joy and bliss, or of 
ugliness and sorrow and pain, is contained within yourself. By your own 
thoughts you make or mar your life, your world, your universe. As you 
build within by the power of thought, so will your outward life and 
circumstances shape themselves accordingly. Whatsoever you harbor in 
the inmost chambers of your heart will, sooner or later by the inevitable 
law of reaction, shape itself in your outward life. The soul that is impure, 
sordid and selfish, is gravitating with unerring precision toward misfortune
and catastrophe; the soul that is pure, unselfish, and noble, is gravitating 
with equal precision toward happiness and prosperity. Every soul attracts 
its own, and nothing can possibly come to it that does not belong to it. To 
realize this is to recognize the universality of Divine Law. The incidents of 
every human life, which both make and mar, are drawn to it by the quality
and power of its own inner thought-life. Every soul is a complex 
combination of gathered experiences and thoughts, and the body is but 
an improvised vehicle for its manifestation. What, therefore, your 
thoughts are, that is your real self; and the world around, both animate 
and inanimate, wears the aspect with which your thoughts clothe it.' 
'All that we are is the result of what we have thought; it is founded on our
thoughts; it is made up of our thoughts." Thus said Buddha, and it 
therefore follows that if a man is happy, it is because he dwells in happy 
thoughts; if miserable, because he dwells in despondent and debilitating 
thoughts. Whether one be fearful or fearless, foolish or wise, troubled or 
serene, within that soul lies the cause of its own state or states, and 
never without. And now I seem to hear a chorus of voices exclaim,' 'But 
do you really mean to say that outward circumstances do not affect our 
minds" I do not say that, but I say this, and know it to be an infallible 
truth, that circumstances can only affect you in so far as you allow them 
to do so. You are swayed by circumstances because you have not a right 
understanding of the nature, use, and power of thought. You believe (and 
upon this little word belief hang all our sorrows and joys) that outward 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 11 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
things have the power to make or mar your life; by so doing you submit 
to those outward things, confess that you are their slave, and they your 
unconditional master; by so doing, you invest them with a power which 
they do not, of themselves, possess, and you succumb, in reality, not to 
the mere circumstances, but to the gloom or gladness, the fear or hope, 
the strength or weakness, which your thought-sphere has thrown around 
them. 
I knew two men who, at an early age, lost the hard-earned savings of 
years. One was very deeply troubled, and gave way to chagrin, worry, 
and despondency. The other, on reading in his morning paper that the 
bank in which his money was deposited had hopelessly failed, and that he
had lost all, quietly and firmly remarked, "Well, it's gone, and trouble and 
worry won 't bring it back, but hard work will." He went to work with 
renewed vigor, and rapidly became prosperous, while the former man, 
continuing to mourn the loss of his money, and to grumble at his ' ' bad 
luck," remained the sport and tool of adverse circumstances, in reality of 
his own weak and slavish thoughts. The loss of money was a curse to the 
one because he clothed the event with dark and dreary thoughts; it was a
blessing to the other, because he threw around it thoughts of strength, of 
hope, and renewed endeavor. 
If circumstances had the power to bless or harm, they would bless and 
harm all men alike, but the fact that the same circumstances will be alike 
good and bad to different souls proves that the good or bad is not in the 
circumstance, but only in the mind of him that encounters it. When you 
begin to realize this you will begin to control your thoughts, to regulate 
and discipline your mind, and to rebuild the inward temple of your soul, 
eliminating all useless and superfluous material, and incorporating into 
your being thoughts alone of joy and serenity, of strength and life, of 
compassion and love, of beauty and immortality; and as you do this you 
will become joyful and serene, strong and healthy, compassionate and 
loving, and beautiful with the beauty of immortality. 
And as we clothe events with the drapery of our own thoughts, so likewise
do we clothe the objects of the visible world around us, and where one 
sees harmony and beauty, another sees revolting ugliness. An 
enthusiastic naturalist was one day roaming the country lanes in pursuit 
of his hobby, and during his rambles came upon a pool of brackish water 
near a farmyard. As he proceeded to fill a small bottle with the water for 
the purpose of examination under the microscope, he dilated, with more 
enthusiasm than discretion, to an uncultivated son of the plough who 
stood close by, upon the hidden and innumerable wonders contained in 
the pool, and concluded by saying, ' ' Yes, my friend, within this pool is 
contained a hundred, nay, a million universes, had we but the sense or 
the instrument by which we could apprehend them." And the 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 12 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
unsophisticated one ponderously remarked, ' ' I know the water be full o*
tadpoles, but they be easy to catch. " 
Where the naturalist, his mind stored with the knowledge of natural facts,
saw beauty, harmony, and hidden glory, the mind unenlightened upon 
those things saw only an offensive mud-puddle. 
The wild flower which the casual wayfarer thoughtlessly tramples upon is, 
to the spiritual eye of the poet, an angelic messenger from the invisible. 
To the many, the ocean is but a dreary expanse of water on which ships 
sail and are sometimes wrecked; to the soul of the musician it is a living 
thing, and he hears, in all its changing moods, divine harmonies. Where 
the ordinary mind sees disaster and confusion, the mind of the 
philosopher sees the most perfect sequence of cause and effect, and 
where the materialist sees nothing but endless death, the mystic sees 
pulsating and eternal life. 
And as we clothe both events and objects without our own thoughts, so 
likewise do we clothe the souls of others in the garments of our thoughts. 
The suspicious believe everybody to be suspicious; the liar feels secure in 
the thought that he is not so foolish as to believe that there is such a 
phenomenon as a strictly truthful person; the envious see envy in every 
soul; the miser thinks everybody is eager to get his money; he who has 
subordinated conscience in the making of his wealth, sleeps with a 
revolver under his pillow, rapt in the delusion that the world is full of 
conscienceless people who are eager to rob him, and the abandoned 
sensualist looks upon the saint as a hypocrite. On the other hand, those 
who dwell in loving thoughts, see that in all which calls forth their love 
and sympathy; the trusting and honest are not troubled by suspicions; 
the good-natured and charitable who rejoice at the good fortune of 
others, scarcely know what envy means; and he who has realized the 
Divine within himself recognizes it in all beings, even in the beasts. 
And men and women are confirmed in their mental outlook because of the
fact that, by the law of cause and effect, they attract to themselves that 
which they send forth, and so come in contact with people similar to 
themselves. The old adage, ''Birds of a feather flock together," has a 
deeper significance than is generally attached to it, for in the thought-
world as in the world of matter, each clings to its kind. 
Do you wish for kindness? Be kind. 
Do you ask for truth? Be true. 
What you give of yourself you find; 
Your world is a reflex of you. 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 13 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
If you are one of those who are praying for, and looking forward to, a 
happier world beyond the grave, here is a message of gladness for you, 
you may enter into and realize that happy world now; it fills the whole 
universe, and it is within you, waiting for you to find, acknowledge, and 
possess. Said one who knew the inner laws of Being, "When men shall say
lo here, or lo there, go not after them; the kingdom of God is within you."
What you have to do is to believe this, simply believe it with a mind 
unshadowed by doubt, and then meditate upon it till you understand it. 
You will then begin to purify and to build your inner world, and as you 
proceed, passing from revelation to revelation, from realization to 
realization, you will discover the utter powerlessness of outward things 
beside the magic potency of a self-governed soul. 
If thou would 'st right the world, 
And banish all its evils and its woes, 
Make its wild places bloom, 
And its drear deserts blossom as the rose, — 
Then right thyself. 
If thou would 'st turn the world 
From its long, lone captivity in sin, 
Restore all broken hearts, 
Slay grief, and let sweet consolation in, — 
Turn thou thyself. 
If thou would 'st cure the world 
Of its long sickness, end its grief and pain; 
Bring in all-healing Joy, 
And give to the afflicted rest again, — 
Then cure thyself.
 
If thou would 'st wake the world 
Out of its dream of death and dark'ning strife, 
Bring it to Love and Peace, 
And Light and brightness of immortal Life, — 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 14 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
Wake thou thyself. 
More Free PDF Books Law of Attraction Haven
--- Page 15 ---
From Poverty to Power – James Allen
