--- Page 154 ---
CHAPTER 5
UPGRADE YOUR SYSTEMS FOR
LIVING
Where We Discover How to Get Better at Life
by Constantly Updating Our Daily Systems
I think it’s very important to have a feedback loop, where you’re constantly thinking
about what you’ve done and how you could be doing it better . I think that’s the
single best piece of advice: Constantly think about how you could be doing things
better and questioning yourself.
—ELON MUSK
--- Page 155 ---
RICHARD BRANSON’S SECRET SYSTEM
It was a starry evening on Necker Island, the private island owned by
Richard Branson, and the beach party had wound down to that lazy lull
where yo u’re totally relaxed, sitting there gazing at the stars, and soaking
in the beauty all around you. It was my second trip to Branson’ s beautiful
home on Necker Island. I was t here with a group of entrepreneurs for a
four -day mastermind and adventure trip.
In the quiet, I had a chance to sit with Richard for a while an d talk
one-on-one about all sorts of th ings, from life to parenting to personal
philosophy . My wife and I were struggling to conceive our second child
but had failed f or four straight years. Richard was actually g iving me
advice on what I could do to improve my odds of being a fath er again.
(Getting procreation advice from Branson will always be an interesting
memory for me.) It was impressive to see how much he cared and how
genuine he was.
That’ s when it o ccurred to me t hat, given that I was sitting in private
conversation wi th one of the world’ s greatest entrepreneurs, maybe I
should s top discussing ways to improve sperm count and instead ask
Richard for something a bit more related to his genius zone. So I asked
him this: “Richard, you’ve started eight dif ferent companies in eight
dif ferent industr ies and taken all  of them to a billion dollars. Tha t’ s huge.
If yo u co uld summarize in one sentence how you did it, what would you
say?”
Richard didn’ t blink. He answered immediately like a wise, kind sage.
Here’ s what he said:
It’ s all about finding and hiring people smarter than you, getting
them to join your business and giving them good work, then getting
out o f the way and trusting them. Y ou have to get out of the wa y so
you can focus on the bigger vision. That’ s important, but here is the
main thing: Y ou must make them see their work as a mission.
This, in Richard ’ s words, is his “system” for starting game-ch anging
companies. His focus is on hiring smart people, giving them freedom and
getting o ut of the way , and continuously thinking of the vision, ensuring
that a mission was driving the company .
A system for liv ing is a repeate d, optimized pattern for getting things
done. How we d ress in the morn ing is a system. How we get through our
--- Page 156 ---
e-mail is often a  system. Our w ork, our parenting, our exercise routine,
how we make lo ve and handle relationships, our methods for c reativity
—all often fall into specific systems for living.
I co mpare systems for living t o the software that computers use to
perform specific  operations. They’re the things you do to function in the
world, f rom the moment you wake up to your nighttime rituals like
putting on your pajamas and reading a book before going to bed. W e
have so cietal systems, too, such as our educational system, business
structures, and community systems.
Where do our sy stems come from? As you know from Chapter 3 , they
come from our b eliefs about what’ s true, right, good, healthy , n ecessary ,
appropriate, and ef fective. After  our models of reality , they’re the second
aspect of consciousness engine ering that allows you to advance your
human potential and step into the extraordinary .
But here ’ s the problem. Most of us are using systems that hav e long
become obsolete . As Bill Jense n said in his book Futur e Str ong:  “Even
as we enter one of the most disr uptive eras in human history , one of the
biggest challeng es we face is that today’ s systems and structures still live
on, past their expiration dates. W e are locked into twentieth-century
approaches that  are holding back the next big fundamental shifts in
human capacity .”
--- Page 157 ---
UPGRADED SYSTEMS FOR AN UPGRADED
LIFE
Good so ftware i s constantly being updated. It would be ridiculous to still
be runni ng W indows 95 when you could be running the latest version.
Y et when it com es to our systems for living—our internal softw are—we
run systems that are highly suboptimal.
But wha t if you start viewing your systems for living in mu ch the
same wa y you view the apps you download on your smartphone? When
you swa p outdat ed models of re ality for empowering ones and pair them
with new  system s for applying your new models day to day , your life
will improve exponentially—and fast.
In th is c hapter , y ou’ll learn how to think about your systems for  living
in a very structu red way so that  you get to do more and create more, in
less time, while having more fun.
Let me give you an example r elated to that night on Necker Island
with Richard Branson.
I had been thinking about writing a book for a long time but had no
idea how to start. I simply was not ready .
I wa nted to wri te in a style that contained practical lessons sc attered
among f ascinating stories that could keep the reader entertained. One of
my favorite books of this type was actually Branson’ s 1998
autobiography Losing My V ir ginity . I loved  it because of the per sonal
stories peppered with really powerful personal growth lessons. That book
became one of the role model books for the kind of book I wanted to
write.
However , I was nowhere cl ose to Branson in terms o f life
accomplishments or life adventures. So I stayed stuck—thinking I’d
“someday” write  such a book when I could prove myself by ge tting my
business to a gigantic level.
That same night on Necker as we were talking about parenting and I
shared w ith Branson some of m y philosophies, he interrupted me and
said, “Y ou should write a book.”
I wa s silent, stunned. That little  push from Branson (and he pr obably
doesn’ t even remember it) was just the boost of confidence I needed to
start seriously thinking about this book.
Still it took me three years to figure out what I wanted to write about.
Then it took me one whole year to get a framework done.
--- Page 158 ---
And then it took me three months to write the first chapter .
It was slow and painful.
But each day , I kept optimizing my systems.
I dev eloped a m ethod for coming up with titles, a method for creating
a framework, and a style for writing personal stories. I eve n tested
dif ferent types of whiskey to see which helped me create the most
interesting writing. (Scotch versus Kentucky versus Japanese. If you
must know , Jim Beam Kentucky bourbon won.)
As I fine-tuned these systems, I experienced exponential productivity
in m y w riting abilities. Now , I can write a chapter in a single day . Three
months ago, this would have  been next to impossible. H ere’ s my
ef ficiency plotted on the graph below that shows how far I came as I
optimized the system. Note ho w hard it was to start but how much I
could speed up as I formalized my system.
When y ou optimize your systems for living, you can expe rience
exponential growth in areas that truly matter to you.
--- Page 159 ---
EXTRAORDINARY PEOPLE DISCOVER
EXTRAORDINARILY EFFECTIVE SYSTEMS
Extraordinary people don’ t just have extraordinary models of reality .
They str ive to ensure that their s ystems for living—that is, DOING what
they do in the world—are we ll defined, structured, and continuously
optimized.
I try to u pgrade at least one of m y systems for living every wee k, not
because I feel like things are always broken but because I know how
ener gizing it is to try something  new . It’ s exciting to think that we can
just swap in a new system like downloading a new app.
There’ s a three-step method for ef fectively upgrading your syste ms for
living:
1. THE DISCOVER Y PROCESS.  Many people discover new systems from
books, conferences, or online courses. Maybe you read about the benefits
of a particular approach to weight training. Y ou do some research and
decide to incorporate it into your workouts. In a month or two, you
assess the results. Or you hear about a new management strategy at a
conference and decide to try it with your team and track how it’ s
working. I make it a habit to rea d nonfiction books on a wide variety of
topics that matter to me, such as parenting, work, and exercise, and to
continually disc over new systems. Think of it like browsing the App
Store. It can be  fun and enlightening when you find somet hing that
seems to work for others and might also work for you.
2. YOUR REFRES H RATE.  Y our refresh rate is how often you upgrade
your sys tems fo r living. For ex ample, I try to experiment wi th a new
exercise system  every year . In 2013, for example, I spent thirty days
straight on Les Mills’ s BODYPUMP . The next year I experimented with
Minimum Ef fective Dose exercises such as Christine Bullock’ s T otal
T ransformation program. This year I’m trying kettlebells. None of these
was ran domly chosen. I discovered them after reading books, having
conversations with friends who were passionate about fitness, and
knowing what my needs were  (love handles begone!). I ma de these
changes not necessarily because my previous exercise system was
broken b ut beca use I simply realized I’m more lik ely to work out if I
switch things up regularly so I don’ t get bored. It also ensures that I’m
working dif ferent muscle group s and keeping my whole body fit and
healthy .
--- Page 160 ---
3. SET POINTS AND MEASUREMENT .  How  ef fective are your systems for
living? Is your new system for living really better than a previous one?
W e’ll lo ok at ways to measure and maintain the ef fectiveness  of your
systems for living as you di scover and refresh them. This is the
important bit that people often for get—are you measuring the
ef fectiveness of your system? A  set point is a level of perform ance that
you do not allow yourself to slip below . For example, I have  a waist
measurement se t point that has kept me at the same waist size for ten
years. I measure it by seeing which hole is used when buck ling my
favorite belt. If I ever go even s lightly beyond that set point, I make it a
discipline to diet or exercise to get back to my set point. I’m not allowed
to buy a new belt.
Here’ s how all three stages come together to allow you to create
ef fective systems for governing your life.
--- Page 161 ---
The Discovery Process
Patrick Grove is one of the most successful entrepreneurs in Australia
and the Asia Pa cific region. His entrepreneurial success has ma de him a
member of the Business Review Australia’ s Rich 200 list, and he’ s
known as the Asia Pacific’ s IPO whiz kid because he h olds the
seemingly incredible record of starting four companies and taking each
of th em public. He’ s also a close friend. I once bumped into Pa trick in a
local Sta rbucks in the neighborhood where we live, where I found him
scribbling furiously on a piece of paper . When I asked what he was up to,
he said, “I’m trying to solve this massive problem.”
“What is it?” I asked.
“I’m try ing to figure out how I c an make $100 million in one year ,” he
answered.
I sm iled. But I  knew Patrick w as serious. He’ s one of the biggest
thinkers I know . Making $100 m illion in one year sounds impo ssible to
most people, but to an extraordin ary mind like Patrick’ s, it’ s a reasonable
question. It was not a function o f “is it possible?” but rather “when is it
possible?”
That enc ounter happened in 2008. In 2013 Patrick pulled it of f. He
acquired three small used car w ebsites across Southeast Asia, renamed
the group i Car Asia, took it pub lic in Australia, and drove this
investment to over $100 million in valuation. All in ONE year .
Patrick likes to get out of th e of fice and ask himself big, tough
questions, and then he says tha t the inspiration for his business ideas
often comes to him. He makes sure that he gives himself the s pace and
time to do this.  T oo many of us are so busy doing  that we never step
back and think about how  we’re doing. Or why  we’ re d oing it. I call this
the do-d o trap. Y ou’re so busy doing what needs to be done, y ou don’ t
really know whether your systems for living might be obsolete , or even
(pun intended) absolute crap.
This is why people like Patrick get out of the of fice and find the time
and space to question their systems and set new , bolder goals.
A wareness is the essence of discovery . Every now and then, stop doing
and gather some research. I know many people who have a disciplined
system for going to the gym a few times weekly . But are y our gym
workouts fully optimized? For example, once a month I might actually
skip going to the gym one day and instead read about new workout
routines, buy a new fitness app, or study a new fitness m ethod to
--- Page 162 ---
optimize  my gym time. This is what I mean by the discovery process.
Y ou step back fr om what you’re doing and seek to discover new ways to
do it better .
At Mind valley we bypass the d o-do trap through a technique called
Learn Day . On the first Friday of every month, nobody works (unless it’ s
something crucial). Instead, everyone focuses on learning abou t how to
work be tter . Customer support agents may research the art of writing
personalized replies or review customer feedback for ideas on improving
our products. A programmer may experiment with a new coding
language. People are allowed to sit and read all day , provided it ’ s a book
related to their career . Throug h this process, new ideas fo rm, new
systems emer ge, and new ways of working are born.
Whether related  to work, health, fitness, personal growth, culture, or
anything else, discovery is a life-af firming tool. It’ s not just about
making life a li ttle more interesting. It allows you to be better at what
you wan t to do. Patrick Grove is  the chairman of four public companies,
and he still has time to step back and rethink his systems. Som e might
say that this is why  he’ s  chairman of four public companies. Surely all of
us c an find the time to think in a dif ferent way about how to solve our
own problems—massive or otherwise.
--- Page 163 ---
Your Refresh Rate
When was the last time you read a book about a topic y ou were
interested in but knew nothing about? Signed up for a class? Sought
honest feedback  from a friend?  Sat in a Starbucks and scribbled notes
about crazy dreams you wanted  to pursue? Or otherwise revita lized the
systems in your life? Keeping your systems fresh is a system in itself.
Y our frequency of doing this is your refresh rate.
--- Page 164 ---
E x e r c i s e :  W h a t ’ s  Y o u r  R e f r e s h  R a t e ?
Let’ s go back to  the T welve Are as of Balance we looked at in Chapter 3 .
Have yo u updated the systems in any of these parts of your life recently?
If not, it’ s time to hit the refresh button.
W rite d own the areas where you know you need to make some
changes. It could be how you interact with your partner , the way you
raise yo ur kids,  how you deal with people and projects at work, how
you’re pursuing a job hunt, whether your home and other creature
comforts make you feel good, or whether you’re making tim e for big
dreams, amazing new experiences, spiritual insights, or creative growth.
Maybe you want tune-ups in all of these areas. Y ou’ll get there.
The important thing is to remember to study and invest in le arning
about how to im prove your systems for living. Below are th e twelve
categories; for each, I’ve added my personal favorite book as a
suggestion for something that might give you a bold new perspective on
the subject:
1.YOUR LOVE RELA TIONSHIP .  Men Ar e fr om Mars, W omen Ar e fr om
V enus  by John Gray . This book is a beautiful and somewhat
humorous look at how to live with and love the opposite sex.
2.YOUR FRIENDSHIPS.  How to W in Friends and Influence People  by
Dale Carnegie. I read this book seven times before I turned twenty;
an amazing book for anyone.
3.YOUR ADVENTURES.  Losing My V ir ginity  by Richard Branson. This
book inspires you to live a life of adventure and to have fun while
pursuing big goals.
4.YOUR ENVIRONMENT .  The Magic of Thinking Big  by David J.
Schwartz, PhD. This book inspires you to upgrade your quality of
life and to dream bigger about your home, your of fice space, the
car you drive, and more.
5.YOUR HEAL TH AND FITNESS.  Here I have dif ferent recommendations
for men or women. For men, it’ s The Bulletpr oof Diet  by Dave
Asprey . Dave is a friend and the most famous biohacker in the
world. This is science meets eating. For women, it’ s The V ir gin
Diet  by JJ V ir gin, which will challenge your rules about calories
and exercise and show you that it’ s not about how much you eat,
--- Page 165 ---
but how you combine the right foods in the right order for your
body’ s “chemistry lab.”
6.YOUR INTELLECTUAL LIFE.  What better way to optimize your
intellectual life than by upgrading your learning systems, learning
to speed-learn and improve your memory? I recommend courses
by Jim Kwik.
7.YOUR SKILLS.  The 4-Hour W orkweek  by T imothy Ferriss is a great
book on finding fast hacks to developing unique skills.
8.YOUR SPIRITUAL LIFE.  Conversations with God  by Neale Donald
W alsch is the best book I’ve read on spiritual growth. But a close
tie is Autobiography of a Y ogi  by Paramahansa Y ogananda, which
was Steve Jobs’ s favorite book.
9.YOUR CAREER.  Originals  by Adam Grant is one of the best books
I’ve read on how to be more creative at work and how to think
outside the box, sell your ideas, and make a dif ference.
10.YOUR CREA TIVE LIFE.  The W ar of Art  by Steven Pressfield inspires
you to shed your artist inertia and get moving with your creative
work. It is also one of the most beautifully written books I’ve
come across.
11.YOUR F AMIL Y LIFE.  I believe the root cause of most family issues is
the lack of self-love, so I suggest The Mastery of Love  by Don
Miguel Ruiz.
12.YOUR COMMUNITY LIFE.  Delivering Happiness  by Zappos CEO T ony
Hsieh is an inspirational read on starting epic businesses and
giving back to the world in a big way .
W ant to  jump-st art your progress? Aim to read one book a w eek. If
you find this hard, start by first learning to speed-read. (Y ou’re
upgrading your  reading system.) W ith a few simple tricks, you can
rapidly boost your reading speed.
Reading is an e asy and excellent way to boost your refresh rat e. But
you should also consider online courses, masterminds, networking
groups, and seminars. Patrick G rove is a learning junkie. W e  became
friends because of our mutual interest in personal growth and the
seminars and courses we attend.
My visit  to Necker Island was part of a learning experience, too . I was
there to bond, co nnect, and share ideas with other entrepreneurs looking
--- Page 166 ---
to b uild big bus inesses while having daily sessions with Branson, who
served as a mentor to us. The reason I founded
MindvalleyAcademy .com , which at the time of this writing has more
than a million m embers, was to provide people with the opportunity to
learn new models and systems from the world’ s greatest teachers. These
teachers teach and run webinars in the academy , many of which are
completely free to attend.
The more you seek opportun ities to learn and then apply  your
learnings, the faster your refresh rate.
--- Page 167 ---
Set Points and Measurement
It’ s grea t to refresh your system s for living. But once you’ve got a good
thing going, how do you maintain it?
Y ou kno w what it feels like to s et out to make a big life improv ement,
only to see your results slip away a little bit at a time. Y ou work hard to
take of f the poun ds; then they st art to creep back. Y ou fall back into your
procrastination habit. Y ou spend more and save less. Or you stop keeping
up with  friends, or with your meditation practice, or connect ing with
your kids, or snuggling so much with your sweetheart.
I struggl e with this as much as anyone. But I’ve figured out a way to
reset myself when my systems start to slip. I devised a tool called
nonnegotiable set points.
Here’ s an example of how I apply this in my life.
I love my wine,  whiskey , chocolate, and cheese. But I like to stay in
shape because I feel and perform at my best when I’m at peak physical
ener gy .
As I  get  older , I’ve been setting up simple mental and physical  hacks
to slow down my aging and maintain my sense of well-being. My
nonnegotiable se t point for my body is that at any time, I should be able
to drop and do f ifty push-ups. No excuses. I can come of f a twe nty-hour
flight fro m L.A. to Kuala Lump ur and plop into bed at home. B ut after a
good sleep if I get out of bed and can’ t do fifty—something’ s of f. Fifty
push-ups is my health p ulse che ck. I can alwa ys tell when my travel
schedule or a few good meals with family and friends has nudge d me of f
my peak, because I have a hard time doing my usual fifty push-ups
during my workout. If that hap pens, I know that I need to really pay
attention to how I’m treating my body and make some changes.
W e can establis h these system checks for our finances, the time we
spend with our kids, our endurance, the number of books we read per
week, and so on.
Things slip when we don’ t have a detection method for knowing when
it’ s happening. Set points are that detection method.
--- Page 168 ---
E x e r c i s e :  Y o u r  N o n - N e g o t i a b l e  S e t  P o i n t s
A s et point is simply a bare-minimum threshold you establish for
yourself that you promise you will not go below . A set point dif fers from
a go al. G oals pu ll you forward, while set points help you main tain what
you have. Y ou need both.
Y ou can  establis h set points for anything important to you. And  here’ s
a secret: Y ou ca n use set points not only to prevent or reverse  slipping
but a lso to impr ove  over time. Imagine getting fitter as you get older . . .
more int imate w ith your partner . . . more secure financially . . .  or closer
to your kids. There’ s a super -simple set point mind trick you can deploy
that ups your ga me in amazing ways. So, let’ s get you started o n setting
up your own set points.
--- Page 169 ---
S t e p  1 :  I d e n t i f y  t h e  a r e a s  o f  y o u r  l i f e  w h e r e  y o u
w a n t  t o  c r e a t e  s e t  p o i n t s .
Look ba ck at the T welve Areas of Balance list from Chapter 3 . In which
categories did you score the lowest? Where are you slipping? Pick two or
three to focus on, for which you’d like to set specific, achievable set
points. E ventually , you can expand your list, but start with a few  that are
really important to you.
--- Page 170 ---
S t e p  2 :  D e t e r m i n e  y o u r  s e t  p o i n t s .
Next, cr eate set point tar gets for each area you’ve selected. Now , this is
very important: Make sur e that your set points ar e absolutely achievable .
Y ou’ll see why in a minute.
For things you can measure (y our weight or your bank account, for
example), you can establish specific amounts: My weight set point is X.
My bank account set point is Y . Y ou can establish set points for your
intellectual life (I will read X books per month) or even your wo rk (I will
spend tw o hours a week resea rching or studying something that will
make me better at my job). The more specific you are, the easi er it will
be to keep track of the set point and actually stick with it.
Here is an example of potential  set points you can choose for each of
the T welve Areas of Balance:
1.YOUR LOVE RELA TIONSHIP .  Set up set points for how much time you
spend together , whether it’ s the frequency of date nights, working
out together , or even regularly scheduled lovemaking.
2.YOUR FRIENDSHIPS.  Create set points for keeping in touch; for
example, calling a close friend at least once a week, inviting
friends for brunch or dinner once a month, writing a short weekly
note to someone going through a tough time.
3.YOUR ADVENTURES.  Consider setting set points for the frequency of
holidays or adventure trips. I go on at least two long trips with my
entire family every year . W e don’ t have to be going somewhere
exotic or expensive, but by committing to extended time with my
family , I have a chance to show them how much I love them while
we create lasting memories together . Y ou could commit to going to
one new place every month, even if that place is somewhere in
your neighborhood. It doesn’ t have to cost any money at all, but
your world will feel bigger and brighter when you regularly
expose yourself to new corners of it.
4.YOUR ENVIRONMENT .  Set a few simple set points for keeping your
home tidy; for example, making the bed every morning, making
sure the sink is clear of dirty dishes at night, sorting the mail as
soon as you get it and recycling what you don’ t need to keep, and
so on. Y ou can also create set points for the level of quality of your
life; for example, a weekly full-body massage or spa treatment.
--- Page 171 ---
5.YOUR HEAL TH AND FITNESS.  Set some specific set points as fitness
benchmarks. For me, it’ s my push-up routine. It could also be
maintaining a specific waist measurement or getting in the routine
of going to one yoga or Pilates class per week, or even tracking
your eyesight or blood pressure.
6.YOUR INTELLECTUAL LIFE.  Start to incorporate some systems for
bringing intellectual richness into your life. It might be reading a
few pages each night before bed, visiting a gallery or exploring
one room of a museum each week, or attending one play per
month. A great set point here is to read at least two books per
month.
7.YOUR SKILLS.  Commit to spending a certain number of hours per
week reading or studying material to improve skills in your field. I
have a set point of taking of f one day per month from work to
focus on studying and learning how to work better .
8.YOUR SPIRITUAL LIFE.  Y ou might make fifteen minutes of meditation
per day part of your spiritual practice, read several pages of
spiritual literature each day , or pray or send your thoughts to
someone dealing with a problem. My set point in this category is
fifteen minutes minimum of daily meditation.
9.YOUR CAREER.  Join a professional group and make sure you go to a
certain number of meetings per year . Read one book per month on
career issues. If you’re looking to change careers, commit to
reading a certain number of articles online per week about this new
field and how to break in.
10.YOUR CREA TIVE LIFE.  Choose and pursue a creative outlet, and set a
reachable set point for making it part of your life. It could be
spending twenty minutes journaling each day , joining a weekly
improv class, or setting goals to move forward on a creative
project that’ s been stalled or you’ve been meaning to start. I have
set points for the amount of writing I do every week.
11.YOUR F AMIL Y LIFE.  Set a goal of spending a certain amount of time
doing family-oriented activities per week, whether with your kids,
the entire family , your parents, or other relatives. It could be
calling your mom or dad every couple of days just to say hi, going
out for Sunday breakfast as a family , having playtime with your
children each evening.
--- Page 172 ---
12.YOUR COMMUNITY LIFE.  Decide on an amount to donate annually to
good causes, or identify a place where you’ll volunteer on a
regular basis. I have an annual set point for money donated to
charity . Each year I ensure I can give away a healthy sum to good
causes I believe in.
--- Page 173 ---
S t e p  3 :  T e s t  y o u r  s e t  p o i n t s  a n d  c o r r e c t  i f  y o u
m i s s .
I t est my fifty push-ups set point once a week. If I can’ t do fifty—
whether because  I’ve been slack ing of f on exercise, my ener gy levels are
low , or I’ve put on weight—I im mediately initiate a set-point correction
procedure.
My set-p oint cor rection procedu re is a specific method to get me back
on track. When it comes to fitness, it’ s what I do when I need to get back
into shape to do  fifty . What wor ks for me is to immediately go on a low-
carb diet for a week to get my  weight back to normal and commit to
working out at the gym three times a week. T ypically in one  week I’m
back to fifty .
I turn forty the year this book is published. I intend to live to one
hundred. And even at that age I expect to be able to do fifty . I don’ t
believe in letting this slip.
The set- point correction proced ure is a crucial part of this process.
When y ou slip and can’ t maintain a set point, you must be disciplined
enough to correct it. This brings us to Step 4.
--- Page 174 ---
S t e p  4 :  T u r n  u p  t h e  h e a t — i n  a  g o o d  w a y .
When you slip of f your set point, set a goal to get back to the set point
plus a little bit mor e . Su ppose fifty p ush-ups is your fitness set point. If
you slip , aim to get back to fift y and a little more—say , to fifty-one. If
you’ve s topped your weekly date nights with your partner , go back to the
weekly date night but now add  next-day mooky (my term for morning
nooky). That’ s turning up the heat—but so gradually that you don’ t
notice it. Once you reach that new level, make that your new set point.
Now you’ve not just prevented stagnation, you’re actually gr owing .
Here’ s what the set point system looks like when you map it out:
Most pe ople slip with age. Bu t when you apply non-negotiable set
points, you grow with a ge. I believe we  all can be better than ever as we
gain mileage in life—just make sure you make your set points non-
--- Page 175 ---
negotiable. Y ou can learn more about set points on
www .mindvalley .com/extraordinary .
--- Page 176 ---
THE POSITIVE PSYCHOLOGY OF SET
POINTS
There’ s a powerful reason why set points work. It’ s a natural human
tendency to feel that we’ve failed when we slip from our goals. But with
set points, a failure is turned into a challenge. If you can’ t at tain your
fifty pus h-ups, y ou enact a new  goal. Get to fifty-one. Y ou replace the
feeling of failure with the positive feeling of striving for a goal.
The key  is to ma ke the new goal easily achievable. Notice that m y set-
point correction procedure for push-ups was to turn up the heat from fifty
to fifty- one, no t to fifty-five or sixty . Setting the bar too high is just
punishing; it’ s unrealistic that you’ll make all of that progress in one
giant lea p. T urn ing up the heat just a little bit allows you to reg ain some
momentum without setting yourself up to fail.
When you correct your set points by aiming slightly higher than
before, y ou can put yourself on a path to constant improvement in every
aspect of life.
This brings us to Law 5.
--- Page 177 ---
Law 5: Upgrade your systems for living.
Extraordinary minds consistently spend time discovering, upgrading, and measuring
new syste ms for living applied to life, work, heart, and soul. They are in a perpetual
state of growth and self-innovation.
--- Page 178 ---
THE SYSTEMS OF THE FUTURE
I’m going to ask you to do an exercise with me.
If you’r e readin g this book on a plane or subway or anywhere else
with people around you, I wan t you to try to smell your neighbor . Go
ahead. Lean just a little toward them and take a whif f.
If you’re reading this alone, try smelling yourself.
What do  you smell? In most cas es it’ s going to be perfume, aftershave,
a certain soap, or deodorant. Or not much of anything.
And that’ s exactly the way it should be.
But if you were doing this exercise 150 years ago, everyone a round
you would have stunk . B ack then, we didn’ t have the practice of a daily
shower . W e weren’ t trained to brush our teeth. Cologne and perfume
were mo stly used by the very wealthy . Deodorant didn’ t exis t. In the
1900s, humanity simply got used to its own stinking smell.
T oday we do all kinds of things in the morning to clean and prepare
our bod ies for the day . W e bru sh, shower , spray on cologne, a nd dress
well, all  to keep our physical bodies fresh and clean. Y et billions of us
wake up each morning feeling w orry , stress, anxiety , and fear a nd don’ t
do anyth ing abo ut it. W e assume this is normal, but it’ s not. Just as we
can wash our bodies, so we can have systems to completely “wash” our
minds of these debilitating feelings.
As the “smell your neighbor” ex ercise shows in a fun way , we pay far
more att ention t o systems for ta king care of our bodies than to systems
that take care of our mind and spirit.
W e’ve c reated a  society where i t’ s considered normal to wake up with
feelings of stress, anxiety , fear , and worry . But it isn’ t. These feelings
aren’ t meant to be constant sta tes. They’re alarm systems, evolved to
alert us to things we need to d eal with, not just live with. Y ou’re not
supposed to hate your work or dread your day . “Happy hour” shouldn’ t
be the drinks you have on Friday to celebrate getting through another
week.
Instead o f taking pills or engaging in unhealthy habits to suppress our
feelings, we can install systems to be free of them. What’ s inspiring is
how pop ular these new systems are proving to be—and how fast and
powerful the transformations are. I call these systems transcendent
practices. They include exercise s on gratitude, meditation, compassion,
bliss, and other practices that take you beyond or above the range of
normal or merely physical human experiences.
--- Page 179 ---
Now that you understand how  to discover , refresh, and crea te set
points a round y our systems for living, we’re going to focus the rest of
this book on systems for consciousness—in short transcendent practices.
These systems can have an amazing payof f when applied to life and
work, as  you’ll see in the next chapter . B ut first I wanted to share som e
insights into how one of the world’ s most powerful women is applying
transcendent practices to run her business and life.
--- Page 180 ---
HOW ARIANNA HUFFINGTON RULES HER
MIND
I g ot the beautif ul opportunity to interview Arianna Huf fington in 2014,
just when her book Thrive  was coming out. I adore Arianna; she radiates
calmness and kindness while also running a massive media empire
centered around  the Huffington Post . A riann a shared  with me some  of
the t ransformati ons that had been occurring in her life since she started
adding transcendent practices to her busy day .
Arianna’ s shift happened on A pril 6, 2007. She was two years into
building the Huffington Post,  hav ing incredible success but  working
herself t o the bone. And that’ s  when it hit her that money and power
were not  the only two metrics for success—there was a third that was not
getting nearly enough airtime. She explained to me:
When building a start-up, it’ s e asy to buy into the delusion that
we have to wo rk around the clock trying to make everyth ing
happen. And then, of course, we have lives outside of work as well.
As we were bu ilding the Huffington Post,  I w as t aking my older
daughter around  to check out colleges to see where she wanted to
apply .
I c ame back fro m the college t our and collapsed from burnout,
exhaustion, and sleep deprivation. I hit my head on my desk, broke
my c heekbone, and needed four  stitches on my right eye. As I was
going from doctor to doctor to see if there was anything medic ally
wrong w ith me,  I was asking myself all of these questions that we
often sto p asking when we leave college: “What is a good l ife?
What is  success ?” And I came  to the conclusion that the way we
define success, centered only on the two metrics of money and
power , i s just a very inadequate way to define life. It’ s like trying to
sit o n a two-leg ged stool—sooner or later , we topple over . And
that’ s when I came up with this idea of the third metric of succ ess,
which consists of four pillars: well-being, wisdom, wonder , and
giving.
Arianna went on to describe he r daily systems for living. She spoke
about meditation:
--- Page 181 ---
I don’ t want just  to be ef fective or productive. I want to be joyful.
After eight hours of sleep, I also meditate every morning for at least
twenty m inutes. On the weekend, I try to do an hour or an hour - and-
a-half. I love it.
Then we discussed gratitude:
I used to wake up and the first  thing I would do was check m y
smartphone. No w I don’ t do that. And just taking this time—
sometimes it can be literally a minute to just look ahead at my  day
and fill myself with gratitude for the blessings in my life, and  set
my intention for the day—it immediately takes away this f alse
ur gency that we bring into our lives that creates such unneces sary
stress.
I love Arianna’ s  message. Her systems for living involve medi tation,
movement, grati tude, and setting an intention for the day . And that’ s how
one of the most powerful women in the world starts her day .
I o nce polled o ne of my audiences to learn their biggest chal lenges
with meditation . T urns out one of the biggest challenges peo ple have
with meditation is that they sim ply can’ t find the time. I call this the
busyness paradox. It’ s a paradox because meditation actually adds time
to your day by optimizing you r thinking and creative process to make
you more functional.
Arianna is busy . She’ s been n amed to T ime  magazine’ s list of the
world’ s one hundred most influential people and the Forbes  ranking of
the one hundred most powerful women in the world.
Y et she told me:
It doesn ’ t take a lot of time. But  then I can bring that quality int o
my day .  Things happen in the course of my day , your day , I’m sure
everybody’ s day  that are challenging, that require us to deal with
problems. So when that happen s, as it inevitably does, I am in a
place where I can address them without being overreactive,
prioritizing wha t I need to handle right away , and without stressing
about bad things happening.
She suggested that you can start with as little as five minutes a day:
Eventually you can build it up t o twenty minutes, thirty minutes,
or more . But even just a few m inutes opens the door to creatin g a
--- Page 182 ---
new hab it and all the many pr oven benefits it brings, and I have
fifty-five pages of scientific endnotes in the book about it.
I could probably have written an entire book from the wis dom I
learned from Arianna. She is truly an amazing woman who shared many
more of the sy stems she formed as daily habits that make her truly
extraordinary .
Y ou can watch a video of m y full conversation with Arianna at
www .mindvalley .com/extraordinary  and learn about more systems that
she uses  in her d aily life to set herself up for success and peaceful, happy
living.
--- Page 183 ---
TRANSCENDENT PRACTICES AND WHERE
WE’RE GOING NEXT
W e can  tie Arianna’ s wisdom to philosopher Ken W ilber ’ s eloquent
words in Chapter 3  about the need to apply transce ndent practices to our
models and systems in the modern world.
I b elieve  we’re about to enter a new age of alignment betwe en our
physical bodies,  our intellect, an d our spirit. That is what we’re going to
explore in the next part  of this book as we go into your inner world.
--- Page 184 ---
PART III
RECODING YOURSELF
TRANSFORMING YOUR INNER WORLD
A s you practice consciousness engineering, something beautiful starts to
happen. As you gain a new sense of power and freedom from B rules that
no longer hold you back, your growth starts to accelerate.
At this point a great yearning often starts building in you.
Y ou want to do mor e, be mor e, contribute mor e.
This part of the book will give you the means to do so.
In previ ous chapters, you focused on the world around you and
learned to shed models from the past. Now we’ll look at your present and
your fut ure, and  we’ll focus on a new world—your inner world  with all
its conflicting habits, beliefs, em otions, desires, and ambitions. W e’ll be
bringing a beautiful order and balance to this world.
Y ou’ll be asking yourself two questions:
What exactly is happiness, and how can I be happy in the present?
What are my goals and visions for the future?
Y ou’ll learn new systems for living that allow you to dramatically
raise your levels of happiness, i ncluding three powerful approaches that
you can apply to  be more blissf ul on a daily basis—I call it Blissipline:
the discipline of daily bliss.
Y ou’ll also discover how to create exciting goals for your future
without succumbing to the Brules of the culturescape. Y ou’ll learn the
dif ference between end goals (a brilliant idea) and means goa ls (a bad
idea). Best of al l—you can do all of this by asking yourself thre e simple
but profound questions.
When y ou’re happy in the pres ent moment and pulled forward by a
vision for the f uture, your inner and outer worlds mesh seamlessly . It
almost feels as if luck is on your side, and the universe has your back.
When you’re in this state, life seems to unfold for you in the best
possible way—a s if you’ve bee n blessed. I have a term for this. I call it
bending reality .
