--- Page 185 ---
CHAPTER 6
BEND REALITY
Where We Identify the Ultimate State of
Human Existence
I have realized that the past and future are real illusions, that they exist in the
present, which is what there is and all there is.
—ALAN W A TTS, ZEN PHILOSOPHER
--- Page 186 ---
LOVE AND ITS CAREER REPERCUSSIONS
I w as hardly a poster boy for “Person Most Likely to Succeed” after
college. My scorecard the first three years after graduation looked like
this:
I tried and failed trying to launch two start-ups.
When I did try to get a decent job, I was fired. T wice.
Finally in 2002, after being a couch-crasher for a while, I got my
dialing-for -dollars job selling le gal software and got good enough at that
(thanks to the practices I talked about in Chapter 3 ) to be promoted to
director of sales and relocated to New Y ork City to open the company’ s
East Coast of fice.
Then I hit another snag.
Love.
My girlfriend, Kristina, was amazing—the kind of woman who turned
heads everywhere she went. But there was one big problem. She lived in
T allinn, Estonia, 4,167 miles away . Y es, I counted.
W e t ried to compensate by seein g each other every four months . W e’d
meet in Paris or Greece, and lik e star -crossed lovers on a budg et, we’d
have the mos t romant ic holidays we could in the cheap hotels that were
all we could af ford. It’ s not eve ry day that you meet a woman who’ s so
incredible you’ll tolerate a three-year long-distance relationship. So
eventually I proposed for tw o reasons: romantically—because we
couldn’ t wait to be living in the same city together and fina ncially—
because all those transatlantic f lights and holidays were causing me to
run out of cash.
So I  ask ed my boss for four wee ks of f. The idea was to get mar ried in
Europe and then go on a honey moon and spend some time vis iting our
folks. It all went well. But the day I arrived back in New Y ork with
Kristina, I received a call from my boss. “Y ou know I think you’re great,
and I really like  you,” he said, “But I couldn’ t keep the positio n open. I
had to replace you. Business is business.”
I w as dumbstruck. I had no US green card and no way to find a nother
job. Nei ther did  Kristina. “T ell you what,” he said, “I can find  another
position for you. But it’ll be half your previous pay .”
I remember standing there holding the phone, feeling as if my soul had
collapsed onto the floor . Calmly , I replied, “Umm . . . okay . I’ll do it.”
--- Page 187 ---
Inside I wanted to scream expletives that would make a Marine blush.
Kristina, not having a green card, couldn’ t work in the United States.
Money was going to be tight, bu t we would not give up on our American
dream.
Sometimes from the crappiest situations, opportunity arises. Since I
had two mouths to feed and a salary that had been cut in half, I had to
find othe r ways to make money . I’d read a couple of books abo ut online
marketing and figured that with my knowledge of coding and marketing,
I co uld easily b uild a simple w ebsite to promote and sell a product I
could buy wholesale. Since meditation was something I was interested
in, I thought selling a meditation product would be a great way to start. I
registered the first cheap doma in I could find— mindvalley .com —and
launched my little e-commerce store. I worked on it a few hours every
evening after I got home from the of fice.
In my first month, I lost $800. In  my second month, I lost $300. In my
third month, I m ade a profit—a grand total of $4.50 for every day I
worked. Still, it felt good. It bought breakfast at least. I lo ved my
morning cup of Starbucks cof fee. Now , I had a tiny website that earned
me enou gh to buy a Starbucks cof fee every single day . At first it was a
Grande Café Mocha, but the growth of my microbusiness did not stop.
Soon I was mak ing $5.50 a day . I could upgrade to a V enti. That was a
pretty exciting moment.
By month six, I was earning $6.50 every day—enough for a V enti with
(drumroll please) hazelnut flavoring. A few months later , my little site
was buy ing me my daily Starbucks and  a Subw ay sand wich for lunch.
Exciting times, indeed. I remember having beers with some fri ends at a
bar , prou dly tell ing them of my little side business that paid for breakfast
and lunch each day—and how in a few months, it would pay for dinner ,
too.
That wa s basically how Mindvalley started. It wasn’ t about building a
business. No big goals. No deadlines. Just this little game to see how
much fo od I could get with my profits. W ithout realizing it, I’d stumbled
upon a secret tha t video-game designers and psychologists had long been
aware of. I was “gamifying” my life.
The money continued to grow . I soon had a new goal. I knew my
minimum livable income was $4,000. That was what Kristina and I
needed to eat, pay rent, live i n Manhattan on a modest bud get, and
reinvest in the business. I was earning $7,500 from my job, bu t I really
needed just $4,000 to survive in New Y ork with Kristina at t hat time.
--- Page 188 ---
Right b efore Thanksgiving 2003, I hit that number for Min dvalley’ s
monthly earnings. I called my boss and resigned.
--- Page 189 ---
FROM GAME TO GRIND
Quitting my job as a law firm s oftware salesman meant that I no longer
had a US visa. K ristina and I fac ed a choice. W e could return to Estonia,
her home, or to Malaysia, where I was born. Estonia is a beautiful nation,
but its winters are dreadful, so we settled on Malaysia for its  warmer
weather .
I’d like to be able to say that this is the whole story for why we left.
But there’ s more. In the years following September 1 1, the Unit ed States
was on high alert. For some re ason, I was put on a watch l ist called
Special Registration, which was designed to monitor foreign visitors
from specific countries. Malaysia unfortunately made the list, and
someone in the State Department decided that I was “suspicious” enough
that I should be monitored.
I could travel only via certain airports, and it included an exhaustive
two- to three-hour extra wait at immigration for special screening. But
worst of all, eve ry thirty days w hile in the United States, I had to register
myself a t the local immigration  of fice. I would be required to wait in a
line—sometimes standing outside in the cold for four hours in a line that
stretched more than a block long, until an of ficer could see me,
fingerprint me, take a photograp h, and check my credit card purchases to
see if I had made any dangerous purchases. It was horr ible and
demeaning.
After tolerating this for four months, Kristina and I decided we had to
give up our American dream and  move to a new country . I never stopped
being in  love with the United States. Although I grew up in Malaysia, I
still feel more American than anything else, but I couldn’ t stay in the
country I loved while being forced to live according to parolelike rules.
So I ended up home in Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia. I was precisely
halfway across the world from my close friends in New Y ork, my
favorite city in the world, and my customers and business vendors.
At first the Mal aysia of fice of Mindvalley included just me and my
faithful Labradoodle, Ozzy (whom I listed as my PR manager: “the first
dog in the country to hold a paid position in e-commerce” ). Soon,
though, we started growing. I hired my first employees and expanded
into a small of fice space at the b ack of a warehouse in a run-down part of
the city . W e then started ramping up with more staf f and projects.
Suddenly , I had to run a “real”  business. Rent. Hiring. Payroll. Filing
taxes. D ealing w ith banks. I lov ed the work itself but was dragged down
--- Page 190 ---
by a ll th e worrie s of running the  day-to-day . Being so far remo ved from
the United States posed its challenges.
I s truggl ed, working crazy-long  hours. And to make matters worse, I
was hitting a glass ceiling. The next four years would be relatively
unremarkable. There were ups  and downs, and we grew to eighteen
people, but our business was s till finding its way . At least it paid the
bills. By  May 2008, I found m yself in a dilemma. The comp any was
making a quarter -million dollars of revenue per month, but losing
$15,000 per month. If the bleeding didn’ t stop, I’d have to start laying
of f some of our eighteen employees.
The gam e had become a grind. It was definitely one of those d ips we
talked about in Chapter 1 . Bu t something really beautiful was about to
happen. I just didn’ t know it yet. It would cause a major shi ft in my
models of reality . It would spark me to adopt new systems of living for
my l ife and work. And the result would be so powerful that in just eight
months, I would grow the comp any beyond my wildest imaginings and
forever change my own life.
--- Page 191 ---
What Happened Next
What ex actly sh ifted in me? I’ll get to that in a minute. First, he re’ s what
happened in just eight months after the shift.
THE BUSINESS EXPLODED.  From being on the ver ge of laying people
of f, we grew 400 percent in re venue in just eight months. W e’d
never experienc ed growth like this. In May 2008, we did $250,000
in sales.  Eight months later , by  December of the same year . we’d
had our first million-dollar month.
WORK BECAME FUN.  I  no lon ger felt suf focated by the pressure or the
grind.
WE STARTED GETTING DREAM CLIENTS.  N o more worki ng the phones
and haggling. Often clients cam e to us. Part of my role beca me
learning to say no.
WE GOT AN AMAZING TEAM.  In a year , we  grew from ei ghteen
employees to fifty .
But the best was yet to come. By  May 2009, just one year after almost
going bust, my life had completely transformed. That was a month I’ll
never for get. I spent just six days in the of fice and twenty-one days on
beaches around  the world. I attended a friend’ s wedding in Cabo,
Mexico. I spent nine days with T ony Robbins in his resort in Fij i. I got to
spend several days with Richard Branson and others on his private
island, Necker—a dream com e true for me. While all of this was
happening, our company had its best-ever month and a new single-day
sales record. I w as at T ony Robbins’ s private villa in Fiji with T ony and
his wife when I got the news on  my phone. I had an incredible business.
A w ife and a family . An amazing life. And for the first time, I  loved it
all.
Magic seemed to be happening  all around. My wildest dream s were
coming true. It was as if I had been blessed with sudden luck. So, what
was the insight that caused my  life to shift so rapidly in suc h a short
time?
--- Page 192 ---
BENDING REALITY FOR FUN AND PROFIT
If yo u’ve been reading the pre vious chapters and doing the e xercises,
you probably have a pretty good idea of the way we humans tend to live
in our heads according to “truths” that we absorbed from the
culturescape. Y ou’ve identified important Brules that have been limiting
your life , and you’ve started applying the principles of consc iousness
engineering to detect the models of reality and systems for living that
may be holding you back. Th us, you’ve adopted a new an d robust
framework for personal growth.
But there’ s more to come. As you start playing with consciousness
engineering and  experimenting with new ways of thinking an d living,
life starts to feel more spacious and exciting. Y ou become ready to do
more, be  more, and really thrive as a human being. Having mas tered the
art of liberating yourself from the culturescape, you’re ready for a new
level of mastery : mastery of yo ur own inner self. Y ou’re now  ready to
recode y ourself into a new type of human being and to make your own
dent in the universe.
But you ’re not going to do it in any conventional way (culture h ackers
just don ’ t work like that). Instead, you’re going to question and redefine
two of the bigge st pillars of how  we define success—namely , happiness
and the attainment of goals.
Y ou’re going to get both in massive quantities, but not through
struggle and striving. Rather , they’ll come through attaining a b alance—
a delicate balance in your state of being between your levels of happiness
and your vision for your future. I call living in this state “bending
reality” for a reason—I’ve found that when I put myself in this state, it
almost seems as if the universe has my back and luck seems to be on my
side. It’ s as if I c an bend reality to make my days perfect and my visions
unfold a t spectacular speed. This was the state I entered in the summer of
2008 when my life and business started expanding at a massive rate.
Like a good en gineer , I decided to try to decode this state so I could
replicate it in myself and others.
--- Page 193 ---
IT’S ALL HAPPENING IN YOUR MIND
In the spring of  2008, as my business was struggling, I decided to stop
what I was doi ng and take a break from the countless start-up and
marketing strategies I was studying about and working long hours to
implement. Instead, I decided to pour myself into personal growth.
I knew somethin g was of f. I just did not know what. But I knew it was
something internal. I studied countless books and attended a number of
seminars. Books by Bob Proctor and Neale Donald W alsch and seminars
by T . Harv Eker and Esther Hicks gave me deep insights—the biggest of
which was the idea that our beliefs shape our world.
I k new this inte llectually , but I could not seem to make it work in a
powerful way . And so I kept beating my head against a wall trying to
make my business survive and  thrive. I watched as our bank savings
dwindled, and the threat of layof fs loomed ever lar ger . I came to work
trying to act confident in front of my staf f, but deep inside I felt like a
failure.
I c an’ t remember when the key insight came to me, but when it did, it
was prof ound. And it went like this: Stop postponing your happiness. Be
happy n ow . Y our thoughts and beliefs do cr eate your r eality , but only
when your pr esent state is joyful.  I realized I was running on empty and
the fuel I desperately needed was happiness. I did have much to be happy
about, but I was so obsessed and stressed out about meeting our revenue
goals that my dominant thoughts were fear and anxiety .
I tho ught back to  the early years  when I would celebrate making  $4.50
a day by buying myself a Starbucks cof fee. It seemed so simple back
then—I was grateful for every small win—and I realized ther e was no
reason I  couldn’ t adopt that sa me model of reality now . Keep the big
goals—just don’ t tie your happiness to your goals. Be happy now .
I dec ided to change my game and my mind-set. I set new goals  to get
us out of the revenue slump, but I also decided to make fun and
happiness a key part of my day . I was not going to postp one my
happiness until I attained some future goal.
As I started hack ing my life and  work in this way , the needle started to
move. I wrote d own my tar get f or June: to hit $300K in revenue. W e hit
it. I took my entire team to a beach holiday to celebrate and h ave fun.
There we set a new tar get: $500K for the month. I still have on my wall
today a picture of my team from 2008 holding up a sign on the beach
--- Page 194 ---
with that goal on it. W e pushed hard—but we did it while  hav ing a blast.
W e hit $500K by October . Then we set a new goal: $1 million.
I don’ t know ho w it happened. B ut we crossed the million-dollar mark
that December . From May 2008 to December 2008 we had grown our
monthly revenue  from $250K to  $1 million in a mere eight mon ths. And
I was having fun and the ride of my life all along.
It all started with that shift in my mental model:
--- Page 195 ---
H a v e  b i g  g o a l s — b u t  d o n ’ t  t i e  y o u r  h a p p i n e s s  t o
y o u r  g o a l s .  Y o u  m u s t  b e  h a p p y  b e f o r e  y o u  a t t a i n
t h e m .
I’ve sinc e formulated this model into the philosophy I call bending
reality . Bending  reality is so named because when you’re ope rating in
this state , you tend to have a fee ling that everything in life is bending in
your dir ection, that you are ef fortlessly making things happen—and that
anything is possible.
And so it’ s a subtle balance:
1. Y ou have a bold vision for the future pulling you forward.
2. Y et . . . you’re happy in the NOW .
But here ’ s the key: BOTH of t hese stem from the present. As  Paulo
Coelho said in The Alchemist:
Because I don’ t live in either my  past or my future. I’m interested
only in the present. If you can concentrate always on the pres ent,
you’ll be a happy man.
There’ s no point dwelling in the past and letting it define you,  nor in
getting l ost in anxiety about the future. In the present moment, you’re in
the f ield of possibility . How yo u engage with the present mom ent will
direct your life.
When you’re bending reality , your vision is continuously pulling you
forward—but it doesn’ t feel like work. It feels like a game, a game you
love to play . But at the same ti me, your happiness does not se em to be
tied to that future vision. Y ou’re feeling elated and happy right now , in
this mom ent. Y ou’re happy as you pursue your vision, not only when
you attain it. Y ou’re thus grounded in the present.
Are you ready to try out th is new model? Here’ s what I now
understand about how it works.
--- Page 196 ---
THE FOUR STATES OF HUMAN LIVING
Think of happiness in the now and vision for the future as two
ingredients that can be combin ed, but that have to be in bala nce. T oo
much of one or the other creates imbalance and limitation. Depending on
how they’re combined, at any m oment in life, we can be in on e of four
dif ferent states of mind. This napkin drawing will help you see it.
1.THE NEGA TIVE SPIRAL.  In this state, you’re not happy in the now , nor
do you have a vision of your future. W ith little to enjoy or look
forward to, this is a painful place to be, and certainly not one
where you want to spend any significant amount of time. Often
when in this state you’re feeling depressed.
2.THE CURRENT REALITY TRAP .  This state feels great because you’re
happy in the now . There’ s nothing wrong with being in this state
now and then—for example, when you’re having an amazing
experience or are on vacation. But remember , happiness alone can
be fleeting. Y ou can get happy from smoking a joint. But long-
--- Page 197 ---
term happiness and fulfillment come from something more—the
need to contribute, grow , and do meaningful things. While this
state may bring you temporary happiness, it won’ t bring you long-
term fulfillment.
3.STRESS AND ANXIETY .  This is the state I was in during the years I
struggled to build my business. A lot of entrepreneurs are in this
state, as are a lot of career -driven people. In this state, you may
have big goals, but you’ve tied your happiness to those goals.
Y ou’re waiting to sign the next big deal, move into that new of fice,
hit that next revenue milestone—before you celebrate. It’ s great to
think big and to want to accomplish amazing things, but it’ s not an
optimal state if you’re postponing your happiness along the way . If
you’re working hard but aren’ t making progress or if you feel you
have a lot to of fer but aren’ t getting where you want to go, you
may be stuck in this state.
4.BENDING REALITY .  This is the ideal state where you’re happy in the
now , and you have a vision for the future that drives you. Y our
vision pulls you forward, but you’re happy now—despite not
having yet attained that vision. When you’re in this state, there’ s a
feeling of growth and enjoyment. It’ s about the journey as well as
the destination. An interesting observation about this state is that it
often seems as if the universe “has your back.” Call it what you
want—but it starts to feel as if you’re lucky . The right
opportunities, ideas, and people seem to gravitate to you. It’ s as if
your happiness is rocket fuel moving you toward your vision.
--- Page 198 ---
THE TWO ELEMENTS OF BENDING
REALITY
Now that you have a sense of where bending reality falls on the spectrum
of life, let’ s take  a closer look at the two key elements that m ust be in
play in order to get there.
--- Page 199 ---
1. Be happy in the now.
A k ey ingredient of this state is that your happiness is not tied to
attaining your vision. It comes from the pursuit of your vision, c ombined
with a sense of gratitude for what you alr eady  have.
That wa y , you don’ t have to wait for happiness. It’ s just the natu ral by-
product of pursuing your vision. Y ou feel a deep sense of fu lfillment.
And you  feel insanely motivated to keep moving forward. Y our work
becomes like a craving. Y ou c an work twelve hours straight, and you
might feel tired, but you won’ t burn out. All the truly great people I
know ha ve this beautiful happiness associated with pursuing their goals.
Indeed, I think it’ s the only way to truly attain your goals—to be happy
as you make the long, sometimes dif ficult climb toward great visions.
On Necker Island, as we wer e masterminding with Branson and
getting life lessons from him, someone from my group asked him,
“Y ou’re always happy . What do you do when you’re sad?”
Branson replied , “I can’ t remember the bad times. I only remember
the good things that happened in my life.”
That wa s certainly one thing I noticed about hanging out with him:
He’ s always about having fun . He has huge goals. He’ s one of the
biggest thinkers I’ve ever met, yet he’ s perpetually in play .
And it’ s not just Branson. Go ba ck a hundred years and there’ s another
influential titan of his time who penned this little poem:
I was early taught to work as well as play ,
My life has been one long, happy holiday;
Full of work and full of play—
I dr opped the worry on the way—
And God was good to me every day .
That tita n was John D. Rockefeller , who wrote the poem at age eighty-
six. Dur ing his time he was one of the richest men in th e world.
Rockefeller speaks so simply and clearly here about dropping worry and
about mer ging work and play into a life that is “one long, happy
holiday .” And where he says God was good to him, others migh t replace
that with “luck” or “fortune” or “the universe.”
So, no matter where you are in your life today , you must remember
this lesson: Y our happiness cannot be tied to your goals. Y ou must be
--- Page 200 ---
happy e ven befo re you attain th em. Doing so will make life joyous and
full of play and bring your goals to you faster than ever .
--- Page 201 ---
G e t t i n g  T h e r e :  I n s i g h t s  f o r  H a c k i n g  H a p p i n e s s
W e mak e it hard for ourselves to achieve happiness because we’ve been
trained t o think about it in the w rong way . Many of us have fallen into
the trap of the “if/then” model of happiness: If X happens (if I get the
right job, find the perfect mate, buy that dr eam house, have a ba by , write
a bestselling book, etc., then I’ll be happy .
T o me, that’ s a flawed model in two ways:
1.IT PUTS HAPPINESS OUTSIDE OF OUR OWN POWER.  It gives it to a job,
another person, a house, a baby , or a book, among other things—
and how crazy is that?
2.WHEN WE’RE HAPPY , WE PERFORM BETTER, A TTRACT OTHERS, AND IN
GENERAL KICK ASS IN LIFE.  I got stuck in stress and anxiety because
I had hitched my happiness bandwagon to the future success of my
business. So when the business went into crisis, I went into crisis,
which put me in the totally wrong mind-set to get the business out
of crisis, which threw me into a deeper crisis, which became a
swirling spiral of unhappy crises. I have seen this happen to many
successful people.
--- Page 202 ---
W e  s h o u l d n ’ t  d o  t h i n g s  s o  w e  c a n  b e  h a p p y .  W e
s h o u l d  b e  h a p p y  s o  w e  c a n  d o  t h i n g s .
Y our happiness will accelerate y our movement toward your goals, but
it should  not be tied to them. The best thing you can do to m eet your
goals is to find a  life balance that allows you to be happy now . Integrate
practices into your daily routines that allow you to feel content and focus
on the journey , not the destination. That’ s how you’ll break free of stress
and anxiety and be in the bes t position to fulfill your visio n. W e’ll
explore such practices in the next chapter .
--- Page 203 ---
2. Develop an exciting vision for your future.
I’ve obs erved th at almost all of the extraordinary people I’ve me t or read
about have one thing in commo n: They have a vision for their future. It
may be a new piece of art to create, a service or product to bring to the
world, a mountain to climb, or a family to raise.
These people live in the future in some way . Conventional spiritual
growth a dvocates talk about the need to be “present.” I believe t hat being
present i s only part of the story . Happiness in the now grounds y ou in the
present. But you need bold dreams pulling you forward, too.
Extraordinary people intend to leave a mark on the world.
Now , a word of warning. Y ou ne ed to make sure that your goals aren’ t
Brule-based, or you might end up chasing something that feels
meaningless onc e you acquire it —as happened to me when I got my first
big gig at Microsoft—or as ha ppens to countless entrepreneu rs when
they build a business with the goal of earning a living, onl y to feel
trapped in the usual nine-to-five when they achieve their goal.
Instead, you want a vision for the future that speaks to your soul. This
vision is typically what we call an end goal—which you’ll learn how to
set for yourself in Chapter 8  u sing a proces s called the Th ree Most
Important Questions.
--- Page 204 ---
G e t t i n g  T h e r e :  I n s i g h t s  f o r  H a c k i n g  V i s i o n
I’ve lost count o f the number of  books I’ve read that give instructions on
goal setting, from growing a bu siness to simply getting or ganized. But
just as we’ve be en trained to thi nk about happiness in a limiting  way , so
modern goal setting leads us astray . It happens in three ways:
1.WE CONFUSE BRULES WITH GOALS.  When we set a goal that we must
have a certain kind of job, a certain kind of lifestyle, or a certain
kind of appearance, often these are Brules installed by society .
Extraordinary minds pay little attention to the infectious “wants”
of the culturescape. Instead, they create their own goals.
2.WE CAN ONL Y VISUALIZE WHA T WE KNOW .  While there’ s nothing
wrong with visualizing and pursuing what we think will make us
happy , we can really only visualize what we already know . What if
there are even more wonderful visions and goals you could attain
—gifts that only you can give the world—if only those unseen,
unknown visions could be brought to the surface? W e’ll explore
this in Part IV  of the book.
3.WE’RE NOT ORIOUSL Y BAD A T PREDICTING JUST WHA T WE CAN DO IN A
GIVEN TIME FRAME.  W e tend to a) bite of f way more than we can
chew in the short term, and b) not expect nearly enough of
ourselves in the long term. Both tendencies work against
successful visioneering. W e tend to overestimate what we can do
in one year and underestimate what we can do in three years.
In th e ne xt two chapters, we’ll dive deeper into the practice of creating
happiness in the now and the art of establishing beautiful visions for your
future. But for now , this brings us to Law 6.
--- Page 205 ---
Law 6: Bend reality.
Extraordinary minds  are able to bend reality . They have bold and exciting visions for
the future, yet their happiness is not tied to these visions. They are happy  in the
now. This balance allows them to move toward their visions at a much faster rate
while having a ton of fun along the way . To outsiders, they seem “lucky .”
--- Page 206 ---
E x e r c i s e :  T h e  E i g h t  S t a t e m e n t s
The sim ple set of eight statements below will help you gauge w here you
are on the path to bending reality . Indicate how true each statem ent is for
you by selecting  one of the choices of fered. There are no right or wrong
answers. If you’re still in the starting gate, no worries. W e’ll be talking
more about how to get there.
1. I love my current job to the point where it does not feel like work.
NOT A T ALL TRUE SOMETIMES TRUE VERY TRUE
2. My work is meaningful to me.
NOT A T ALL TRUE SOMETIMES TRUE VERY TRUE
3. There ar e often moments at work that make me so happy the time just
flies by .
NOT A T ALL TRUE SOMETIMES TRUE VERY TRUE
4. When th ings go  wrong, I don’ t  worry at all. I just know som ething
good is on the horizon.
NOT A T ALL TRUE SOMETIMES TRUE VERY TRUE
5. I fee l excited ab out my future, knowing even better things are a lways
on their way .
NOT A T ALL TRUE SOMETIMES TRUE VERY TRUE
6. Stress an d anxiety don’ t seem to  faze me much. I trust in my ability to
attain my goals.
NOT A T ALL TRUE SOMETIMES TRUE VERY TRUE
7. I loo k forward t o the future bec ause I have unique and bold goals on
the horizon.
NOT A T ALL TRUE SOMETIMES TRUE VERY TRUE
8. I spend a good amount of time thinking excitedly about my visions for
the future.
NOT A T ALL TRUE SOMETIMES TRUE VERY TRUE
If you answer ed “V ery true” to statements 1 thr ough 4, you ar e likely happy in the now .
If you answer ed “V ery true” to statements  5 thr ough 8, you likely have a good vision for your
futur e.
If you can answer “V ery true” for all eight statements, you’r e likely in the state of bending
r eality .
Most people, however , find that they tend to be able to answer “V ery true” to either the
happiness-r elated statements or to the vision-r elated questions, but not to both.
--- Page 207 ---
HOW BENDING REALITY FEELS
Bending reality feels almost magical. Everything seems to “click.”
Y ou’re w orking, but it doesn’ t feel like work because you love what
you’re d oing. When I’m in this  state, I almost feel as if work  doesn’ t
exist. Plus, intuition and insights seem to come easily , out of the blue.
Maybe t his is because your mind is focused so intensely on yo ur vision
that you’re alert to everything t hat will help achieve it and you’re in a
happy , joyous state that opens you up to creativity . Sometimes  it seems
as i f the right people, coincidences, and opportunities come  to you,
nudging and pushing you towar d your goals. Is this the mystical law of
attraction? Or is it what’ s known as the brain’ s reticular activating
system? T o me it doesn’ t matter . It’ s a model of reality that serves me
well.
--- Page 208 ---
I f  y o u  c a n  c h o o s e  a n y  m o d e l  o f  r e a l i t y  y o u  w a n t
a n d  a c c e p t  i t  a s  t r u e — w h y  n o t  c h o o s e  a  m o d e l  t h a t
s u g g e s t s  t h a t  y o u  c a n  l i t e r a l l y  b e n d  r e a l i t y  t o  y o u r
w i s h e s ?
For all of these reasons, I call this the ultimate state of human
existence. From a purely practical standpoint, I also believe it’ s the
ultimate product ivity hack. When you’re in this state, it feels as if you’re
bending reality to accelerate y ourself toward the visions you have in
your mind, visions that come to you easily and without anxiety .
Almost everyone has experien ced this sensation at one time or
another , but the trick is staying in this ultimate state for lo nger and
longer periods. The most extraordinary people know how to do this.
It’ s actually a discipline you can learn and practice. I call it Blissipline.
And it’ s coming up next.
I firs t pr esented these ideas on b ending reality at a speech in Calgary ,
Alberta, in 2009, when I shared the stage with His Holiness the Dalai
Lama. M y spee ch included the story in this chapter and expanded it to
applications within businesses and teams. Back then, I descri bed it as
“being i n flow .”  I have since changed the terminology as I have become
better at  the practice through the years. As you yourself master it, you
will begin to see that it is not only your own “flow” you can mold but
rather the full sp ectrum of the w orld around you. Y ou can watch that full
speech on www .mindvalley .com/extraordinary .
