--- Page 276 ---
CHAPTER 9
BE UNFUCKWITHABLE
Where We Learn How to Be Fear-Proof
Train yourself to let go of everything you fear to lose.
—YODA, ST AR W ARS: EPISODE III - REVENGE OF THE SITH
--- Page 277 ---
HOW TO BE A SPIRITUAL BADASS
There is  a great myth in spirituality today: that in order to be spiritual,
we must resign ourselves from the world. In other words, to be spiritual,
one must avoid big goals, ambitions, and wealth.
Rubbish. I believe the most sp iritual people in the world tod ay are
those who are doing things to push the human race forward. T o be
extraordinary is to be connected  to this spiritual aspect of yourself and to
feel it move you to create, change, invent, and rattle the world.
Ken W ilber , perhaps the greatest living philosopher in the world today ,
wrote a beautiful essay on this subject called “Egolessness.”
In it, he says:
The typical person wants the spiritual sage to be less than a
person, somehow  devoid of all the messy , juicy , complex, pulsating,
desiring, ur ging forces that drive most human beings. . . . W e want
our sage s to be untouched by them altogether . And that absence,
that vacancy , that “less than personal” is what we often mean by
“egoless.”
But egoless does not mean “les s than personal”; it means “mor e
than personal.” Not personal minus, but personal PLUS—all the
normal personal qualities plus some transpersonal ones. Think of
the great yogis, saints, and sages, from Moses to Christ to
Padmasambhava. They were no t feeble-mannered milquetoasts but
fierce movers and shakers—from bullwhips in the temple to
subduing entire countries. They  rattled the world on its own te rms,
not in some pie-in-the-sky piety; many of them instigated massive
social revolutions that have continued for thousands of years.
And th ey did so, not because they avoided the physica l,
emotional, and mental dimensio ns of humanness, and the ego that is
their vehicle, but because they  engaged them with a drive and
intensity that shook the world to its very foundations.
Ken W i lber ’ s profound words helped me resolve some of my own
inner conflicts on being spiritu al. I think there are many ways to be
spiritual, and one of them is to be spirited—filled with forward -looking
ener gy a nd the courage to challenge the status quo, like the s cientists,
entrepreneurs, and titans who are working on projects to push humanity
forward. What could be more uplifting than that? W e don’ t  have to
--- Page 278 ---
choose between Buddha or badass. The idea is to be both. Indeed,
sometimes the only way to be ef fective at one is to master the other .
--- Page 279 ---
BUDDHA OR BADASS?
There is a scene  in Star W ars  where Y oda sits an angry teenage Anakin
Skywalker down  and tells him, “The fear of loss is a path to the Dark
Side. . . . T rain yourself to let go of everything you fear to lose.” But to
Anakin this advice seems dif ficult. Not only does he remain attached to
his fear of losing his wife, but his fear grows to be the driving  force in
his life— eventually turning him  into Darth V ader . That scene has been
much de bated on  the Internet: H ow could Y oda expect Anakin to  not fear
the loss of loved ones? It’ s human after all.
Here is what I believe Y oda was saying.
T o truly be a great warrior in the world, you must step past your fears.
It’ s inev itable that we get attache d to people, to our goals, and fe ar losing
them—but a true Jedi knows th at attachments to people and goals can
hinder us. It is possible to move toward a goal or to be madly in love
with someone— without attachment. Often what we really fear is not
losing th e other  but losing that  part of ourselves that this someone or
something make s us feel. This happens when we attach our sense of self-
worth and happiness to someone or something outside of ourselves.
Go ahead and lo ve well. W ork hard toward a goal, but know tha t when
you make your feelings of love  and fulfillment come from an internal
reservoir and not from the other person or the goal, you become much
stronger . In fact, you may discover that you can love better and pursue
your goals with much more ease. But it starts with a feeling within.
Before we come to finding you r own particular quest—that aspect of
the world that you can “ rattle”—you first need to find your “badassery .”
This idea comes from my experiences at 40 Y ears of Zen, the
biofeedback cou rse where I discovered deep inner peace and cla rity after
working intensively on for giv eness. That feeling was one of being
unfuckwithable. I don’ t know the origin of that word. It started to appear
in 2015 on the Internet in the form of an image accompanied by this text:
--- Page 280 ---
U n f u c k w i t h a b l e :  A  D e f i n i t i o n
When you’re truly at peace and in touch with yourself. Nothing anyone says or does bothers
you and no negativity can touch you.
Sounds good, right?
The question is: How do we get there?
There are two m odels of reality that can help you get to this stage. Not
only do they make you feel mor e grounded in terms of who you are but
they also give you immense control over your state of mind and feelings.
--- Page 281 ---
Law 9: Be unfuckwithable.
Extraordinary minds  do not need to seek validation from outside opinion or through
the attainment of goals. Instead, they are truly at peace with themselves and the
world around them. They live fearlessly—immune to criticism or praise and fueled
by their own inner happiness and self-love.
--- Page 282 ---
THE FIRST COMPONENT OF BEING
UNFUCKWITHABLE: SELF-FUELED GOALS
What happens when you go as far as you can with end goals, when you
keep asking the “so” question, as we discussed in Chapter 8 , until you
get to a genuine feeling you c rave to consistently feel? My epiphany
about this came in the middle of the desert in August 2014.
I was at Burning Man, the famous annual art festival in Black Rock
City , Nevada, where people from all over the world come together in the
desert a nd create a city from scratch. Thousands of structure s and art
installations are erected—a carnival of creativity , ingenuity , and culture
to as tonish the m ind and senses—all burned or dismantled at the end as
the hord es depart. More than 75,000 burners, as festivalgoers call
themselves, atte nded the 2014 event. Many see it as a deeply  spiritual
experience.
Each Burning Man has a unique  installation called the temple n ear the
center o f the festival. That year , it was a beautiful domed str ucture of
wood pa nels cut in floral and nature patterns. Thousands medi tated and
prayed there daily . As night fell and the heat ebbed, a breeze sifted
across the desert. I pedaled along the dusty , hard-packed ear th as I’d
done every night since arriving, headed for the temple where I’d sit on
the soft playa sand and meditate among hundreds of burners.
The temple is filled with incredible, indescribable ener gy . Since the
temple i s a temporary structure, every available surface is covered with
handwritten notes expressing w ishes, dreams, and odes to friends and
family , dead or alive. The place  vibrates with the concentrated power of
human thought and emotion.
I went to the temple to reflect on my goals and my life. One night, as I
sat in meditation, an insight hit me that would fundamentally change the
way I selected end goals:
--- Page 283 ---
A  g o o d  e n d  g o a l  i s  s o m e t h i n g  y o u  h a v e  a b s o l u t e
c o n t r o l  o v e r .  N o  o b j e c t  o r  p e r s o n  c a n  t a k e  i t  a w a y
f r o m  y o u .
I no w ca ll goals  like this self-fue led end goals. For example, let ’ s look
at end goals for  a fictional char acter named V anessa, newly married to
Dan. V anessa might write down this goal:
“T o be madly in love with Dan.”
Is this an end goal? It might seem so—but it’ s not. Why? Becau se the
attainment of this goal is lar gely dependent on someone else. What if she
and Dan fall out of love?
A better end goal for V anessa might be this:
“T o be consistently surrounded by love.”
The bea uty of this end goal is th at V anessa controls it. It is thus “self-
fueled.” If she and Dan hav e a long, healthy marriage, this goal
manifests. But even if the marriage doesn’ t work out, V anessa can still be
surrounded by love—from frien ds, family , a new partner—or best of all,
from her own love for herself.
Setting expansive and truly powerful end goals like these is simple.
And goals like these are lar gely within our control.
At Burn ing Man, I realized tha t when it came to love, the be st end
goal I could write for myself wa s not “T o be in a loving relation ship with
Kristina” or “T o be close to my children,” but rather: “T o be con sistently
surrounded by love.”
This goal freed me from having to depend on others for love or to
require it from them. I love my kids and my wife, but I cannot demand
that they love m e back, and s etting goals for myself that ar e lar gely
dependent on someone else leaves me powerless. This is true for
everyone. W e should not be at tached to receiving love from someone
else.
A simila r idea can be applied to our relationship with our ch ildren.
“Having a close, loving relation ship with my kids” sounds like  a proper
end goal, but what if our kids decide at a certain age to move far away or
they don’ t need our closeness anymore? So I changed my family life
goal fro m “T o be close to my children” to: “T o be the best father I can
be.” Bec ause tha t IS in my control, and it encourages me to pay attention
to what my kids need from me on an ongoing and ever -changing basis.
--- Page 284 ---
When I shifted these goals, my mind’ s guidance system kicked in,
pulling me into opportunities  and situations to attain them. My
relationships improved significantly . Neediness on my end stopped. I
began to love and appreciate my own self at a level I never had before.
Doing so  freed me to be more loving and appreciative of others because,
empowered by my own self-lo ve, I stopped unfairly demanding love
from others.
After m uch contemplation, I adjusted my goal about travel and
adventure (did I really wan t to experience bungee jumping or was I just
conforming to a trend?) and replaced it with: “I will always have the
most amazing and beautiful human experiences.”
See, I can control what I defin e as an amazing human experie nce. I
can be in my ni neties and unable to use my body with the sam e ease as
now , but I can still have amazing human experiences, which might be
holding my great-grandchild in  my arms or enjoying a glass of fine
whiskey with my wife.
W ith tha t new goal, I made a de cision to take my family on a s pecial
holiday each year to experience an amazing part of the world. W e’ve
since tra veled to Edinbur gh, Scotland, and to New Zealand and had
incredible experiences. But even if I can’ t travel or decide I don’ t want to
anymore, with this expanded goal I can still have the most beautiful
human e xperiences simply bein g at home, playing with my daughter or
building the latest Lego Star W ars toy with my son. Recently I found
myself incredibly happy just sitting on my sofa drinking a wonderful red
wine I had disc overed and eating the most delicious chocolate (Royce
Rum Raisin, if you must know) while watching The Daily Show  on
Comedy Central. It is  that simple.
The thir d self-fu eled end goal I  now have is: “I am always le arning
and grow ing.” F or a long time  I’d had specific learning goals  such as
“Read a book a week.” And there’ s nothing wrong with goals like that.
But for me it ha d become stressful: Between managing a company with
hundreds of employees and hav ing two kids, I was finding less time to
read. Sit ting in the temple, I had an intuitive hit that it was time to reboot
my learning goals.
It tu rned out that for me, reading a book a week had become a means
goal. What I really wanted was to gain knowledge.
Once I expande d my goal, I got into experimenting with alter native
ways of learning , such as maste rmind groups, online courses, and “brain
exchanges,” wh ere I’d get on a sixty-minute call with a friend who was
an expert on a topic and we’d share notes on our best practices.
--- Page 285 ---
When your goals change, your means of attainment change. A good
goal can open up new and innovative ways of reaching it.
--- Page 286 ---
THE ULTIMATE BEAUTY OF SELF-FUELED
END GOALS
Below are the three expanded en d goals that I currently live by . Can you
see what they all have in common?
1. I will always be surrounded by love.
2. I will always have the most amazing and beautiful human
experiences.
3. I will always be learning and growing.
They are all directly within my own power . No one  c an take these
away fro m me. This means no failure can stunt me. I could be homeless
and alone, sleeping on the streets of New Y ork City—but I can still be
surrounded by love because my  love comes from within. I can learn and
grow as long as  I can find an o ld newspaper or a thrown-away book to
read. I can even have beautiful h uman experiences because I can see the
joy in everyday life, even just walking through Central Park.
When y ou identify self-fueled end goals that put them within your
power—you will have nothing to lose. Not love. Not learning. Not
beautiful human  experiences. Y ou will be free to live life on your own
terms an d to explore opportunities that might once have seeme d out of
reach or inconceivable. T oo ma ny people stay stunted in thei r growth
because of fear of loss—but when you go deep enough with this
exercise, you realize that there is  no loss. Happiness is completely within
your con trol, and when you have  nothing to lose, you’re free to t hink and
dream boldly .
Replacing fear with courage is one of the key components of  being
unfuckwithable. Most people live their lives consistently bothered and
worried about not being loved en ough, about not succeeding fast enough,
not being significant, not being  impressive, losing the things t hat make
us happy . But w hen you let go of the Brules that lead you to th e wrong
priorities, look beyond your means goals and create self-fueled end
goals, you’ve ef fectively bother -proofed yourself. Y ou stop worrying
about w hat others will think of you or might take from you, and  you free
yourself to dream big and be creative in other areas of your life.
When yo u becom e unfuckwitha ble, it doesn’ t mean you’re settl ing for
small go als. Instead, it means you’ve stopped setting goals for things you
--- Page 287 ---
think  y ou need to ge t from other p eople. These days, I have mas sive
visions based on my Three M ost Important Questions. My goals for
Mindvalley are to create a school for humanity—to get a billion people
onto a single ed ucation platform where adults and children can access
the education they truly need to get to a point where they can truly be
extraordinary—not just the ind ustrial-age education that we currently
get. It’ s a big goal, and I work long days to ma ke it happen—but I feel
peaceful where I am now simply because my happiness is not ju st tied to
building a billion-dollar education company . That certainly fuel s me and
excites m e—but my happiness itself comes from those three simple end
goals that I have  daily control over and that no one and no circumstance
can take away from me.
My happiness in the now fuels my vision for the future, and that vision
fuels my  happin ess, because a k ey part of it (love, learning, and human
experiences) is already happening. It all connects.
I b elieve  this is what the ancie nt Zen masters (and Y oda) me ant by
nonattachment t o goals. They didn’ t mean “do not have goal s.” Have
goals. But your happiness shou ld not be attached to the completion of
your goals. The feeling you get from completing those goals  you can
learn to generate  now . Wh en you real ize this, the fear  of loss disappears.
Y ou can  explore  every facet of your dreams. Be bold. Act fearlessly . And
be happy—now .
--- Page 288 ---
THE SECOND COMPONENT OF BEING
UNFUCKWITHABLE: REALIZING YOU ARE
ENOUGH
In Chapter 4  I intro duced you to Marisa Peer , the famous British
hypnotherapist a nd the work she did with me to help me see how my
childhood insecu rities were af fecting my achievement and goal setting in
my adult life.
It’ s near ly impossible to go through childhood without some sit uation
or person infecting you with the belief that you are not enough. Marisa
Peer , in her mu ch-watched A-F est speech, calls the mental models we
carry around that say we are no t enough the “Biggest Disease A f fecting
Humanity .”
Because the model of reality that we are not enough is terribly painful,
we l ive our live s trying to prove  that we’re enough. Sometimes this can
be a n asset; for example, my drive to prove I was enough led  me to a
certain degree of entrepreneurial success.
But it’ s not the optimal path, because working to disprove the model
of n ot b eing enough has a hidden cost. That cost is that you will depend
on others for validation.
Y ou may come h ome from work and expect to be greeted or treated in
a certain way by your spouse. If this does not happen, you feel out of
sorts or rejected.
Y ou ma y expec t to be praised, noticed, or have your ideas heard by
your boss or a superior at work. If that doesn’ t happen, you de cide you
are not appreciated, not respected, or that your boss is an asshole.
Or m aybe your son or daughter doesn’ t call you enough, or a brother
or sister doesn’ t remember your birthday in the way you expect.  Boom—
the feeling creeps back in.
In all of these situations, chances are you won’ t literally think, “I’m
not e nough.” No, the sneaky thin g about this model is that if yo u have it,
it’ s hard to adm it you have it —or even to realize that it’ s there. So
instead, you bury it and create a model of reality about the person you’re
seeking validation from. Y our brain’ s meaning-making machine goes
into overdrive and you decide:
My husband’ s such an inconsiderate asshole sometimes.
That son of mine really doesn’ t appreciate me.
--- Page 289 ---
My sister doesn’ t care about her family—how awful of her .
My boss is an unappreciative jerk.
This is the most disempowering kind of model to have, because you’re
blaming outside circumstances f or what happens in your life. This model
robs you  of your own ability to c ontrol your life. While you can’ t control
what others do, you can control how you react to others. In order to be
truly unfuckwithable, you need  to lose your need to seek vali dation or
love from  others  and to judge them when you perceive that they are not
giving you what you need.
--- Page 290 ---
FROM HOLE TO WHOLE
When you create meaning arou nd others’ actions or judge oth ers who
don’ t provide what you need, chances are you’re really just
compensating fo r a hole within  yourself that they reminded y ou of. In
every case, the r oot cause of this is a feeling of not being enough. So we
look to others for validation, love, or praise and get hurt when we
observe what we believe is criticism, judgment, or rudeness.
But remember , you’re in control of filling the hole within.
And here’ s the p aradox. When you plug this hole within yourself and
stop dem anding that others fill it for you, you actually improve the
chances of having the kind of great relationships you long for .
There is  nothing more attractive than a person who loves himself or
herself s o deepl y that their posi tive ener gy and love spill over to others
and to the world.
--- Page 291 ---
BECOMING IMMUNE TO OTHERS’
BEHAVIORS, CRITICISM, OR JUDGMENT
Y ou know you h ave a hole to plug when you find yourself feelin g hurt or
creating meaning around someone else’ s action or words.
Y ou can’ t control someone else ’ s behavior toward you, but yo u can
control your own reaction and how your meaning-making machine
construes that behavior . The key  is to override our inner desire to prove
ourselves or our tendency to feel as if we’re not enough without the love
or validation of others.
I had such a moment as a teenager that’ s funny in retrospect, but it was
so p ainful at the time that I still remember it vividly today . The year was
1990. I was fourteen, and V anill a Ice’ s hit song “Ice Ice Baby” w as at the
top of the charts. I loved that song, and like every other co ol kid in
school, I had tried my best to memorize the lyrics.
One day at rece ss, I spotted the  group of cool kids that everyone in
class wanted to hang out with. They were sitting around a desk rapping
“Ice Ice  Baby .” Their baseball caps were on backward, and they were
snapping their fingers, looking as cool as teenagers in the nineties could
look.
When th ey got to a particular verse, I knew this was my cha nce to
prove I was hip . I jumped in and sang the verse. Loudly . W ith  my rap
face on.
But I sang the w rong line. The other kids stopped and stared at me.
Jaws dropped. How dare I fudge the brilliant verses of V anilla Ice? It was
sacrilege. And then the cool girl in the group we were all trying to seek
validation from, said: “Jeez, what a nerd.”
I walked  away with my head do wn. Devastated. A failure. Their lack
of validation tortured me.
T wenty-five years later I still re member that moment. It is incredible
to think that I d erived so much meaning about fitting in from knowing
those lyrics. It makes no sense  to me today (especially given V anilla
Ice’ s mu sical tr ack record), but it did then. If you think back , you’ve
probably experienced this sort  of thing, too. (The funny side-ef fect is that
today I know the entire lyrics of  “Ice Ice Baby” by heart. I’m n ever ever
messing that one up again.)
When you look back at the formative experiences of your life—
whether they are the most painful or the most positive—you’re  likely to
--- Page 292 ---
find your meaning-making machine running on high. Someone’ s words
or actions influenced you in some way , and you created a meaning
around them.
In o rder to be unfuckwithable, we need to be immune to such words
and actions—to  praise as well as to criticism. Every time you give
someone the power to build you  up with praise, you’re also unknowingly
giving that person the power to destroy you with criticism. Therefore,
accept praise and criticism as nothing more than someone else’ s
expressions of their models of reality . They have nothing to do with who
you really are.
Y ou we re born enough. And we should be able to feel secu re and
complete in our own skin w ithout others having to support us.
Fortunately , there are some powerful tools and practices to help.
--- Page 293 ---
EXERCISES FOR BECOMING
UNFUCKWITHABLE
I learned the f ollowing exercises from several remarkable men and
women. These three exercises are systems for living that you can apply
to truly create deep love for yourself, deep appreciation for who you are,
and to center yo urself and remove fear or worry . Combined, these help
make you unfuckwithable.
--- Page 294 ---
E x e r c i s e  1 :  T h e  P e r s o n  i n  t h e  M i r r o r  ( f o r
C r e a t i n g  S e l f - L o v e )
I learne d this exercise from  Kamal Ravikant, a Silicon V alley
entrepreneur and investor . He also shared this with me in a training
session on my Consciousness Engineering Program.
Kamal came out of a major illness and depression when he re alized
that the root of his discontent was a lack of self-love. He tells th e story in
his remarkable little book Love Y ourself Like Y our Life Depends on It.
One of Kamal’ s techniques is fo r you to look at yourself in the mirror
and say the wor ds, “I love you.”  T alking to yourself in the mirror is like
speaking directly to your own soul—especially when you’re gazing at
yourself in the eye. Hav e you noticed how uncomfortable it can be to
really look someone in the eye for an extended period of time? T urns out
it’ s uncomfortable because it brings out feelings of connectedness and
love.
Start by focusing on one eye. Once your gaze is fixed on tha t eye,
repeat to yourself (aloud or silen tly) “I love you.” Do this for a s long or
as short a time that you feel is right.
Kamal s uggests you do this eve ry day . It should be a regular p ractice
like goin g to the gym. T ie it to your habit of brushing your teeth in the
morning. After you put down y our toothbrush, get close and co mfy and
look at yourself in the mirror .
I can vouch for the power of this technique. After Kamal shared it
with me and I started practicing it, I experienced remarkably elevated
feelings of self-love and security . In less than a week I could feel myself
operating in a wholly new way with the people around me.
T o le arn more ab out this technique, you can watch Kamal talk a bout this
model at his 2013 A-Fest speech. The video is available on
www .mindvalley .com/extraordinary .
--- Page 295 ---
E x e r c i s e  2 :  S e l f - G r a t i t u d e  ( f o r  A p p r e c i a t i n g
Y o u r s e l f )
Make it a point to do the “What I Love about Myself” exercise w e talked
about in Chapter 4 . This exercise is a powerful way to shut down the
meaning-making machine. It also helps combat negative c hildhood
indoctrination that might have caused you to feel unworthy .
Simply think about what it is a bout you as a human being that you
love. Is it your sense of humor? Or maybe your taste in book s? (Why ,
thank you.) Did you leave a big  tip for your last waiter? Maybe it’ s your
commitment to daily personal g rowth. Or the fact that you have a good
amount of cash s itting in a bank account. Or maybe it’ s that you ’re broke
—but st ill happ y . Y ou can iden tify qualities that are big or small, but
particularly if your meaning-making machine is working overtime, make
sure you  pinpoint three to five things every day that make you  proud to
be who you are.
I d o this exercis e daily in the morning as I wake up. Go ahea d and
express gratitud e for the events  of your day or the beauty of life—but
make sure you include yoursel f in your inventory of life’ s beauty by
expressing grati tude for all those things that make you so gosh-darned
beautiful as a hu man being. See what a dif ference it will make i n the rest
of your day .
--- Page 296 ---
E x e r c i s e  3 :  B e c o m i n g  P r e s e n t  ( t o  R e m o v e
S u d d e n  F e a r  a n d  A n x i e t y )
Every now and then you might need a quick fix to get back to your
unfuckwithable state when sudd en anxiety creeps in. It happens to me,
too.
It wa s a regular family Sunday in November 2015. Halloween h ad just
ended, a nd I had recently returned from a two-week trip with my wife
and kids  that included a visit to Universal Studios in Orlando , Florida,
attending A-Fest in Costa Rica, and visiting friends in Los Angeles and
Phoenix. It was good to be home, but as I sat in a local restaurant with
my family , I sensed something was of f.
Inside my chest I felt my heart beating unnaturally fast. I felt an
unusual gnawing pain within. It was part fear , part anxiety . Being away
for two weeks h ad its costs. I was returning to work as the C EO of a
growing company , but I was fee ling overwhelmed. Four hundred–plus e-
mails were waiting to be answe red. The manuscript for my new book—
this boo k—was due in two week s. And then there were family errands, a
sleeping baby in a stroller next to me, and an eight-year -old who needed
help eating. I felt unpleasant and overstressed. I felt the weight on my
shoulders of all the things I ought to be doing next .
Suddenly I remembered advic e from my friend, the author Sonia
Choquette: Be pr esent.
I took my attention away from the fears and worries. Instead, I focused
on the leaves of the plant on the  restaurant table before me. I noticed the
subtle veins running through the leaves, observed the sunlight falling on
the green surfaces, and used my fingers to feel the texture and pliability
of the stem. In one minute, I felt as if I had just popped a relaxation pill.
Everything went almost back to normal. This is the power of becoming
focused on the present. It take s your mind of f whatever stress, fear ,
judgment, ange r , or frustration you’re having with the world or the
people i n it—an d it forces you to remember who you are and to be
present in the now .
The nex t time you feel an apparent ur ge to lose your cool, or you feel
judged, insulted, or hurt by a loved one, remember to be present. This
quick mental hack to autocorrect your mental state can instantly  pull you
out of stress and anxiety and return you to happiness in the now .
When I interviewed Arianna Huf fington, she shared a profound tip for
how she gets pr esent-centered. Focus on the rising and falling of your
--- Page 297 ---
breath for ten seconds whenever you feel tense, rushed, or distracted.
Arianna said:
This allows you to become full y present in your life. Y ou know
about the thread that Ariadne gave to Theseus so that he could find
his w ay out of the labyrinth after he killed the Minotaur? The thread
for me is my b reath. Returning  to it during the day , hundreds of
times w hen I get stressed, wh en I get worried, when judgm ents
come up , has been an incredible gift—and it’ s available to all of  us.
There’ s nobody alive who is not breathing.
--- Page 298 ---
THE PARADOX OF BEING
UNFUCKWITHABLE
Shortly after filming Marisa Pe er speaking at an event, Al Ibrahim, our
cameraman, realized he had a question about this matter of being
“enough,” so he asked Marisa about it.
In a nuts hell, his  question was this: If it is true that “I am enoug h” and
if we don’ t need to get valida tion or praise from others, wh at is the
driving force that pushes us to do big things in the world? Wh at would
prevent us from just being ha ppy couch potatoes, doing nothing but
enjoying the present?
Marisa replied:
If yo u sit on the couch all day and do nothing, it is precisel y
because you don’ t think you’re e nough. Y ou’re afraid. Y ou’re afraid
of failur e. Y ou’re afraid of rejec tion. Y ou’re afraid that those things
will be proof positive that you indeed are not enough. So you  do
nothing.
Marisa continued:
But if you beli eve that you’re enough, that’ s when you tak e
action. That’ s when you go out and try something new . That’ s when
you apply for that job you really want. That’ s when you ask for that
raise. Because you’re enough. And even if you fail, you won’ t take
rejection personally because it’ s not you—you ARE enough—so it
must be  your methods or your approach or skill or whatever— and
because you know you’re enough, you know you can then improve
those methods and skills and your approaches and then try again.
I fou nd that to be a beautiful paradox: Knowing we are ENO UGH
gives us  the courage to do MORE, do BETTER, do our BEST . When we
learn to be unfuckwithable, the biggest fears that hold so many back no
longer bother us. W e boldly pursue big dreams and goals.
But we’d be happy even if we lost all our goals and possessions
because our end goals are self- fueled goals—feelings that we desire to
have, such as being surround ed by love, enjoying beautiful human
experiences, or learning and growing.
--- Page 299 ---
When y ou learn how to fill the holes within, and you no longer need
outside validation to know you are enough and when you set end goals
that com e from your deepest feelings about living a meaningful life, you
have graduated  to the next level in recoding yourself and  moving
forward on your path toward th e extraordinary . Y ou’re now armed with
the f ortitude you need to take on  truly massive goals—goals that change
the culturescape itself and create a dent in the universe.
When you become unfuckwitha ble, it makes all the smaller problems
meaningless. Y ou’re no longer bothered about that date who didn’ t text
you bac k, the rising price of ga s, or that naysaying coworker . Y ou have
more ur gent things to worry about.
--- Page 300 ---
T h e  p r o b l e m  w i t h  m o s t  p e o p l e  i s  t h a t  t h e i r
p r o b l e m s  a r e n ’ t  b i g  e n o u g h .
Y ou don’ t get b ogged down by petty problems and by other pe ople’ s
misbehaviors, grudges, and riva lries. Y ou have no time for politicking,
finger -pointing, pot-stirring, backstabbing, bullying, tattling, throwing
under th e bus, and other time  sucks that fill the days of b ored and
unhappy people.
When you’re unfuckwithable, you rise above all of that. In stead,
you’re thinking of far bigger things— of problems to solve that coul d
change the world and help othe rs move forward. Y our goal becomes to
tackle these problems.
W e call  these goals “your quest.” W e’ll explore them in the next
chapter .
Y ou can watch Marisa Peer ’ s excellent speech from A-Fest 2014 on
“The Biggest Disease Af flictin g Humanity: I Am Not Enough.” The
video is available on www .mindvalley .com/extraordinary .
