--- Page 89 ---
CHAPTER 3
PRACTICE CONSCIOUSNESS
ENGINEERING
Where We Learn How to Accelerate Our
Growth by Consciously Choosing What to
Accept or Reject from the Culturescape
If you want to teach people a new way of thinking, don’t bother trying to teach them.
Instead, give them a tool, the use of which will lead to new ways of thinking.
—BUCKMINSTER FULLER
--- Page 90 ---
FROM COMPUTER ENGINEERING TO
CONSCIOUSNESS ENGINEERING
Miserable as I was as a computer engineer , the training did give me one
edge: a way of thinking that tu rns out to be perfect for challenging the
Brules of the culturescape. It’ s called computational thinking.
Computational thinking trains y ou to look at problems from all angles
—to break down problems into processes and parts (decomposition),
spot patterns (pattern recognition), and solve them in a very logical,
linear fashion (algorithms). The goal is to come up not onl y with a
solution but also with one tha t’ s replicable, meaning that anyone—a
man, woman, or child from Ind ia, Malaysia, or North America—could
get t he s ame res ults. Computatio nal thinking makes you highly logical—
and a very goo d problem solver . It’ s what gives programmers and
hackers their edge.
From th e day I b usted the beef B rule at the age of nine, I’ve wan ted to
hack everything  about how I live. W ith my parents’ perm ission to
question, I began looking at ev erything about life from the context of,
“Why do we do this?”
But I never thought I’d be applying it to the human mind.
--- Page 91 ---
FROM BROKE FAILURE TO SUPER
PERFORMER IN TEN MONTHS
T o e xplain how I found the tools  for extraordinary living that yo u’ll learn
about in  this and later chapters , I have to take you back to some lean
years in my life.
I got into personal growth because I was going through a tough period.
In 2001, fresh out of college, I moved to Silicon V alley to launch a start-
up. I was twen ty-five. This was a time before Y -Combinator , 500
Startups, or any of the other d ozen or so programs that fund  aspiring
young engineers and their dot-com dreams. Money , especially for
twenty-five-year -olds, wasn’ t easy to come by . I took what savings I had,
borrowed some money from my dad, and went out to try my luck.
My timing, in a word, sucked. A few months after moving to Silicon
V alley , the dot-com bubble burs t. I remember reading that 14,00 0 people
had been  laid of f in April 2001.  Pink slip parties—where the jo bless go
to ne twork and drink themselves into comfort—became the norm. Broke
and des perate, I sent my ré sumé to every job I could find on
craigslist.or g  but got zero rep lies. Funds were so low I couldn’ t af ford to
rent a room, much less an apartment. So I rented a couch.
And it wasn’ t even a three-seater couch. It was a two-seater , so my
legs dangled of f at night when I went to bed. I was renting it from a
Berkeley colleg e student who was trying to optimize his fin ances by
renting out his least-favorite piece of furniture. On that couch in
Berkeley , and on the radiator be side it, lay my entire life. All my clothes,
my book s, my laptop, and my s hattered dreams. It was humbling to be
living in a college town as a graduate with a computer engineering
degree a nd realiz ing that most o f the college students there were  living in
better conditions than I was.
Finally , one day , after another mind-numbing bout of sending my
résumé t o jobs on craigslist, I go t a reply . It was from a company  looking
for people who would call law firms to sell case management software. It
was a dialing-for -dollars job. An d it was straight commission: If I didn’ t
sell, I didn’ t eat. The economy was so bad that startups could get away
with paying no base salary .
I kn ew nothing about sales and marketing, but it was the only job I
could get, so I took it.
--- Page 92 ---
On m y f irst wee k in the of fice, we were assigned territories to cover .
Mine was San Antonio, T exas.
W ork looked like this: I’d have to go to the San Francisco Public
Library , get a co py of the San Antonio Y ellow Pages, look up la w firms,
and start dialing every attorney from A to Z to find one bored enough to
listen to  my pitch without hangi ng up on me. Since my boss doubted that
any lawyer in T exas would be able to pronounce the name V ishen, I
became Mr . V incent Lakhiani for convenience.
My first few mo nths on the job , I earned around $2,500 a month in
commissions—hardly enough to survive on in the Bay Area.
But it’ s often when we’re feeling down that we end up taking a step
toward our next level of person al growth. Remember the drawing from
Chapter 1  on how  extraor dinary lives are meant to be bumpy? I was in
for another bump that would help me grow and learn.
Bored a nd mildly depressed, I began searching online for classes to
take to help get my mind of f th e drudgery of my job. I can’ t r emember
exactly what I typed into Google—maybe “hope,” maybe “success,” or
maybe “why does life have to suck so bad.” And that’ s when I saw it.
I n oticed  a class on meditation and intuition. It was in Los Angeles
and seem ed interesting, especial ly since the lecturer was in pharma sales
and spok e about how these methods had allowed her to rapidly expand
her sales volume. Sold! I rather impulsively decided to fly down and take
the class . When  I showed up, I was the only student there (m editation
wasn’ t as popular then as it is now). I completed the entire two- day class
in one day and flew back to San Francisco that night.
Immediately I began applying some of the techniques I’d learned, one
of whic h was a simple technique to meditate and get myself into the
alpha st ate of mind. Alpha is  a brain wave frequency common in
meditation where you’re in a r elaxed state. People who advocate this
type of meditation say that alpha puts you highly in tune with your
intuition, your creativity , and your problem-solving abilities. A key part
of what  I had learned was listening to my inner voice or in tuition. I
practiced this when making my phone calls. I stopped calling every
lawyer from A to Z in the Y ello w Pages, as my coworkers were doing.
Instead, I’d go into a relaxed, m editative level of mind, run m y finger
down the listings, and call the o nes where I felt an impulse . The impulse
often felt like guessing, but I heeded it. I realize this makes n o logical
sense. But I disc overed that listening to my impulse somehow caused me
to call lawyers more likely to buy . My closing rate started rising rapidly .
--- Page 93 ---
How much of a change can you expect from studying medita tion? I
certainly didn’ t expect much, o ther than learning to relax and  destress
better . But by th e end of the first week after flying back from L. A., I had
my best-ever sales week. I assumed it was an aberration and that it
wouldn’ t last. But I closed two d eals the next week. And the next. And it
got b etter . A mo nth later , I level ed up to closing three deals. Listening to
my intuition seemed to triple the odds of my calling a receptive lawyer .
Other th ings improved, too. I sta rted feeling happier and more positive
about m y days. My confidence and my rapport with people at work
improved. I credit these to the fact that I was now meditating for about
fifteen to thirty minutes ever y day , listening to my intui tion and
visualizing myself closing deals with ease.
Then I started using another technique I’d learned from another class:
a s imple empathy technique for connecting more ef fectively wit h people.
Before s peaking to a lawyer , I’ d tell myself that I’d be able to  connect
with my  potentia l client at a subconscious level, have empathy for his or
her n eeds, know the right things to say at the right moment, and then—
only if this was a software that would genuinely benefit the lawyer ’ s firm
—close the sale. While in meditation, I would visualize the lawyer in
front of me an d imagine beaming genuine kindness and com passion
toward him or h er . I’d end the three-minute visualization with a mental
af firmation that we’d close the deal if it was in the best interest of all the
parties involved.
Again I saw a m assive boost in my sales. Soon I was closing  more
than anyone in the company . A nd so, twenty-six-years-old and  with no
prior sales experience, I got promoted three times in the n ext four
months and was made director of sales. In September of 2002, just nine
months after I jo ined the company , my boss sent me to New Y ork City to
head up the company’ s New Y ork of fice.
I continued to grow within the company . I also con tinued
experimenting, adjusting, and refining my meditation practice. And with
each ref inement, my abilities at work seemed to grow . Soon I w as doing
the jobs of two people—business development manager (managing the
company’ s advertising spen d on Google AdW ords) and  hea ding the New
Y ork of fice—excelling in both roles. My salary had tripled in a few short
months.
At th e ti me, I couldn’ t explain why all of this success was happening.
I just knew that what I was doing worked.
--- Page 94 ---
COMPUTATIONAL THINKING MEETS
PERSONAL GROWTH
My rapid success in the world  of sales sparked my fascinat ion with
decoding the human mind. I realized that we can improve our
performance in logical ways—by , say , reading a book on sales—and
there’ s nothing wrong with that. But there are also techniques  that can
dramatically accelerate our perfo rmance. The ones I learned changed my
life in just one week.
My computation al thinking training kicked in, big-time. I wanted to
break do wn human behavior—w hich at first glance appears like a huge,
tangled knot of thoughts, actions, responses, emotions, impulses, drives,
cravings, habits,  and God knows what else—and crack the code for how
we humans work.
As I  got  better at meditation and other conscious practices, it sta rted to
bother m e that I’d been the on ly person in that class in Los Angeles.
There w as a lot more to learn. I wanted to teach others what had worked
so aweso mely fo r me. So I quit my software sales job and started a small
e-commerce stor e. I called it Mindvalley . Our first products wer e nothing
more than meditation CDs I s ourced from established publishers. As
Mindvalley grew , I launched as many companies as I could, teaching
people mindfulness, meditation, contemplative practices, how to have
better re lationships, nutrition, he alth, wellness—basically , the kn owledge
that we truly ne ed in order to have richer , healthier , more me aningful
lives—knowledge that our industrial-age education system had failed to
teach us . Soon we were publish ing many of America’ s leading thinkers
in h ealth, wellness and consciousness from Ken W ilber to JJ V ir gin to
Michael Beckwith. I started Mindvalley with nothing more than $700 in
2003. T welve years later , with not a single bank loan and no venture
capital money , the company had  grown to 200 employees and more than
500,000 paying students.
In that time I go t to know at a deep personal level many of Am erica’ s
top mind s in human developme nt. I spent nine days at the inv itation of
author and motivational speak er T ony Robbins on his Fiji estate. I
hooked my brain to electrodes with famed biohacker Dave Asprey to
study dif ferent levels of consci ousness. I met masters and gu rus from
India, bi llionaires at the peak of  their game, and legends in business and
society . And with every meeting, interview , and experience,  I began
--- Page 95 ---
dissecting, assim ilating, and assembling the framework tha t helped
create this book.
T oday , I  obsessi vely seek out ne w models and systems for how we can
best understand  ourselves and reach levels of potential we ’ve only
dreamed about. My hacker ment ality pushes me to always be looking for
the most ef fective solution that is replicable—that brings extraordinary
results within reach of the greatest number of people. This is how I
developed the model I’m abo ut to share with you: consciousness
engineering.
--- Page 96 ---
AN OPERATING SYSTEM FOR HUMAN
CONSCIOUSNESS
If yo u h ave a computer , you’ve  probably had to install a new o perating
system f rom time to time. W indows 95 gave way to W indows 8  over the
last two decades . And the borin g 1996 Macintosh computers I used as a
freshman at the University of Michigan gave way to the gor geous Mac
OS we see powe ring MacBooks  today . Every few years, we upgrade our
operating systems on our machines to make our computers run faster ,
better , and take on increasingly complex tasks with ease.
But how  many of us even think  about doing the same for ourselves?
Consciousness engineering is an operating system for the human mind.
And the beauty of it is that—lik e the best hacks—it’ s really simple. It all
boils down to just two things.
--- Page 97 ---
1. Your Models of Reality (Your Hardware)
Y our mo dels of reality are your beliefs about the world. In Chapter 2 , we
talked about how most of the rules we accept as true exist in side our
heads an d were put there, as Steve Jobs said, “by people no smarter than
you.” H uman society today runs on the accumulated beliefs of our
forefathers: Our economic systems, definitions of marriage, the  food we
eat, our methods of schooling a nd work—these structures were created
long ago by people in very dif ferent settings than what we live in today .
Some of  us were raised with empowering beliefs about ourselv es and
the world. Y et m ost of us also have at least a few sickly , disempowering
beliefs t hat hold  us back. The important thing to realize is that no matter
what these beliefs are, they became true because we act and think in
accordance with  them. Thus, ou r beliefs truly do shape our world in a
very real sense.
But while your beliefs make you, your beliefs are NOT you. Y ou can
use consciousness engineering to swap out old beliefs, swap in new ones,
and take on new understandings of the world that might serve you better .
Using our computer analogy , think of your models of reality as your
hardware. W ant  a faster machine or a better resolution moni tor? Just
swap th e older model and replace it with the latest model. Ne ed more
space? Replace your 250 terabyte hard drive with a 500 terabyte drive.
Beliefs are like that, too. When  an old belief no longer serves you, you
have every right to swap it out. Y et we don’ t. When you use the Brule
T est to challenge  your Brules an d swap out obsolete Brules for rules that
work be tter , you ’re upgrading your hardware so your operating system
works o ptimally . In people-speak, that means you’re choosing  what to
believe, and your life is yours to control.
Replacing outdated models of reality is essential. Our models of
reality do more than just create our feelings around an event or life in
general. T o an astonishing extent, they seem to influence the reality of
the world that we experience every single day .
--- Page 98 ---
W h a t  Y o u  T h i n k  I s  W h a t  Y o u  G e t
Our mod els of reality make us w ho we are. The problem is, as w e saw in
Chapter 2 , that many of them weren’ t taken on by rational choice but
rather by imitation. Our beliefs about life, love, work, parenting, our
bodies, our self-worth—are of ten a result of our innate tendency to
imitate the people and practices  around us. What you think and believe
about the world shapes who you are and your experience of the world
around you. Change your acc epted models of reality , and dramatic
changes will happen in your world.
For example, researchers Ellen Langer , PhD, and Alia J. Crum, PhD,
set up a study , reported in 2007 in Psychological Science , in which they
asked 84  hotel maids how much they exercised. Y ou’d think that with all
the physical work involved with cleaning hotel rooms, they would have
answered, “A helluva lot!” Bu t although they cleaned about fifteen
rooms a day , one-third said they didn’ t get any exercise, and the other
two-thirds said they didn’ t exercise on a r egular basis. Now , as anyone
who has just completed a weekend of housecleaning can tell you,
cleaning a room, changing sheets, vacuuming, and so on is a lot  of work.
Y et acco rding to their model o f reality , the maids didn’ t consider their
work activities to be “exercise.” That seemed to be borne out when the
researchers assessed the women and found that they seemed ab out as fit
as sedentary folks.
Here’ s where it gets interesting. The researchers implanted a new
model of reality in the maid’ s minds. They informed forty-four of the
maids that their daily duties met the Centers for Disease Control’ s (CDC)
activity guidelines and surpassed the Sur geon General’ s guidelines. They
also gav e the maids a rundown  of calorie counts for various cleaning
activities and put similar information where the maids could see it at
work. In  short, they flipped a b elief switch. They gave the m aids new
information about their existing habits that showed how the work they
did was, in fact, exercise.
A mont h passes. The researchers follow up. Incredibly , the maids
who’d b een given the fitness information had, on average, lost two
pounds, had lower blood pressures, and overall “were significantly
healthier” based on measurements of their body fat, body mass index
(BMI), and waist-to-hip ratio. And guess what? The maids told the
researchers of no changes in their actions. The only change was in the
information they’d been given—the truth the researchers had provided.
--- Page 99 ---
The rese archers had successful ly swapped out an old model of reality
and implanted a new one. They made the maids view their work as
“exercise.” And the results caused actual physical changes in the bodies
of the maids.
The rese archers concluded that what’ s become known as the p lacebo
ef fect—results t hat appear to come purely from a person’ s mind-set
instead o f from a specific medic ation or medical treatment—plays a role
when it comes to exercise.
Amazing, isn’ t it? Measurable positive change—just from installing a
new belief that their work w as actually healthy work. Imagine the
implications thi s could have for how we encourage employees to be
more engaged in their work or how we encourage people to lose weight.
If the mind is so  powerful that it can actually change health ba sed on a
changed perspective, imagine what that could mean about the mind’ s
power to control our mood, our self-confidence, our happiness, and
everything else that determines the quality of our time here on Earth.
As t he hotel ma ids’ study vividly shows, while your models of reality
are not y ou, they ma ke you who you  are. When you realize that, you can
swap out a bad  or outdated m odel, swap in a healthier one, and gain
incredible power to shift your world. Let’ s return for a moment to our
computer hardware analogy . If your computer hardware can’ t handle the
tasks yo u need it to do, you g et a faster , more powerful computer , a
higher -quality m onitor , a better mouse. Look how sleek and ef fi cient our
computers have  become in the last thirty years. W ouldn’ t it be great to
think with that same level of elegance, speed, and ef ficiency? Y et when it
comes to updating our models of reality , most us are stuck with the
1980s M acintosh rather than the new MacBook. W e hold on to our old
models and deny ourselves an upgrade.
The hot el maids in the study lost weight and got healthier simply
because a new b elief was installed in them. What would happen  to you if
you swa pped in new beliefs a bout your love life? Y our work? Y our
body? Y our ability to make money? W e’ll explore how to do th is in the
next chapter .
As I’ve learned about the power of beliefs, I’ve chosen specific
models o f reality  to help me stay healthier and younger . I’ve decided I’m
going to live to  be one hundr ed. I’ve chosen a model whe re seven
minutes of early-morning exercise gets me the same results as h ours in a
gym. As a result , I’ve been able  to get fitter and develop a better body in
my forties than I had in my tw enties. I’ve also decided on a belief that
work is one of the most pleasurable things in life—so I enjoy what I do
--- Page 100 ---
on a daily basis . All of us have this ability to decide what m odels of
reality we’ll adopt. Y ou get to choose.
Thus the  single most ef fective model of reality you can adopt right
now is the idea  that your mode ls of reality are swappable. Y ou do not
have to continue believing an d seeing the world through the lens
installed within you in your younger years. I’ll show you how to  swap in
a new , optimal set of beliefs in the next chapter . But first there’ s another
important part of the picture to look at.
--- Page 101 ---
2. Your Systems for Living (Your Software)
Y our habits, or systems for living, are how you put your m odels of
reality in to prac tice. If models o f reality are the hardware of the human
“machine,” syst ems for living a re the software. They’re your activities
and daily habits—for example, how you eat (based on your beliefs about
nutrition), how you work (based on your beliefs about what kind of
career a nd work behaviors are acceptable), and how you deal with
money ( based o n your beliefs a bout the ease of acquiring mon ey or the
guilt or honor of  having lots of it). There are many other s, from how you
raise your kids to how you make love, make friends, work out, solve
problems, finish a project at work, make a dif ference in the world, and
have fun.
Systems of living are easy to ac quire. Y ou can always learn new  ones.
The prob lem is that our Industrial Age school system hasn’ t done a very
good job of kee ping us up to date with the best systems for fun ctioning
in the world. Nobody taught us optimal ways to exercise, love, parent,
eat, or even to speed-read or improve longevity . I think of them like apps
you can easily download and update, intended for specific purposes or to
solve specific problems. Not working? Download the new version that
fixes old  bugs. Found a better one? DELETE. The trick is rec ognizing
what systems you’re running and doing enough self-checks to quickly
identify the ones you need to upgrade.
All of this now brings us to Law 3.
--- Page 102 ---
Law 3: Practice consciousness engineering.
Extraordinary minds understand that their growth depends on two things: their
models of reality and their systems for living. They carefully curate the most
empowering models and systems and frequently update themselves.
--- Page 103 ---
THE LIMITATIONS OF TODAY’S MODELS
OF REALITY AND SYSTEMS FOR LIVING
Our current models and systems have three limitations:
1. Our models of reality are programmed by the world we grew up in.
2. Our mo dels of reality (good o r bad) determine our systems for
living. In short, bad beliefs create bad habits.
3. Our mod ern mo dels and systems are lacking in conscious practi ces
—we’re only just beginning to realize the power of our minds.
T o understand these three limitations, we need to look at our current
world fr om the outside in. Getting outside our culturescape is easier said
than done. That’ s why , in order to understand how we can improve our
models and systems, I decided to journey to visit a culture far removed
from the modern W estern world.
--- Page 104 ---
Strange Lessons from the Amazon Rain
Forest
Kristina and I ar rived in the dee p Ecuadorian Amazon just before sunset.
Our small plane took of f from a run-down town called Puyo on the
border of the jun gle and flew over a sea of green before landing  on a dirt
airstrip smack in the center of the rain forest. A boat ride, a hike, and
several h ours la ter , we were at T ingkias, a village belonging to  a family
of the Achuar t ribe. The nearest “civilized” town was more than one
hundred miles away . Around us was nothing but green, humid jungle and
the s ounds of co untless birds and animals. Here we would spend the next
five day s, living  life in a radically dif ferent culture where man y of the
norms o f human  civilization—fr om how we sleep to how we car e for our
bodies to how we drink water or worship a higher power—were
completely challenged.
The Ach uar peo ple of the Amaz on rain forest in Ecuador evolved for
generations with little contact with the wider outside world. They only
became known to the W estern world in 1977, so being with them is
about as close as  you can get to visiting a culture relatively unto uched by
modern human beings. W ith minimal exposure to the modern
culturescape, their models of reality are dramatically dif ferent from ours.
I’m not talking about conventional things that we expect other cultures to
do dif ferently— like food, dress, music, and dance. I’m talking about
things so  dif fere nt that if we were to read about them in a histor ical text,
we wou ld find it hard to believ e that these were normal huma n beings
alive on the planet today .
Many tr uths tha t we assume to be absolute, such as “drink water” or
“eat breakfast,” are meaningles s to them. Living with the Achuar was
eye-opening. What I saw there profoundly shifted my thinking about
what I believe to be acceptable truths.
--- Page 105 ---
L e s s o n  1 :  O u r  M o d e l s  o f  R e a l i t y  A r e
P r o g r a m m e d  b y  t h e  W o r l d  W e  G r e w  U p  I n
By t he time you arrive at the village, you’re ready for a bath an d a long
drink of water . Y ou can bathe in the pond nearby . But if you wan t a drink
of water , you’re out of luck. B ecause the water you bathed in —where
everyone in the tribe bathes and swims, too—is the only water around.
And it’ s filled with bacteria that would not be wise to ingest.
W e assu me that all human b eings drink water . Y ou might even
consider that it’ s an absolute tru th, as we discussed in Chapter 1 . But the
Achuar have ev olved a brilliant hack for the fact that there’ s no clean
water in the Amazon. The wom en harvest, boil, and mash yu cca roots
and then  repeate dly chew and sp it the chewed-up root into a bowl. They
mix this combo of yucca and saliva with pond water and lea ve it for
several days. The mixture ferm ents, yielding alcohol, which kills the
bacteria. What you end up with isn’ t water , but chicha , a beer of sorts,
made fro m the fermented spit of the tribeswomen. Every woman has her
own bre w , whic h she makes fo r her husband (men can have more than
one wife ) and children. Every w oman’ s brew tastes dif ferent, based on
the taste  of her saliva. The wom en spend hours each day chew ing and
spitting to make chicha  w hile the men go hunting. It’ s  a big job, since
this is all that the tribe drinks.
How does chicha  tast e? W ell, to me, really awful, only because I
haven’ t been trained to appreci ate it. T o the Achuar , it tastes delicious,
and the men com e home from a  long hunt craving it. It sounds weird to
us, but it’ s totally normal for th em, and it’ s how they survive in one of
the most challenging places on Earth to live.
Is drinking water normal? It is to  most of humanity . But to the A chuar ,
drinking water is unusual and  distasteful. Our definition of what is
normal is nothing more than what is programmed into us.
What we see as our culture is really nothing more than a qu irk of
history . It’ s not necessarily righ t or wrong. Just like the Achuar way of
living is n’ t right or wrong. Our culture is the result of thousands  of years
of ideas emer gin g, clashing, and dissolving, battling for dominance. But
I can assure you  of one thing: Our culture wasn’ t created by pur e rational
choice. In many ways it took form merely by imitation and chance. Y et
we cling to our culture, both the good and the bad, as if it’ s the only way
of living. When you look at the Achuar and you look at us, you see that
pretty m uch every aspect of human culture—of life as we live it day to
--- Page 106 ---
day—is malleable, up for grabs, within our control, and open for
questioning.
--- Page 107 ---
L e s s o n  2 :  O u r  M o d e l s  o f  R e a l i t y  ( G o o d  o r  B a d )
D e t e r m i n e  O u r  S y s t e m s  f o r  L i v i n g
The Achuar don’ t have a model of reality for God in the way that most
humans beings do. Instead, they  believe that animals and plant s possess
human souls and that these s ouls have the ability to com municate
through languag e and signs. T o communicate with this world, th ey drink
ayahuasca  (a  natural plant- based d rug) tha t induces vivid visions and
metaphysical experiences.
I de cided to ex perience the ayahuasca  ceremony with a visiting
shaman who was stopping by our village. I knelt on a platform before
him. In the darkness I could not see his face, only the flicker  of light
from the tobacco leaves he smoked. It was a surreal mom ent, like
stepping back centuries in time to an ancient culture. The shaman
mumbled some words, blew smoke in my face, tapped me with a branch,
and then gave me a tiny taste of the precious ayahuasca .
Everything seemed fine for a moment. Then suddenly: unbearable
pain in my stomach. I fell to my knees as the pain hit, hung my head over
the edge of the platform, and started vomiting violently as m y guides
held my arms an d legs to preve nt me from falling of f the platform onto
the jungle floor . After four to five minutes I stopped vomiting b ut was so
weak I could barely walk. I w as helped to a hammock. As soon as I
closed my eyes, all I could see were fractals. It was as if the world were a
series of  interloc king triangles of all dif ferent colors spinning, pivoting,
and mer ging.
When I opened my eyes and turned on my side to stare out at the
jungle, t he trees looked like hu ge, friendly monsters of the type you’d
see in the book Wher e the W ild Things Ar e  by Maurice Sendak. It was as
if Se ndak’ s famous line: “Let th e wild rumpus start!” had someh ow been
signaled in my b rain. I don’ t know how long I stared at the tree monsters
before I felt the  ur ge to fall asleep, but closing my eyes thrus t me into
that mesmerizing world of dancing fractals forming random shapes.
I felt scared at fi rst, but the fear turned into a sense of sublime p eace. I
felt a oneness with the forest, th e trees, the humidity , and the sky . It was
a be autiful feeling of being completely in the now with no regar d for the
past or future. It felt good to be  alive. Eventually I fell asleep and woke
later as dawn broke, when I joined the rest of the group to eat and discuss
our experiences.
--- Page 108 ---
The beli efs of the Achuar in the spirit of the forest led to their s ystem
for expe riencing the divine through ayahuasca.  Similarly many of our
systems for living evolved as our culture did—in response to certain
beliefs o f the time. But in mode rn times they evolve into habits  because
of, w ell, just ha bit. W e’ve done them for so long we don’ t even know
how we got sta rted. W e accept our current systems as “just the way
things are,” but look deeper and you’ll see that these systems stem from
beliefs f rom the past that you ma y have absorbed through the cu lture you
were raised in.
--- Page 109 ---
L e s s o n  3 :  O u r  M o d e r n  M o d e l s  a n d  S y s t e m s  A r e
L a c k i n g  i n  C o n s c i o u s  P r a c t i c e s
Many o f our models and syst ems are rooted in the purely physical
aspects of life—what we eat, how we take care of our bodie s, beauty
regimens, and so on. But u ntil recently , there’ s been almost no
innovation in the systems that improve the way our minds and spirits
function.
The Ach uar wa ke up each day at 4:00 a.m. and assemble as a tribe
around a fire to drink a certain t ype of tea called wayusa. W hile drinking
their tea, they al so share life experiences, problems, worries, and dreams
from the  previous night. Most of us don’ t remember our dreams without
ef fort. W e tend to see them as  fleeting images, soon for gotten in the
serious business of the day . But the Achuar view their experiences during
the day and at night as equally important and seem to simultaneously live
in the waking and dream states. In the blending of these wor lds, they
solve pro blems, have adventures, and communicate with one another and
with the spirit realm. They sha re these events while drinking their tea,
and the elders l isten and advise. The morning tea is a ritual fo r mental
and spiritual cleansing.
Are the Achuar simply gifted a t remembering dreams? Perhaps. But
there might be more to it. W e had journeyed into the jungle with the
celebrated phila nthropist and aid worker L ynne T wist. L ynne told me
how she had come in contact with the Achuar . She’d repeated dreams of
indigenous peop le with distinctive red markings on their faces. They
seemed to be calling to her for help. When she described these visions to
friends, one remarked that the faces she described looked much like the
Achuar . That’ s how L ynne came to Ecuador to meet the tribe. The
Achuar are facing eviction from their centuries-old home due to logging
and oil and gas companies cutt ing lar ge swaths of the Amazon . L ynne,
working with the Ecuadorian g overnment and the Achuar , has helped
create laws to protect as much as four million acres of rainforest.
And it all started with visitors who seemed to enter her dreams calling
for h er to help.  Are dreams m ore than what we in the modern world
make them out to be? Perhaps  there’ s something to the Achuar early-
morning commitment to exploring the dream world.
Just how much of these spiritual experiences and abilities are we
lacking in our modern world? P erhaps similar to the Himba tribespeople
--- Page 110 ---
who hav e dif ficu lty seeing the c olor blue, are we blind to certain spiritual
experiences?
W e’re p hysical beings, and we e volve our physical systems very fast.
Think of all the new diet and exercise routines you’ve heard or read
about in just the past year or so. Y et our spiritual evolution is stuck in the
past. Many of us are dissatisfied with the dogma of conventional
religion; that’ s not new . But it’ s only been fairly recently that we’ve
come to  realize that the spiritual landscape is vast and varied a nd of fers
many op tions b esides participa ting in your family’ s religion. I believe
our spiritual systems need a major leveling up. That’ s why I was so
struck by the Achuar mornin g ritual of sharing their dre ams and
cleansing their minds while drinking the morning tea that cleanses their
bodies.
In th e ne xt two chapters, we’ll talk about new models and system s that
are evolving to help our minds catch up with our bodies.
--- Page 111 ---
THE ODDITY OF CULTURE
W e might consider their lives  bizarre, but to the Achuar , we  seem
bizarre. W e run of f to stressful jobs, leaving our kids in the  care of
others. W e sit and stare at a lit- up screen for most of the day . Then we
exercise like maniacs to burn of f the calories we consumed the day
before. W e pack  our elders into  communal homes and then worry about
how to care for them. W e take pills to keep from feeling fear and other
emotions we believe are negativ e. W e drink potions to stay awake. Then
we t ake pills to put ourselves to sleep. W e eat and drink too much, partly
because we have more than we  need and partly because we’re stressed
out. Every tribe has its troubles. But the Achuar taught me that what we
consider real, what we define as culture, what we believe is tr ue about
life—the nine-to -five, marriage, the way we raise our kids, how we treat
our elders, what we do all day—are just collections of be liefs and
practices that we put together because, well, they seemed like good ideas
at the time.  When you bec ome aware of this fact, you also gain the
ability to transcend and evolve these cultural practices.
--- Page 112 ---
LEVELING UP OUR INNER GAME
I once got to meet a man who many say is one of the most brilliant minds
alive today . Ken W ilber is the m ost widely translated academic writer in
America, with twenty-five books translated into some thirty foreign
languages. W ilber is the originator of an extremely comprehensive
philosophy called Integral Theory , which is a sort of theory of ev erything
that unifies the disciplines of cultural studies, anthropology , systems
theory , developmental psychology , biology , and spirituality , to name just
a f ew . Ken has been quoted by e veryone from Bill Clinton to Kermit the
Frog, and Integral Theory has been applied in fields as diverse as
ecology , sustain ability , psychotherapy , psychiatry , education, business,
medicine, politic s, sports, and ar t. As part of the research for this book, I
spent five hours interviewing W ilber about human development models
and how consciousness evolves.
One of the ques tions I asked Ken was “what’ s your vision of a n ideal
education curriculum for children?” This is what Ken told me:
Humanity is flying way under its full potential simply because we
do not educate f or the whole or complete human being. W e educate
for just a small part, a slice, a f ragment of just what’ s possible for
us. .  . . B ecause according to the great wisdom traditions around the
world—not only do humans possess typical states of consciousness
like wak ing, dre aming, or deep sleep, they also possess profoun dly
high stat es of consciousness like  enlightenment or awakening— and
none of our education systems teach ANY of that. Now , all of these
factors I ’ve men tioned . . . none of these are rare, isolated, esot eric,
far -out, strange, or occult. They  are all some of the very most basic
and most fundamental potentials of a human being everywhere.
They are simply human 101. Y et we don’ t educate human 101. W e
educate somethi ng like human 1/10. So yes, I firmly believe that we
can brin g about health on this p lanet for the planet and the humans
on it if we sta rted educating the whole person with all t heir
fundamental potentials and capacities and skills and stopped this
fragmented, partial, broken system that we have now .
Consciousness engineering isn’ t just about being happy—though
happiness is a w onderful by-product. It’ s about getting to human  101 and
beyond and striving to be at the  highest level of human develop ment we
--- Page 113 ---
can be, so we can fulfill our hi ghest potential and, as the saying goes,
leave this world a little better for our having been in it.
While th ere are many ways to g et beyond human 101, I’ve fou nd the
framework of consciousness engineering to be the most powe rful tool,
since al l growth comes from changing your models of reality or
upgrading a system for living.
Changing a model of reality is a  form of growth that often comes from
epiphany or insight. It’ s a sudd en awakening or revelation that shifts a
belief. O nce you adopt a new model of reality that is superior to  an older
model, you can’ t go back. It’ s w hat happened to me when I moved from
seeing work as a  job to seeing my work as my calling. Or when someone
moves from following a religion to discovering spirituality .
Changing a system for living, on the other hand, is a process change.
It’ s a step-by-step upgrade of a given process—as when you learn to go
from riding a bicycle to driving a car as a means for mobility .
Once you understand the consciousness engineering approach, you
can view  yourse lf as a highly tuned operating system ready to install new
hardware (models of reality) or new apps (systems for living) when
needed. Y ou never get attached to the ones you have because y ou know
newer , better ones are always being discovered.
In short, you view yourself as always ready for change and growth.
--- Page 114 ---

--- Page 115 ---
How to Speed Up Your Learning Rate
Consciousness engineering primes you to learn and grow mu ch faster
than before because it creates a mental map in your brain.
Elon Musk was once asked in a Reddit.com  Q& A: “How do  you learn
so fast?”
He repli ed: “It is important to v iew knowledge as sort of a semantic
tree—make sure you understand the fundamental principles, i.e. the
trunk an d big branches, before you get into the leaves/details or there is
nothing for them to hang on to.”
As you  think of your personal growth, think of conscio usness
engineering as that trunk. The two big branches are models of re ality and
systems for living. Everything you study in personal growth will either
be a model (a new belief about money , for example) or a system (say , a
new exercise or diet routine). These things cling to the two big branches.
I’ve fou nd that by keeping this  idea in mind, I can learn and grow
faster than ever before. Once you internalize consciousness engineering,
every time you pick up a book to read on personal growth or health, or
an a utobiograph y of a great leader , you start to look for model upgrades
that you can swap in and new systems you can adopt.
In the next two chapters we’ll re fine this learning process by sh owing
you exa ctly HO W to upgrade y our models and systems in the best way
possible.
Each of us has so much untapped capability . W e’re reminded  of it
every tim e we hear stories of triumphs of will and ingenuity— whether
it’ s an innovation by someone like Dean Kamen, one of America’ s
greatest invento rs, or a citizen standing up for honor in the com munity .
W e call it all ki nds of things—courage, brilliance, vision, even  miracle.
But consciousn ess engineering  on a regular basis catapults  us into
becoming our best, most extraordinary selves. And that, my fellow
hackers, is within reach of every one of us.
Here’ s a n impor tant exercise. Consciousness engineering works best
when ap plied in  a holistic way across our lives. In order to do that, we
need to understa nd two things: First, we need to identify the key  areas of
our lives  where we can apply consciousness engineering, and se cond, we
need to pinpoint which of those areas could use some rebalancing.
--- Page 116 ---
E x e r c i s e :  T h e  T w e l v e  A r e a s  o f  B a l a n c e
My friend Jon Butcher is the owner of Precious Moments, the  famous
American catalo g order company that sells giftware in the form of cute
porcelain dolls. He’ s one of the most successful entrepreneurs in
America today , but what is really unique about Jon is how superbly well
balanced his life is. He seems to have it all—wealth, success, a perfect
marriage, great kids, and a life filled with adventure. For example, Jon’ s
a grandf ather , b ut he’ s in such  great health, you’d mistake h im for a
forty-year -old. Jon’ s secret, he claims, is how he sets his goals in life.
Jon divided his life into twelve  categories, and for each categ ory he
mapped out his beliefs, his vision, his strategy , and his purpose. It’ s goal
setting a t the deepest level. When Jon’ s friends asked him what h is secret
was, he would teach them h is system. It eventually evolved into
Lifebook, a personal growth seminar you can take in Chicago, where you
spend four days diving deep into dif ferent aspects of your life to create a
detailed life plan.
The idea I’m s haring here is partially inspired by Jon Bu tcher ’ s
Lifebook seminar , which I attended in 2010. I’ve adapted the categories
(my own twelve are dif ferent from Jon’ s) for this exercise to help you
discover the models and systems you’re applying in your life so that you
can begin to con sider where you need to upgrade. I call them the T welve
Areas of Balance. Each area inf luences and shapes you in an important
way . This exercise will help you  elevate yourself on every level, leaving
no part of your life behind.
Ready to start your adventure in consciousness engineering? Here
goes:
When you think of your life and where you want to grow , think
holistically . T oo many people live lives lacking in balance. They may
have gre at wealth but lousy relationships with their family . Or they may
be incredibly fit and healthy bu t struggle with debt. Or they may have a
career filled with achievement s but feel heartbroken and lonely . An
extraordinary li fe is balanced on all levels. Thinking holistically will
help you make sure you don’ t end up winning in one area but losing in
another . I use th e T welve Areas of Balance to help keep an even keel,
and now it’ s your turn.
For each category below , rate y our life on a scale of 1 to 10, with 1
being “very weak” and 10 being  “extraordinary .” Don’ t think about each
--- Page 117 ---
item for too long. Often the first impulse—your gut check—is the most
accurate.
1.YOUR LOVE RELA TIONSHIP .  This is the measure of how happy you are
in your current state of relationship—whether you’re single and
loving it, in a relationship, or desiring one.
2.YOUR FRIENDSHIPS.  This is the measure of how strong a support
network you have. Do you have at least five people who you know
have your back and whom you love being around?
3.YOUR ADVENTURES.  How much time do you get to travel,
experience the world, and do things that open you to new
experiences and excitement?
4.YOUR ENVIRONMENT .  This is the quality of your home, your car ,
your work, and in general the spaces where you spend your time—
even when traveling.
5.YOUR HEAL TH AND FITNESS.  How would you rate your health, given
your age, and any physical conditions?
6.YOUR INTELLECTUAL LIFE.  How much and how fast are you growing
and learning? How many books do you read? How many seminars
or courses do you take yearly? Education should not stop after you
graduate from college.
7.YOUR SKILLS . How fast are you improving the skills you have that
make you unique and help you build a successful career? Are you
growing toward mastery or are you stagnating?
8.YOUR SPIRITUAL LIFE.  How much time do you devote to spiritual,
meditative, or contemplative practices that keep you feeling
connected, balanced, and peaceful?
9.YOUR CAREER.  Are you growing, climbing the ladder , and
excelling? Or do you feel you’re stuck in a rut? If you have a
business, is it thriving or stagnating?
10.YOUR CREA TIVE LIFE.  Do you paint, write, play musical instruments,
or engage in any other activity that helps you channel your
creativity? Or are you more of a consumer than a creator?
11.YOUR F AMIL Y LIFE.  Do you love coming home to your family after a
hard day’ s work? If you’re not married or a parent, define your
family as your parents and siblings.
--- Page 118 ---
12.YOUR COMMUNITY LIFE.  Are you giving, contributing, and playing a
definite role in your community?
Are you  already seeing some areas where you’d like to im prove?
That’ s just the point—now you have a clear baseline from which to begin
your journey toward the extraor dinary . For the moment, just thi nk about
how you’d currently rate your self in each category . In the next few
chapters we’ll return to these T welve Areas of Balance to help you
identify where you want to focus your attention to improve your models
of reality and your systems for living.
