--- Page 209 ---
CHAPTER 7
LIVE IN BLISSIPLINE
Where We Learn about the Important
Discipline of Maintaining Daily Bliss
It turns out that our brains are literally  hardwired to perform at their best not when
they are negative or even neutral, but when they are positive. Yet in today’ s world,
we ironically sacrifice happiness for success only to lower our brain’ s success rates.
—SHA WN ACHOR, THE HAPPINESS ADV ANT AGE
--- Page 210 ---
THE BILLIONAIRE WHO DANCES ON
TABLES
It was another beautiful night  on Necker Island, Richard Branson’ s
gor geous getaway in the British V ir gin Islands. Kristina and I were
sitting at a huge long wooden table with Richard and his other guests,
dining on delectable food and free-flowing drinks. W e’d just returned
from the  beach, and everyone w as in a playful mood—perhaps because
our host, Branson, radiated that vibe.
But as the meal went on, I no ticed that several entrepreneurs  there
seemed to try to steer the conversation toward more serious  matters.
They started hitting Richard with business questions. Someone asked
about an  investment opportunity . Another asked for advice about running
a lar ge company . I can’ t blame  them. When you’re in the presence of
such a legendar y entrepreneur , you can’ t help but want to glean a few
nuggets of his wisdom. Still, I felt that their timing was of f. This was
meant to be a fun, casual dinner .
Then Richard did something surprising. He politely halted the
conversation. In his flip-flops, he climbed onto the table amid our plates
and glas ses. He then extended his hand to Kristina, who was sit ting next
to me, and helped her up onto the table.
“Let’ s dance,” he said.
And the y did. A beautiful slow dance right there in the middle  of the
feast while everyone else watched—surprised and amused—cutlery and
wine glasses be damned.
It w as the perfe ct reminder that life is not all business. W e’re here in
this brief span of time to be h appy together . And it was so perfectly
Richard Branson , who is an inspiration to me as an extraordinary person
who’ s m astered the art of wo rking toward big visions while being
persistently happy in the present.
--- Page 211 ---
INTRODUCING BLISSIPLINE: THE
DISCIPLINE OF DAILY BLISS
When R ichard Branson resto red fun to a special dinner , he was
demonstrating that happiness is under our control. When things get out
of balance, you can bring yourself back to bliss.
Science is showing us that one of the key things that lets us fu nction
optimally in the world is our ability to control our happiness level. It’ s a
requirement for learning to bend reality . While it’ s a trainable skill, many
of us still find it elusive.
In this chapter , I’ll introduce a simple system for mastering happiness
in the now . It goes beyond feeling peaceful to feeling truly joyous. It
combines spiritual mastery with  the real-world desire to meet your goals
and make your intentions come true. I call it Blissipline: the discipline of
daily bliss.
--- Page 212 ---
Why Happiness Matters
Studies abound on the link between happiness and ef fectiveness. Here
are just a few of the compelling findings.
HAPPINESS CAN IMPROVE PERFORMANCE AT YOUR JOB.  In the brilliant
book The Happiness Advantage , Sha wn Achor d escribes a common med
school exercise in which doctors in training make a diagnosis based on a
rundown of a p atient’ s sympto ms and history . It’ s a test of t he doc’ s
knowledge and ability to think outside the box, not getting wedded to
one diagnosis (known as anchoring). In one study three groups of doctors
were asked to do this kind of a nalysis. One group was “primed to feel
happy” before the exercise, another group was asked to read “neutral”
medical material beforehand, and the “control” group wasn’ t given
anything prior to the exercise. The happiness-primed docs were almost
twice as  speedy  at making the right diagnosis compared to tho se in the
control g roup—and beat them soundly at avoiding anchoring, too. What
was this  mysterious priming? The doctors in the happiness group were
given a little candy . And they weren’ t even allowed to eat it to avoid
possibly skewing the study results by performing with elevated blood
sugar! W hich le ads to the amusi ng question that Achor asks in his book:
“Perhaps patient s should start o f fering their doctors lollipops, instead of
the other way around.”
GOOD ATTITUDES YIELD BETTER RESUL TS.  Martin Seligman, PhD, a
pioneer in the field of positive psychology and author of Learned
Optimism , s creened 15,000 newly hired salespeople at MetLife using a
test he develope d to measure o ptimism levels, and then followed their
performance for  three years. Th e salespeople who scored in th e top 10
percent for optimism performed  a whopping 88 percent better in sales
than the  reps in the top 10 percent for pessimism. Dr . Seligman found
that the power o f optimism held in other professions, too. He c oncluded
that in general, o ptimistic salespeople performed an impressive 20 to 40
percent better than pessimistic salespeople.
HAPPINESS MAY HELP KIDS LEARN.  In his book The Happiness
Advantage,  Shawn Achor describes a study with four -year -olds who
were giv en some  “learning tasks” to do. One group was asked to think of
something that made them happ y; the other wasn’ t. The happy-thought
group did a spee dier job on the task and didn’ t make as many mistakes—
which makes you wonder what might happen if we designed schools to
take into account a student’ s happiness.
--- Page 213 ---
W ith so much evidence on how happiness boosts performance, it
seems evident that learning to c ontrol and maintain our happiness is an
important part of extraordinary living. But first we have to answer the
question—what exactly is happiness?
--- Page 214 ---
How Happiness Happens
Before we dive into the practice of Blissipline, it’ s important to first
define th e idea of happiness. I b elieve that there are three disti nct types
of happiness.
--- Page 215 ---
1 .  H a p p i n e s s  f r o m  S p e c i a l  a n d  U n i q u e
E x p e r i e n c e s
This is the happiness that co mes from unique human experiences.
There’ s the heart-pounding bliss of incredible sex. The fist-pumping
elation of winning a sports ga me. The chest-thumping excitement of
closing a major deal. The mind-bending bliss of ecstatic exp eriences,
chemically induced or otherw ise. This bliss is powerful—present
moment and short-lived. Someti mes there’ s a crash or letdown afterward
as your brain c hemistry descends from this high. In small doses, it’ s
fantastic, but it can be distractin g, addictive, and potentially destructive.
If we were hooked up to ins tant bliss machines that pumped this
chemistry through us 24/7, civilization would cease to progress (and
we’d be too blissed-out to care).  Happiness from unique experiences is a
kind of short-term happiness—but it can’ t be the only kind.
--- Page 216 ---
2 .  H a p p i n e s s  f r o m  G r o w t h  a n d  A w a k e n i n g
While bliss from experiences is wonderful, there’ s a second  type of
happiness. It’ s more rare but seems to be more enduring.  It’ s the
happiness advoc ated by spiritual practitioners and transcendent p ractices.
I c all it happine ss from growth and awakening. This type of h appiness
comes from reaching higher states of consciousness. People seek
awakening in many dif ferent ways—from mindfulness practices to
spiritual paths and practices of a ll kinds. The millions who pursue some
type of spiritual  path show how  important this level of happin ess is to
human beings.
--- Page 217 ---
3 .  H a p p i n e s s  f r o m  M e a n i n g
I adore my kids, but let’ s be honest: There are times when parenting is no
fun. I’ve had nig hts of no sleep, dealt with icky diapers, and w alked the
floor for hours at a time with a wailing baby . So, I wouldn’ t  say I’m
always h appy as  a parent. And studies bear this out: Having kids tends to
lessen h appiness. But even on t he dif ficult days, I wouldn’ t tra de it for
anything. The overwhelming majority of parents say the same thing.
Social psychologist Roy Baumeister , PhD, has found that this
“parenthood paradox” is explain ed when the search for meaning is added
into the equation. Parenting is h ighly meaningful, even though  it’ s also
highly d emanding and requires personal sacrifices that go against short-
term happiness. What’ s interesti ng about the parenthood paradox is that
it se ems to indic ate that we hum ans find meaning so important t hat we’ll
sacrifice a certain amount of happiness for it.
Meaning is what we get from having a healthy vision for the fut ure, as
we discussed in Chapter 6 . It’ s a critical component of happiness. In the
chapters that follow , we’ll take a deeper dive into how to find the
meaning and mission that will put you on your personal path to
extraordinary living.
These three types of happiness tiptoe with us through life.
Opportunities to find unique experiences, growth and awakening, and
meaning are always around us. Most of us just don’ t look as ha rd as we
could. And the reason for this is that we get tuned to function at a
particular preset happiness level.
--- Page 218 ---
Your Happiness Gauge
Think ba ck to a time of supreme  happiness in your life. Maybe it was the
day you  fell in l ove, got married, had a baby , achieved a dream goal, had
a spiritual epiphany , or just felt  glad to be alive. Spend a few moments
feeling those feelings. Incredible, right?
Now , sense how you’re feeling right now .
Chances are, you’re neither at y our highest high nor your lowe st low
right now . Y ou’re likely somewhere in between. W e don’ t generally
spend too long at the very top  or the very bottom of our e motional
spectrum.
Studies show that each of us has a particular level of happiness that we
tend to return to after things happen, good or bad. Researchers call this
phenomenon he donic adaptatio n. While hedonic adaptation can help
insulate us from being forever flattened by tragedy , it can mean that even
the joy of huge ly positive events doesn’ t stick with us for l ong. W e
humans are so g ood at adapting that we adapt to whatever has happened
and then continue along in life.
But rese arch has found that our happiness is hackable. Y ou’ve a lready
learned how to raise your set points for the T welve Areas of Balance in
your life. Happiness is no dif ferent. It’ s all part of optimizing your
systems for living. It turns out th at you can actually raise your happiness
level to experien ce higher levels of happiness every day of your life, too,
no m atter what i s going on arou nd you. There are three specific  systems
for living that can be especially helpful for this.
--- Page 219 ---
THE PATH TO BLISSIPLINE: THREE
SYSTEMS FOR ADVANCING YOUR
HAPPINESS LEVELS
The three Blissipline systems b elow will help you upgrade you r quality
of life every day . They’re called transcendent practices: conscious
practices that you internalize or embody . Y ou’ll know if they’re working
because you’ll experience higher levels of satisfaction in daily l ife—and
the boost in happiness usually comes instantly .
Does this mean that bad things won’ t happen or that you’ll never be
unhappy? Of course not. But it does mean that you’ll have the Blissipline
to deal with adversity from a positive place and the capacity to recover to
a higher happiness set point than before.
The thre e systems below are all scientifically proven to create a boost
in happi ness; in some cases, a long-lasting boost that can span months.
These a re the three systems I used to pull myself out of st ress and
anxiety in 2008 and revive my career and business. These systems will
also help you we ather the inevitable dips you might face as you pursue a
thrilling, “unsafe” life outside the Brules.
--- Page 220 ---
Blissipline System 1: The Power of Gratitude
Perhaps no single exercise leads to as big a happiness boost as the
practice of gratitude—so much so that gratitude is getting si gnificant
notice in research and scientific  circles. The list of scientificall y proven
benefits for the practice of gratitude now includes:
More ener gy
More for giving attitudes
Less depression
Less anxiousness
More feelings of being socially connected
Better sleep
Fewer headaches
A study by Rob ert A. Emmons, PhD, and Michael McCullough, PhD,
showed that people who simp ly wrote down five things th ey were
thankful for from the previous week showed a 25 percent dif ference in
happiness levels compared to people who wrote down five negative
things from the week. They a lso exercised more and said they felt
healthier .
Dr . Emmons did another study in which people wrote down p ositive
things ea ch day .  Not only did they report an even greater gratitude boost,
but they  also said they helped other people more. Apparently gratitude
leads to giving, which in turn boosts the happiness and gra titude of
others. That’ s the kind of social contagion I can get behind.
--- Page 221 ---
A p p r e c i a t i n g  t h e  R e v e r s e  G a p
So, how can you make the experience of gratitude a daily occurrence in
your lif e? Switch your “gap.” This idea comes from entrep reneurial
coach Dan Sullivan. As shown in the diagram below , most of us are
trained to watch the forward gap—the gap between where you  are now
and whe re you want to be. The p roblem is that we tell ourselves  we’ll be
happy when  we reach that new revenue tar get at work . . . finally get
married . . . have a baby . . . have X amount of money in the bank, and so
on:
But there’ s a pr oblem here. If you’re chasing the forward ga p, the
chase w ill neve r end. No matte r how good life gets, you’ll always be
chasing the next idea on the ho rizon. And just like the actual  horizon,
you can’ t catch it. It will always remain ahead of you. T ying hap piness to
the attainment of some future goal is like trying to catch up to the
horizon. It’ s always going to be one step beyond your reach.
Instead, Dan suggests we look backward—to the past—and appreciate
how far we’ve come. Dan calls this the reverse gap:
--- Page 222 ---
Dan explains it this way:
The moment I s tart feeling disappointed or discouraged or I sta rt
feeling really tense, I immed iately say , “Okay , what are you
measuring against?” and sure enough, I’m measuring against the
ideal. A nd the moment I say , “Okay , turn around, where did you
come from?” And the mome nt I turn around and I measure
backwards [from] my starting point for this particular activity—
bang, I feel great. . . . I’ve lear ned a lot. W e’ve made tremendous
progress. . . . In a matter of a few seconds, I go from the negative
zone of being in the gap to the positive zone of measuring my actual
progress.
Even in tough ti mes, you can lo ok back and see how far you’ve come,
how much you’ve learned, and  the support you’ve received a long the
way . Paying attention to the “reverse gap” is a perfect exercise in
gratitude and is far more likely to give you a boost of happiness than
striving for happiness in the future. That’ s why gratitude is such a
powerful system for Blissipline.
I believe every day should begin and end with gratitude. I practice it
every da y in my morning med itation. Each morning, focusing on the
reverse gap, I think of five things I’m grateful for in my personal life.
Then I think of  five things I’m  grateful for in my work and career . A
typical list might look like this:
--- Page 223 ---
PERSONAL LIFE
1. My daughter , Eve, and her beautiful smiles
2. The happiness I felt last night relaxing with a glass of red wine and
watching Sherlock  on BBC
3. My wife and life partner
4. The time I spent with my son building his newest Lego Star W ars
creation
5. The wonderful cup of gourmet cof fee my publicist, T ania, left on
my desk
--- Page 224 ---
WORK LIFE
1. My leadership team and the amazing talent they bring to our
company
2. A particularly great letter we received for my online course
Consciousness Engineering
3. The incredibly fun Culture Day we had in the of fice yesterday
4. The fact that plans are coming together to hold our upcoming A-
Fest at another amazing location
5. Having coworkers who are friends and who greet me with hugs
when I come to the of fice
This entire practice takes me n o more than ninety seconds. But it’ s
perhaps one of the most impor tant and powerful ninety seconds I can
spend each day .
--- Page 225 ---
E x e r c i s e :  D a i l y  G r a t i t u d e
In Chapter 4 , you learned two gratitude exercises that take just a minute
or tw o e ach and help prevent negative models of reality from tak ing root.
Here, we’ll take the process a little deeper . Each day , take a few  minutes
to fo cus on the reverse gap—wh at has happened in your life that you’re
grateful for? Think about:
Three to five things you’re grateful for in your personal life
Three to five things you’re grateful for in your work life
For som e people, expressing gratitude for things in their imm ediate
environment might feel awkward. That’ s okay; too many of us have
fallen in to a gratitude-free way  of living, which means that it’ s all the
more important to push through the discomfort. Here are a few hints for
enhancing the process as you get the hang of it:
FOCUS ON THE FEELINGS.  A lot of people  turn this into a mechanical
list-making exercise or list things they “should” feel grateful for (usually
a sig n th at a Brule is running the  show). T o avoid these pitfalls,  focus on
your feelings : ha ppy , optimistic, comforted, confident, tender , proud,
sexy , filled with laughter , filled with love. For each item, spend five to
ten s econds letting the feelings well up. When you land on some thing for
which y ou truly do feel gratitu de—whether it’ s for your great child or
your great skin—it will feel like a straight shot to bliss.
DO THESE EXERCISES TWICE A DAY, MORNING AND NIGHT .  J ust  as Arianna
Huf fington describes her medit ation system as a way to kick-start her
morning in the right direction, taking just a moment to express gratitude
in the morning can have an am azing impact on the rest of your day .
Similarly , ending the day with gratitude allows you to establish a more
positive model of reality .
SHARE THE GOODNESS OF GRA TITUDE.  Think about ways to use or adap t
these exercises with others in your life. T ry them with your kids, as I do,
or with your partner over a glas s of wine at the end of the week (that’ s
happy h our for real). The benefits will be even greater if you share them,
and hearing what others feel grateful for may inspire you to find more
gratitude in your own life.
--- Page 226 ---
Blissipline System 2: Forgiveness
In S ilicon V alley , the Quantified  Self movement is growing in popularity .
People known as biohackers are  measuring every aspect of their being. If
you’ve ever used a sleep app on  your smartphone to gauge the quality of
your sle ep or if you’ve used w earable tech to record how ma ny steps
you’ve t aken in  a day , you’re part of the Quantified Self movement. In
short, you’re using measureme nts and metrics to improve your well-
being.
Quantified Self is now coming to meditation in a big way through
traditional brain wave measurement machines—but with a fa scinating
twist.
I recently got to experience this firsthand at the invitation of my friend
Dave Asprey . Dave is the formidable entrepreneur behind the
Bulletproof cof fee brand and is one of the fittest, sharpest, and most
intelligent people I’ve ever met. But less than ten years ago, he  told me
he w eighed over 300 pounds,  and his life was a mess. D ave said
everything shifted when he experienced this new form of meditation.
I flew all the way to V ictoria, British Columbia, to meet Dave a nd try
out this program  called 40 Y ears of Zen. Why the odd name? W ell, the
scientists who developed this technology studied the brain waves of
many remarkable people—billionaires, intuitives, creatives, monks, and
mystics. What they found wa s that when you meditate usi ng these
methods, your brain takes on the same patterns as someone who has
spent twenty-one to forty YEARS in Zen meditation.
And so I started  my journey into this program with some of the most
remarkable people I had ever met. Our group of seven consisted of a
famous H ollywood actor , a guy who’d just sold his company for a billion
dollars, a top m edical doctor , nutrition and fitness expert JJ V ir gin,
legendary marketing mind Joe Polish, and Dave.
In so me respects, the experienc e was similar to the way we use  sleep
apps to measure  the quality of our sleep, but in a super -high-tech way:
W e wer e hooked up to some  of the most cutting-edge, sp ecialized
biofeedback equipment to measure our brain waves. The equipment
beeped dif ferent sounds depending on the brain waves we were
producing (alpha waves, associated with high creativity , com passion,
insight, for giveness, and love; theta waves, correlated with flashes of
creativity and intuition; and del ta waves, associate d, we were told, with
“altering reality” ). W e’d also see numbers on our screens indic ating our
--- Page 227 ---
brain wa ve amp litudes (higher amplitudes are better) and the c oherence
between both hemispheres of our brain (better coherence signifies better
states of mind).
The dif ference between 40 Y ears  of Zen and, say , classic meditation or
mindfulness is simple. It’ s based on actual biofeedback. When you’re
meditating with your brain hooked up to a machine that’ s r ecording
every peak and trough of your brain waves, it’ s easy to pinpoint exactly
what works and what doesn’ t. Y ou can see the results of what’ s going on
in your mind.
Instantly .
The main focus of our sessions  was to teach us how to increase our
alpha wa ves, wh ich would allow us access to higher states of cre ativity , a
more relaxed mind, better proble m-solving abilities, and in general many
of the same benefits one would get from years of meditation.
All of us were making major b reakthroughs. By the end of m y time
there, I was feeling a noticeable dif ference. In fact, my practice h as never
evolved so fast in such a short time.
As it turned out,  the big secret to increasing alpha waves was ju st one
thing. And we spent seven full days focusing on it.
For giveness.
The people behind the program  discovered holding onto grudges and
anger is the sin gle biggest factor suppressing alpha waves. S o it was
critical for us t o be able to release every last bit of that ou t of our
systems.
Nobody mentioned for giveness in the brochure when we signed  up for
the p rogram. W e signed up to im prove our thinking and creativity skills,
to exper ience deep states of meditation, to tame stress and anxiety . Y et
for giveness gav e us all of the above. W e could see the results in our
neurofeedback data.
W e had to for give every single person in our lives who had wronged
us, even if it was in the slightest way imaginable.
I had to for give high-school teachers, business partners, family
members—everyone I could think of who I believed had wronged me,
big or small.
And every time I did a round of for giveness, my alpha waves spiked.
The method they taught us was unbelievably ef fective.
For me it was timely . I had some major for giveness to do.
--- Page 228 ---
R e c o v e r i n g  f r o m  a  N i g h t m a r e
Sometimes, life puts you in funny , almost ironic situations.
Just three months before attending this training, I had had one of the
most horrible experiences in my life. I employ some 150 people in one of
our of fic es. And  I had discover ed that someone whom I had trusted to
run the operations and of fices  of the company had been skimming
money from us. He had created fake vendors—from air -conditioning
repairmen to cleaners and jani torial services—and then paid his own
companies exorbitant sums to service our of fice. So the person I had
hired to run our employee hous ing and of fice maintenance was in fact
paying his own companies to provide services for our company . This was
illegal and highly corrupt.
By the time he was caught, he had pocketed more than $100,000. It
was a massive b low to me. I couldn’ t believe that someone I ha d trusted
so deeply could take advantage of me in this way . I had trusted this man
for four years. I felt sick to my stomach, but I could not tell if it was
from hurt or disgust.
Unfortunately , as painful as the discovery was, the worst was  yet to
come. W hen we finally fired hi m and filed a case against him with the
police, he proceeded to go on a rampage to make my life dif fic ult. From
threats that gangsters would b eat me up, to threats of my c ar being
followed by gang members, t o disrupting our business activities by
sending the fire department to investigate fake char ges that our of fice
was a firetrap— he did everything he could for months to distract us from
our work. It w as a nerve-wracking time for me and my fam ily and
probably one of the most stressful things I’ve ever had to endure.
When we were doing the for giveness exercises at 40 Y ears of Zen, I
decided to leave him for last.
Finally , there I w as in the dark chamber , meditating. For giving a man
who had stolen from the compan y . Betrayed my trust. Threatened to hurt
me. As I finished the exercise, I heard the machine let out a sudden beep.
I had scored my highest brain wave record.
For giving this man liberated me. I’d always known that for gi veness
was extremely powerful, but never to this extent. I was also genuinely
surprised that I was able to so thoroughly for give him. But more than
that, I felt a deep sense of compassion for him.
Even though I’d been plagued by the actions of this person, I believe if
I were to see him today , I could comfortably sit down with him, have a
--- Page 229 ---
cof fee, and take the time to u nderstand him and not be unn erved or
upset.
This is what is meant by the phrase, “For give into love.”
So, for anyone who’ s looking to master Blissipline, for giveness is key .
--- Page 230 ---
E x e r c i s e :  L i b e r a t e  Y o u r s e l f  a n d  T r u l y  F o r g i v e
Here’ s how to do a simplified variation of the for giveness exercise I
learned.
--- Page 231 ---
P r e p a r a t i o n
In a note book or on your computer , make a list of people you feel have
wronged you or situations where you’ve been hurt. They could be recent
or from the distant past. This m ay not be easy to do, especially if you’re
dealing with a v ery hurtful or long-standing situation. Be patient with
yourself and remember that fo r giveness, like happiness, is a trainable
skill. In my ow n life, I have found it well worth the time a nd ef fort
needed t o releas e anger and hurt  from my heart. When you’re ready , pick
one of the people on the list and start the exercise.
--- Page 232 ---
S t e p  1 :  S e t  t h e  S c e n e
First, wi th your eyes closed, for about two minutes or so, feel yourself in
that very moment when it happe ned. Picture the environment. (In one of
my sess ions, for example, I ima gined my bullying school headmaster in
the basketball court where he had made me stand for hours in the hot sun
as punishment.)
--- Page 233 ---
S t e p  2 :  F e e l  t h e  A n g e r  a n d  P a i n
As you see the person who wronged you in front of you, get em otional.
Relive the anger and pain. Feel it burn. But don’ t do this for more than a
few minutes.
Once you bring up these emotions, move on to the next step.
--- Page 234 ---
S t e p  3 :  F o r g i v e  i n t o  L o v e
See that same person in front of you, but instead, feel compassion for
him or her . Ask  yourself: What did I learn fr om this? How did this
situation make my life better?
As I  was doing  this process, I remembered a quote from one of my
favorite authors,  Neale Donald W alsch: “[The universe] sent you nothing
but a ngels.” It im plies adopting a model of reality that everyone who has
ever ent ered ou r lives, even tho se who have hurt us, are nothing more
than messengers to teach us an important lesson.
Think about what lessons you  could derive from this situati on, as
painful as it might have been. How did these lessons help you grow?
Next, focus on the person who  wronged you. What pain or anguish
could they have gone through in their life that made them do what they
did?
Remember that hurt people, hurt people. Those who hurt others are
doing it because  at some level, at some time, they were hurt, too. Think
about how they may have been hurt in their childhood or in recent years.
When I did this exercise, I saw the man who had stolen from me and
tried to imagine him as a littl e boy . Perhaps he came from  poverty .
Perhaps he had an abusive parent. Perhaps his life was a constant
struggle, and the only means of survival as a child was to steal. I don’ t
know th e reality of his history , and I don’ t need to know it, but it was
helpful for me to imagine him in a situation where I co uld feel
compassion for him rather than just anger .
This process could take a few minutes. Afterward, you should feel a
slightly lesser negative char ge toward this person. Repeat the  process
until you feel co mfortable for giving into love. For a serious of f ense, this
could take hours or days. For a small of fense like a minor issu e with a
coworker , five minutes may be all you need. I learned f rom this
experience that you don’ t have  to ask the other person to for g ive you.
Y ou just have to for give them . And that’ s completely within your
control.
Now , th ere’ s something important to distinguish here. “For gi veness
into love” does not mean to simply let go (in my case, to drop the
char ges against  the man with the police). Y ou still need to protect
yourself and take action if need be. Criminal acts, especially , need to be
reported to authorities.
But the pain of what happened should not eat at you.
--- Page 235 ---
My friend Joe P olish, who took the training with me, sent a quote he
found on the web to me in a text message the next day:
UNFUCKWITHABLE:  When you’re tr uly at peace and in touch with
yourself. Nothi ng anyone says or does bothers you and no
negativity can touch you.
When you learn to truly for give, you become unfuckwithable.
Someone could be mean to you , and, yes, you’ll take defensiv e action
and prot ect your self if necessary . But you’re able to go on with your life
without having to waste your ener gy on them.
The thin g that truly made 40 Y e ars of Zen the most powerful personal
growth experien ce I’ve ever had  was the sense of liberation I felt at the
end of it. I had cleaned myself of so many grudges I’d held onto for
years. I let go of  painful memories I’d for gotten I had that were weighing
me down. And I finally relea sed the negative char ges I felt against
people who I believed had wronged me.
T oday , I  have never felt more a t peace with myself. Y ou can do this,
too.
--- Page 236 ---
Blissipline System 3: The Practice of Giving
The Dalai Lama once said: T o be happy , make others happy .
Giving is the path for doing this.
Giving is a natural segue fro m gratitude. Gratitude fills us with
positive feelings  and ener gy for life. When our cup is full, we have the
capacity to give to others. Dr . Emmons’ s study found that peo ple who
practiced gratitude were more caring. Dr . Baumeister ’ s research found
that bein g a self-described “giver” was linked with a greater sense of
meaning in life. He also found that meaning in life was connec ted with
doing good things for other people.
Giving h appiness to others is hugely powerful, lifts up both giver and
receiver , and it’ s easy , because happiness is contagious. It can be
anything from smiling and sayi ng good morning with gusto to  leaving
little not es in briefcases or lunchboxes; from going the extra mile on a
project to doing an extra house chore without being asked; from leaving
a though tful not e of appreciation on a coworker ’ s desk to meeting your
sweetheart at work with surpr ise tickets to an evening conc ert “just
because.”
Giving is the path for doing this. I believe that the only currenc y that
truly ma tters in an uncertain world is the kindness and generosity passed
from one human being to another .
In 2012  I decided to try an experiment with giving at Mindvalley . I
frequently apply a method I call culture hacking to help create healthier ,
more collaborative culture in my workspaces. In culture hacking, you
apply con sciousness engineering within a group to allow the members to
grow an d collab orate. This time I wanted to see what would happen if I
created more appreciation and connections between cowork ers. The
method I decided to use revolv ed around the art of giving. V a lentine’ s
Day was  coming  up, and I had b een hearing too many singles g rumbling
about it.  So, here’ s the experim ent that came out of that: For the week
before V alentine’ s Day , each person in the company drew a fellow
employee’ s nam e out of a hat. They became the secret angel of that
particular “hum an” for the wee k. W e gave each secret angel a simple
instruction: Do one nice thing a day for “your” human for five days.
Morning cof fee and croissant, ca ndy , flowers, cards, or just a simple note
of appre ciation l eft on someone’ s desk—these are just a few examples of
what people might give. At the end of the week, there’d be a big reveal,
and lots of laughter and hugs all around. W e called it Love W eek.
--- Page 237 ---
People ended up going out of their way to or ganize the  most
spectacular surprises for their humans. These included elaborate lunches
being cooked and delivered, hand-picked handicrafts, covering
someone’ s entir e desk in flowers or balloons—and even once, a plane
ticket to a holiday destination.
There w as a second surprise, too. The vast majority of emp loyees
polled said they actually enjoye d the act of giving more than t he act of
receiving their gifts. They loved planning a daily surprise of something
they knew their human would enjoy . If they didn’ t know the ir human
well, much of the fun came from finding secret ways to learn about him
or her from coworkers and coming up with creative ideas for what to
give.
The exp eriment was so successful that we now do it every year . By the
end of Love W eek, the entire of fice is buzzing with happin ess. And
while you might think that no w ork gets done with all this fun going on,
Love W eek is a ctually one of the most ef fective productivity h acks we
do each year . A Gallup study of more than ten million workers found that
those who answered yes to the statement: “My supervisor , or so meone at
work, seems to care about me  as a person” were found to be more
productive, contributed more to profits, and were significantly more
likely to stay with their company long term.
Giving is a powerful system for bringing bliss into your life. A
compliment to a coworker , a handwritten note of appreciation, inviting
someone to get ahead of you in line—all of these seemingly little things
will help elevate your happiness while creating tiny ripples that you may
not see but whe n multiplied, help us make this world a far kinder and
more beautiful place.
--- Page 238 ---
B e  m e r c i l e s s  w i t h  y o u r  k i n d n e s s .
E x e r c i s e :  W a y s  o f  G i v i n g
S t e p  1 .  L i s t  a l l  t h e  t h i n g s  y o u  c o u l d  g i v e  t o  o t h e r s .
Ideas in clude: time, love, understanding, compassion, skills, ideas,
wisdom, ener gy , physical help, and what else?
--- Page 239 ---
S t e p  2 .  D r i l l  d o w n  a n d  g e t  s p e c i f i c .
What skills (accounting, tech support, tutoring, legal assistance, writing,
of fice s kills, art skills)? What kinds of wisdom (career co unseling;
working with kids; helping others deal with an experience you’ve had,
such as going through an illness or being the victim of a crime)? What
types of physical help (fixing  things, assisting the elderly , cooking,
reading to the blind)?
--- Page 240 ---
S t e p  3 .  T h i n k  a b o u t  w h e r e  y o u  c o u l d  g i v e  h e l p .
within your family or extended f amily? At work? In your neighb orhood?
Y our city? Local businesses? Spiritual community? Local library? Y outh
or ganizations? Hospitals or n ursing homes? Political or nonprofit
or ganizations? W hat about starting a group or raising awareness about an
under -served cause?
--- Page 241 ---
S t e p  4 .  F o l l o w  y o u r  i n t u i t i o n .
Review your lists and mark the items where you feel a sur ge of
excitement.
--- Page 242 ---
S t e p  5 .  T a k e  a c t i o n .
Put out feelers, watch for coincidences that bring opportunity your way ,
and explore the possibilities.
Y ou can  also bring systems like Love W eek to your of fice or workplace.
Mindvalley has produced a gui de for companies on how to implement
this in their wor kspace. Y ou can watch a quick video and learn the steps
on www .mindvalley .com/extraordinary . T hen join us each V alentine’ s
Day week as w e initiate Love W eek together with thousands  of other
companies.
--- Page 243 ---
ON YOUR WAY TO BLISSIPLINE
I’d like to tell a story from my wife, Kristina, about an encounte r she had
with one of the wisest beings living on this Earth.
Kristina worked for an NGO a t the time and was a volunteer at the
UNHCR, the United Nations High Commission for Refugees.  Life for
refugees in Asia can be aby smal, and while Kristina’ s work was
rewarding, it was also extremel y stressful to see such misery on a daily
basis. In her w ords, it sometimes made her “feel almost gui lty about
being so happy and fortunate in my own life.”
These issues were very much on her mind when the opportunity came
up to ask the Dalai Lama a question while we were at that incredible
conference toget her in Calgary . Kristina asked, “How is it possible to be
happy when seeing so much misery and tragedy every day?”
The Dal ai Lama’ s answer was actually a question, and it was simply
this: “But who can you help if you’re unhappy?”
And this  is perhaps one of the most important things to unde rstand
about Blissipline . Y ou can be surrounded by pain. Y ou can be empathetic
and feel  for others, but ultimately the discipline of bliss allows you to
help spread more bliss in the wo rld. That is the highest expression of the
extraordinary life.
This brings us to Law 7.
--- Page 244 ---
Law 7: Live in Blissipline.
Extraordinary minds  understand that happiness comes from within. They begin with
happiness in the now and use it as a fuel to drive all their other visions and
intentions for themselves and the world.
I hope that this chapter has shown you how easy it is to bring
Blissipline into your life and how incredibly powerful the results can be.
Live Blissipline and share it, and it will take root and grow .
