--- Page 301 ---
CHAPTER 10
EMBRACE YOUR QUEST
Where We Learn How to Put It All Together
and Live a Life of Meaning
Even the smallest person can change the course of the future.
—J. R. R. T OLKIEN, THE LORD OF THE RINGS
--- Page 302 ---
WHERE WE’VE COME FROM
Each pa rt of this book represents an evolution of sorts. W ith each
evolution, you ascend to a new  level in terms of your awareness of the
world and your ability to influence it.
In a sim ple diag ram, this gradually expanding progression would look
like this:

--- Page 303 ---
Level 1: Living in the Culturescape
In Part I  o f this book, you became aw are of how the culturescape
dominates many of us. Y ou learned about how the rules of cultures—
some of which go back thousands of years—influence who you are
today . Y ou learned about Brules and how to recognize and avoid them.
At L evel 1, you  are being contr olled and shaped by the world around
you. Life happens T O you. But as you start to expand in aware ness and
influence, you move to Level 2.
--- Page 304 ---
Level 2: The Awakening
At this level, in Part II , you learned th at you can choose the world you
want to live in. Y ou take a sta nd and decide that you will choose  to
create th e world  you want to experience. Life happens as you C HOOSE.
Here you start practicing the s kill of consciousness engineering. Y ou
learn tha t your models of reality  and your systems for living are the two
components that determine who you become. Y ou learn to swap  out bad
models a nd take  on empowering ones. Y ou discover that you can create a
filter so only the most empowering models of the culturescape come
through to you. In the process , you start to realize that you have the
ability to  do more, think bigger , and be in control of your own happiness.
These realizations open you up to Level 3.
--- Page 305 ---
Level 3: Recoding Yourself
At t his level, y ou connect with the world inside you and l earn that
happiness in the now , combined with a vision for the future, put you in a
balanced state for moving powerfully toward your goals. Y ou start to
find that  your dreams and ambitions come to you with ease. Y o u realize
that you  can influence the worl d outside by changing the world inside
you. Y ou turn on your internal engine of power . W e call this  state of
being “bending reality .” There’ s a feeling of limitless opportunity . Y ou’re
shifting up to Level 4.
--- Page 306 ---
Level 4: Becoming Extraordinary
At this level, you feel secure a nd confident in your own abil ities and
strengths. Y ou are unfuckwith able. At the same time, you start to
actually change the world around you so that you contribute to the
growth and expansion of other human beings. Y ou decide that you have a
greater purpose and role to play ,  and you decide to influence the world in
a positive way . Y ou feel a call ing, a push to make the world a better
place. Life happens THROUGH you.
Thus as you ascend the levels, your relationship with life changes:
First Life happens T O you.
Then Life happens as you CHOOSE.
Then Life happens FROM you.
Then Life happens THROUGH you.
At Level 4, life is working through you to cause you to give back to
life. Y ou  becom e a servant to a higher calling. This calling is what we
call your quest.
--- Page 307 ---
FINDING YOUR QUEST
Like a character  in a computer game or a hero in an ancient tale , you’ve
been on a path of intense learning, gathering and honing your skills and
insights in crucial areas.
But there’ s one thing left to accomplish. In every great tale that has
captivated gener ations and stood the test of time, the hero is not a hero
without a quest. This chapter is about finding your quest .
Make no mistake: Y ou could remain in Level 3 and be a highly
ef fective human  being. But as you bend life more and more skill fully and
start seeing the power unleashe d by this new way of living an d as you
get used to the feeling of living in this heightened way , you may start to
wonder if there are even greater uses of this power that you haven’ t yet
thought of.
Level 4—the level of the quest—awaits those curious and
venturesome souls.
--- Page 308 ---
WHAT EXTRAORDINARY PEOPLE HAVE IN
COMMON
What keeps the men and women  whose stories I have shared in this book
going a nd going and going, w illing to take big gambles and risks?
They’re driven by a vision so big that they’re operating at a leve l beyond
the conv entional rules and limitations of work and life. When I think
about the extraordinary people I  know , there’ s something about t hem that
is inher ently positive. They pour that positive ener gy into a mission
they’re p assionate about. Ariann a Huf fington is running a medi a empire,
but she still pur sues her calling of helping people live meaning ful lives
and stay  healthy . X Prize fo under Peter Diamandis is looking to
incentivize dramatic advances to  help solve the world’ s problems. Dean
Kamen i s worki ng to bring scien ce and technology to the forefro nt in the
United States so kids will grow up to be scientists who can change the
world. Elon Musk is set on making humanity an interplanetary species.
What I’ve learned from years of studying personal growth and
speaking with many unusual thinkers and doers is this:
--- Page 309 ---
T h e  m o s t  e x t r a o r d i n a r y  p e o p l e  i n  t h e  w o r l d  d o  n o t
h a v e  c a r e e r s .  W h a t  t h e y  h a v e  i s  a  c a l l i n g .
How do we de fine a calling? It’ s pretty simple: A calling i s your
contribution to the human race . It’ s something that helps us leave the
planet better for our children. It doesn’ t have to be a massive new
business or a game-changing piece of technology . It can be  a book
you’re working on. It could be dedicating your life to raising remarkable
children. It could be working for  a company with a mission to ch ange the
world in a way that resonates with you.
The key is that  when you have this calling, work dissolves.  What
you’re d oing excites you. It’ s a passion; it’ s meaningful. Y ou’d probably
do i t for no money , since it’ s anything but work. I once witnessed
someone ask Richard Branson how he maintains work-life balance, and
his r eply was, “W ork? Life? It’ s all the same thing. I call it L IVING.”
When your work becomes a calling, the old model of work disappears.
Amy W rzesniewski, associate professor of or ganizational behavior at
Y ale Un iversity , has been studying a classification system that can help
you recognize your orientation toward your work and attain greater job
satisfaction.
She defines work in three ways:
1.A JOB  is a way to pay the bills. It’ s a means to an end, and you have
little attachment to it.
2.A CAREER  is a path toward growth and achievement. Careers have
clear ladders for upward mobility .
3.A CALLING  is work that is an important part of your life and provides
meaning. People with a calling are generally more satisfied with
the work they do.
That’ s what I’m talking about when I talk about having a calling.
Mindvalley is my calling. The mission is to touch one billion liv es, put
enlightened ideas into the world, and shake up how people live, work,
and take care of their minds and bodies. Through Mindvalley , I’m
inviting others to become extraordinary through personal growth and
learning—a personal value for myself. Education—the transmission of
knowledge, enrichment, and power from one person to another—is a
particular expression of love that I find compelling and beautiful. This
--- Page 310 ---
mission makes my work deeply meaningful and makes me happy . Even
in the lean start-up years, when I  was banging away on my computer in a
tiny apartment in New Y ork City , I was happy because I was fulfilling
my vision of sp reading meditation to the masses. Obviously  my life
today is very dif ferent. But whil e there’ s a limit to the rewards of money ,
there’ s no limit to the rewards of having and pursuing a mission.
--- Page 311 ---
THE BEAUTIFUL DESTRUCTION
If yo u’ve been pondering and p racticing what I’ve talked about in the
later chapters of this book, you’re already on your way toward this stage.
Finding your calling starts with identifying your end goals. As you do
the Three Most Important Questions exercise in Chapter 8  and create
your list of experiences, growth opportunities, and contributions, you’re
setting the stage for something magical to happen. Y ou may not know
exactly how to get to your end destination or even what that destination
is. But there’ s s omething myste rious about the human mind: Once you
choose a destination, often the right synchronicities, opportunities, and
people e mer ge i n your life to get you there. Some people call this luck. I
beg to dif fer . I believe luck is under our control. When you p ursue the
right end goals while making s ure you’re happy in the now , h appiness
unlocks the door for luck to come calling.
In fact, it often seems as if you don’ t find your quest. Rather , your
quest finds you.
The path may not be a straig ht line. Y ou might have old Brules,
models of reality , and systems for living (your own and maybe others’)
to challe nge or dismantle first. Y ou may experience dips, stops, starts,
and speed bumps. But it’ s all pa rt of the process. Those bumps are often
signposts design ed to turn you in the right direction and get you  moving
toward y our call ing. This recoding of your life won’ t always be neat and
tidy . Remember:
--- Page 312 ---
S o m e t i m e s  y o u  h a v e  t o  d e s t r o y  a  p a r t  o f  y o u r  l i f e  t o
l e t  t h e  n e x t  b i g  t h i n g  e n t e r .
I call this the beautiful destruction . T rust is the key that unlocks it. I
once asked Arianna Huf fington  the same questions I asked Elon Musk:
“What m akes you Arianna? If w e could distill you and try to ext ract your
essence, what is it that makes you you?”
Arianna replied:
I would say tru st. I have an incredible trust in life. One of my
favorite quotes is a little misquote: “Live life as though everything
is rigged  in your favor .” I really profoundly believe that what ever
has happened in my life, incl uding the biggest heartbreaks, the
biggest disappointments, was exactly what was needed to help me
get to the next stage of my own personal evolution and growth. I
always h ad a sense of that, but now I believe that so profound ly . I
can lite rally see the hidden blessing in every bad thing that
happened.
There are names for these little nudges that move you toward your
calling.
--- Page 313 ---
ENTER K E N S H O AND S A T O R I
My friend Dr . M ichael Bernard Beckwith, the inspiring found er of the
Agape I nternational Spiritual Center in Los Angeles, talks about two
dif ferent p aths to life growth: kensho  and satori . Kensho  is growth by
pain. Satori  is growth by awakening.
Kensho  i s a grad ual pro cess that often happens through the tribulations
of life. A relatio nship breaks up, but you learn from it and y our heart
becomes more resilient. Y ou los e a business, but you use the har d-earned
wisdom to start your next one. Y ou lose your job, but you learn who you
are b eyond your career . Y ou su f fer a health problem, but you discover
personal reserve s you didn’ t k now you had. Kensho  is the universe
giving you tough love.
Bottom line: Y ou go through so me kind of pain or dif ficulty through
which you learn dif ferent ways t o feel, think, and be. Y ou might not even
notice these changes while they’ re happening. Imagine the tectonic shifts
of the continents. W e can’ t see them happening, but mapped over time,
it’ s clear the world has changed.
In retrospect, you might even view these painful events as positive
forces that pushed you to challenge beliefs and systems that were
holding you back in ways you hadn’ t realized (what we often call the
blessing in disguise or the clou d’ s silver lining). Dr . Beckwith suggests
that kensho  is our soul’ s way of calling on us to grow .
Kensho  was  hav ing my salary cut in hal f at work after I got back from
my honeymoon . It forced me to start a side business that e nded up
becoming Mindvalley .
Kensho  was  los ing my US visa. It moved me to Malaysia, where I had
no inkling of the impact I would have on entrepreneurship in that
country .
Kensho  was  Mi ndvalley about to go bu st in May 2008, leading me to
discover new models for usin g my mind that led to a 400  percent
increase in the company’ s revenue.
In contr ast, Dr . Beckwith defines satori  m omen ts as big insights that
happen suddenl y and change y ou forever . They can happen anytime,
anywhere—while you’re out in nature, listening to music or seeing
inspiring art, holding hands with a loved one, quietly contemplating, or
being in  a personal growth situation, such as with a therapist, te acher , or
healer . O nce you’ve had a satori  moment, the stuf f that used to scare you
or hold you back  is left in the du st. Y ou’ve leveled up and can operate on
--- Page 314 ---
a whole new plane. If you were to plot your growth as quality of life over
time, s atori  moments would look like sudden bursts upward, while
kensho  m omen ts woul d start with a dip and then shoot upward as y ou
recover and then assimilate your new learnings.
So, you see, her e’ s a new model for understanding the problem s that
happen to us in life. It could be that our problems are nothing m ore than
a fri endly universe whispering i n our ear as we hike through li fe: “Hey ,
you’re on the wrong path. Check out the view from this  angle.”
Dr . Beck with once shared with me this little wisdom-bomb during an
interview:
Behind every problem, there’ s a question trying to ask itself.
Behind every question, there’ s an answer trying to reveal itself.
Behind every answer , there’ s an action trying to take place.
And behind every action, there’ s a way of life trying to be born.
That new  way of life trying to be  born is your calling. And who knows
how this calling might influence the world and those around you?
--- Page 315 ---
YOU ARE THE CHOSEN ONE
Do y ou choose your calling, or does your calling choose you? T here is a
model of reality emer ging that suggests that the universe comes calling
—and your job is to listen.
My friend Emily Fletcher , a wonderful and vivacious meditation
instructor who has spoken at H arvard Business School and at Google,
told me in an interview this story about pop music legend Michael
Jackson and the universe, which she refers to as “nature”:
If you watch the documentary , Michael Jackson’ s This Is It,  they
interview his manager . He said that Michael used to call him all  the
time at like three, four , five in the morning. And the manager was
saying Mike would be like, “Fi reflies. W e need fireflies.” And his
manager would be like, “Mich ael, it’ s four in the morning. W e’ll
talk abo ut this tomorrow .” And Michael would say , “No, I need you
to w rite it down. I need you to get up and write it down. Fireflies.”
And his  manager would say , “W hy? W e’ll talk about it tomorrow .”
And he’ s like, “If we don’ t do it, Prince will.”
I lik e this story because to me it’ s illustrating that Michael . . .
knew th at if he didn’ t take acti on, if he didn’ t lead with creation,
that natu re would look for som eone else. It’ s like nature is just
trying to  create all the time, an d it’ s looking for people who  are
awake. I t’ s looking for people who are willing to raise their ha nds
and bring something from the unmanifest into the manifest. And I
don’ t think that it’ s choosy about who it is. It’ s like, “W ell, if you
don’ t do it, then fine. I’ll choose this other person.” And so th is is
why the more we create, the more of nature’ s support we get. It’ s
like imagine that nature is the CEO of the company and then we’re
all the employees. And if you’re the CEO of a company , which of
your em ployees are you going to give the raise to? Which of your
employees are you going to giv e more important jobs to? The one
who is not executing on anything or the one who is creating and
executing and coming in with new ideas every day?
Emily is  saying that when a mission needs to manifest, the un iverse
(or , as she calls it, nature) may knock on your door and bless you with
that intuition. But it’ s up to you to jump on it. If you don’ t, the universe
will move on to the next person. The universe doesn’ t care who’ s going
--- Page 316 ---
to chang e the world. It just wan ts someone who’ll seize the idea and run
with it.
In the book Big Magic: Cr eative Living beyond Fear ,  Elizabeth Gilbert
talks ab out a similar phenomenon. Gilbert talks about how she would
come up with a very specific book idea, and then somethin g would
happen in her li fe to distract he r from working on the book. She’d later
find the exact sa me book emer ging from another writer ’ s mind—a writer
who chose to act on it.
Gilbert writes, “I believe inspiration will always try its best to work
with you—but if you’re not ready or available, it may indeed choose to
leave you and to search for a dif ferent human collaborator .”
There’ s even a name for this s ort of occurrence. It’ s called multiple
discovery . Gilbert describes it as:
. . . insp iration h edging its bets, fiddling with the dials, working
two chan nels at the same time. I nspiration is allowed to do that if it
wants to . Inspira tion is allowed to do whatever it wants to, in fact,
and it is never obliged to justify its motives to any of us. (As fa r as
I’m conc erned, w e’re lucky that inspiration talks to us at all; it’ s  too
much to ask that it also explain itself.)
So, let’ s say this model is true—that the universe does indeed  come
calling. W ell, then, you damn well better take those marching orders!
But here’ s the in sight that makes me smile. If it’ s true that the universe
does come calling and has chosen you for its grand new design, whatever
that is, then it m eans that just lik e every great hero in legend, film, or the
best computer games, you ar e literally the Chosen One for your
particular quest.
Ain’ t that something?
Y ou can access the full session  with me and Emily Fletcher discussing
this idea in further detail on www .mindvalley .com/extraordinary .
--- Page 317 ---
THE GODICLE THEORY
As you ascend the levels and get to Level 4, several unique and beautiful
new models of r eality will open up to you. I found the models below to
be c onsistent in every person I interviewed for this book. Each is a
unique approach to living, and each leads to the other:
1. Extraordinary people feel a unique connectedness and kinship to all
life.
2. Extraordinary people are open to intuitive insights they attain
through this connection.
3. Extraordinary people allow thei r intuition to lead them to a vision
that pulls them forward.
4. As extraordinary people serve this calling, the universe blesses
them with luck.
This feeling of being lucky reinforces their sense of connectedness and
kinship to all life. It’ s a virtuous circle because each leads to the other .
The feeling of b eing lucky or blessed leads to a feeling of eve n greater
connectedness w ith the world as you seek to share these blessings.
Illustrated, it looks like this:
--- Page 318 ---
Combined, I call this model of reality the Godicle Theory . Her e’ s the
idea: If there is a God, or Universe, or Life Force, or whatever we choose
to call it, I believe that it is deeply connected with all of life and all of
humanity .
If th is is so, then we are particl es of this “God.” I call these pa rticles
Godicles. The idea is that you, me, and every other human being on this
planet are Godicles experiencing creation.
Whether you choose to interpret this as meaning that we a re the
metaphysical essence of God or we that are made from stardust is your
choice. Either way , it’ s an empowering model of reality . (Remember ,
models o f reality  do not have to be scientifically true. Y ou can take on a
model as a philosophy if it empowers you.)
The Godicle Theory is interesting to me because of what it implies:
First, tha t all of us are connected , all life is connected, and we’re all in
this together .
Second, if we’re all connected, t hen we’re capable of intuitive insights
gained from this connection.
--- Page 319 ---
Third, there is a higher collective mind that seeks new visions for the
betterment of itself and that pic ks individual Godicles to work on
them. These Godicles experience this calling as their “quest.”
And finally , if w e are particles of God, then it’ s beautiful to thin k that
we are endowed with certain God-like powers.
Perhaps this is why we sometim es seem to bend reality when  we’re
pursuing our quest.
All of this is, of  course, just theory . It’ s a personal spiritual model of
reality that I p lay with. But i t also comes from observation of the
extraordinary people I have met. They embody these ideas. Y ou do, too.
Y ou just have to step outside the culturescape and go within.
Let’ s look at how the elements of the Godicle Theory might play out
in your life at Level 4.
--- Page 320 ---
1: You Feel a Connectedness with All Life
At t his level, yo u start to feel a deep connectedness with the w orld. All
of huma nity—all cultures, all nations, and all people seem to resonate
with you  as part of one family . Ken W ilber describes this phenomenon as
moving into world-centric consc iousness. Simply put, people in Level 4
start to see past the Brules that divide them and understand that dif ferent
cultures, dif fere nt religions, and dif ferent countries are not so dif ferent
after all.  W e’re one species, on one planet. The only dif ference is what’ s
in our heads. At  Level 4, you can have an ardent patriotism for y our own
country , an appreciation for you r religion, but you’re equally in awe and
respectful of other cultures, nations, and religions. Interestingly , the
overwhelming m ajority of people I meet who are at Lev el 4 are
humanists, not subscribing to an y one world religion but instea d having
an appreciation of and reverence for humanity as a whole.
It’ s imp ortant to make a qualifying statement at this point in our
journey . Many men and women  throughout history have had a sense of
extreme mission—but rather tha n push humanity forward, they ended up
starting wars, engaging in massive failed social experiments (think
Joseph Stalin), or becoming pro ne to dangerous ideas such as religious
fundamentalism. All of these have one thing in common—they viewed a
particular idea or group of peo ple as being superior to another group.
This is the oppo site of true connectedness, for true connectedness does
not recognize borders, color , or other such models of dif ferentiation. The
truly extraordinary have reverence for humanity as a whole.
--- Page 321 ---
2: You Are Tapped into Intuition
Y our intuition at this level becom es incredibly strong. Y ou feel drawn to
people o r oppor tunities as if yo u had a homing beacon. Y ou often wake
up with  amazing ideas floating around in your mind. These intuitive
impulses seem to guide you toward the right opportunities and ideas.
I agree with Dr . Beckwith’ s beautiful idea that when we’re in this
state, the calling isn’ t coming fr om us. It’ s coming thr ough  us. I believe
intuition is a c onduit for that. This is why Blissipline is so  crucial.
Happiness is the fuel for intuitio n. When you’re stressed or fea rful, you
shut intuition down.
Thanks to intuition, when you set end goals, you don’ t necessarily
need to know HOW to attain th em. T oo many people trap them selves in
the c hains of rea listic goals because they refuse to see beyond t he HOW .
Don’ t w orry abo ut the HOW . St art with the WHA T and the WHY . When
you kno w what you want to bring forth in the world and WHY you want
it, choo se it. Then take whate ver action intuition guides you toward
taking.
--- Page 322 ---
3: You Are Pulled by a Vision
At this level, your goals are plugged into your lar ger mission. A mission
provides the fuel that keeps us g oing. W ithout a mission, work is a four -
letter wo rd. W ith a mission, work dissolves. As many mission -oriented
workers say , their job stops being work and becomes something that adds
to the quality of their life, rather than detracting from it.
And so traditional goals don’ t m otivate you; instead, you’re pulled by
bigger v isions to  serve the worl d. Dr . Beckwith shared this insight with
me about living with purpose:
It’ s a  mu ch higher way of being. So you don’ t give up goals, yo u
don’ t give up tasks . . . you still have them but they don’ t run you. . .
. Wh en you are living under a g oal-oriented model, you are pushed;
you need motivation. [But] whe n you are living your purpose, you
are now pulled by a vision.
At t his level, you wake up every day excited about what you’re
working on. It may be your day job, or it may be a volunteer project or a
venture you’re working to get of f the ground. Whatever it is, th e calling
to serve is strong. It drives you. It lights a fire under your ass to move. In
the o ld p aradigm of goals, you n eeded motivation to go after yo ur goals.
A whole industry of motivational tools has been born to support such
ef forts. But motivation is only needed when you’re chasing a Brule—a
means goal. When you chase end goals, especially end goals related to
your cal ling, you no longer need to be “motivated.” Instead,  you are
PULLED by your vision.
--- Page 323 ---
4: You Feel As If Luck Is on Your Side
At this level, all sorts of coincidences, synchronicities, and lucky breaks
seem to happen to push you forward. Y ou thus tend to be positive,
enthusiastic, and optimistic about the world and life.
When y ou’re w orking on a go al that is out of alignment with your
calling, very often you will face  roadblocks. This is why we so metimes
fail to reach our goals. But think of these roadblocks as kensho  moments
—as gentle taps to get your blinders of f so you can see what you’re
really meant to be doing with your life.
Here’ s a new model worth considering. Failure is often nothing more
than goo d luck in disguise: the destruction of an old way of lif e so you
can create the ne xt grand vision of yourself. When you finally get on the
right track, pointed toward that mission that life chose you for , just like
the chos en one of countless films, you start to find huge rese rvoirs of
untapped power  and support com ing your way . Some people ca ll it luck.
Y ou kno w better . Y ou’re just an other Godicle being pulled toward your
quest.
This brings us to Law 10.
--- Page 324 ---
Law 10: Embrace your quest.
Extraordinary minds are motivated by a quest or calling—a drive to create some
positive change in the world. This drive  propels them forward in life and helps them
to gain meaning and make a meaningful contribution.
--- Page 325 ---
GETTING STARTED
When it  comes to finding your mission, it helps to remember t hese two
ideas from the culturescape as potential Brules that might hold you back.
--- Page 326 ---
Brule 1: You Have to Be an Entrepreneur
When I give ta lks, especially to college students, I’m struck  by how
many people think that in order to make a meaningful contribution in
life, they have t o become an en trepreneur . When I tell them, “ No—you
do n ot have to  be an entrep reneur in order to move tow ard your
mission,” I can almost hear the sighs of relief. There’ s been a Brule
going a round in recent years that the greatest achievers become
entrepreneurs, a nd employees are just working stif fs. Not true. I used to
advocate being an entrepreneur , but I started questioning this Brule when
I noticed that many of the best people I’ve hired at Mindvalley were
former entrepreneurs. Sometimes they made this change because they
started businesse s solely to earn a living but discovered something—the
mission—was m issing. Others  had businesses with an educational
mission but realized that being part of a lar ger , more establish ed entity
would add to their momentum, so they came onboard with us.
Many o f the most important people in the world today are not
entrepreneurs. Many leading sc ientists, engineers, and innova tors who
are chan ging the world are do ing it as employees at lar ge, well-run,
mission-driven or ganizations.
Entrepreneurism is a means goal, not an end goal. The end g oal is
usually living a life of purpos e, combined with the experiences that
freedom and money can bring. But in today’ s world, you can get those
things by working for the right company . Extraordinary people focus on
whatever actions they need to t ake to move their mission forw ard. So,
instead of thinking, I have to become an entr epr eneur so I can fulfill my
mission,  f ocus on your m ission as the end goal, and let it guide you. Star t
with yo ur mission and then decide if it will mean becoming an
entrepreneur , joining an established team, funding a company , or going
to work  for one. Don’ t get stu ck in the entrepreneur -versus-e mployee
model. Bottom line: Entrepreneu rship is not a goal in itself. It is the side
ef fect of having the right end goals.
--- Page 327 ---
Brule 2: The Career Myth
Let’ s talk about your career . Ar e you really in the right career for you?
T oo often, people pursue careers solely for money or titles. Both can be
dangerous to your long-term happiness. Getting sucked into these models
can happ en to anyone choosing  a career path because they majored in a
particular field in college, or their parents nudged them into it, or the
culturescape su ggests a certain career as the proper path— and not
because it’ s meaningful to them. Y ou could be damning yoursel f to soul-
stealing work for years or decades in that kind of job.
I k now that at ti mes you may have no choice—you might have to pay
the bills , just as I did when I took my dialing-for -dollars job . If that
happens to you, it’ s important to be doing things in other parts of your
life that reflect movement toward a mission you believe in. In my case,
for exam ple, I started teaching meditation on the side because  I felt it
gave me the meaning my job did not.
But on the flip side, company jobs can get a bad rap. If you find a
company that matches your mission, you can have an in credibly
rewarding career . B ut you must choose the  right company . If working for
a c ompa ny is where you’re at o r where you’re headed, here’ s the main
thing to look for:
--- Page 328 ---
I s  y o u r  c o m p a n y  a  h u m a n i t y - p l u s  o r  a  h u m a n i t y -
m i n u s  c o m p a n y ?
I believe that the key to long-term career happiness is the ability to
dif ferentiate be tween humanity-plus and humanity-minus settings.
Here’ s how I define these terms.
Humanity-minus companies are often businesses that exist solely for a
profit m otive. There’ s nothing wrong with this, but it’ s hard er to get
excited about your company’ s m ission when it’ s not adding any value to
the w orld, or wo rse, if the comp any is selling harmful products like junk
food or is engaged in unsustainable practices like fossil fuels.
Other humanity- minus compani es are founded on artificial demand—
that is, selling products we don’ t truly need and that might even be
potentially harmful, but they are marketed as necessities for w ell-being
or h appiness. Y ou know what I’m talking about. W e see those a ds on TV
every day .
Humanity-plus companies, in contrast, push the human race forward.
Some examples include companies focusing on clean, renewable ener gy
sources, companies that promote  healthy eating and living, or companies
working on new ways to elevate and improve life on our planet. Ideally ,
these ar e the companies we s hould be working for , supporting, and
starting.
Y ou can work for a company in a traditional industry like ai rlines,
insurance, elect ricity , and more, and that company might still have a
powerful mission that inspires you and others. Think of S outhwest
Airlines, for example—it’ s a traditional industry , but they are
contributing to the world by ra dically innovating on customer service
and customers’ experiences when they fly .
Whatever your mission turns ou t to be—whether it’ s starting you r own
business, joining  a business, pursuing a cause outside of wor k, letting
your creative light shine out to the world, or devoting yourself to raising
amazing children, there’ s really only one thing you need to remember:
--- Page 329 ---
Y o u  d o n ’ t  h a v e  t o  s a v e  t h e  w o r l d .  J u s t  d o n ’ t  m e s s  i t
u p  f o r  t h e  n e x t  g e n e r a t i o n .
DISCOVERING YOUR QUEST
How do you get started with finding your mission?
This technique comes from my friend, author and speaker Martin
Rutte, creator of projectheavenonearth.com . Martin suggests you ask
yourself these three questions in  order to help you identify your calling
—fast. I’ve tested this out with people, and it’ s amazing how rapidly they
come up with a purpose or mission they might want to explore.
The first question is: Recall a time when you experienced Hea ven on
Earth. What was happening?
The second question is: Imagine you have a magic wand and with it
you can create Heaven on Earth. What is Heaven on Earth for you?
And now the fin al question: What simple, easy , concrete step(s) will
you take in the next twenty-four hours to make Heaven on Earth real?
While asking yourself these questions, what words and phrases come
to m ind? What i mages do you s ee? W rite them all down. Draw  pictures.
Record yourself speaking your thoughts if that helps the ideas flow .
As you do this, p ay attention to your emotional reactions. (Reme mber:
T rue end goals tend to be feelings.) Do you feel your heart ope n or beat
faster? Does your gut literally respond? Does your breath catch or
deepen? Do you gasp with excitement? These are your first big clues to
your mission. Remember the words of Steve Jobs:
Have the courage to follow your heart and intuition. The y
somehow already know what you truly want to become. Everything
else is secondary .
Get guided: I’ve arranged with Martin Rutte to guide you through this
process. Y ou can access the video at
www .mindvalley .com/extraordinary .
--- Page 330 ---
ADVICE FOR THE EXTRAORDINARY SOUL
At a  certain po int you might decide to take the plunge. K now that
success might not come fast or easily . It sometimes seems that many of
the people who make the news hit the jackpot fast. Not true.
I spo ke to my friend Peter Diamandis, one of the most influenti al men
in Silic on V alley , to ask hi s advice on what “makes someone
extraordinary .” Peter is the founder of Singularity University and the X
Prize Foundation. He’ s been hailed as one of the foremost leaders in the
world to day . Peter associates with men like Larry Page of Google and
Elon Mu sk (wh o sits on his board)—so I asked Peter what he thought
made these individuals, as well as himself, so successful. This  is what
Peter said:
I’ll tell you that  it’ s perseverance; it’ s having a heartfelt passion
and emotionally driven passion—something you want to solve on
the p lanet that w akes you up in  the morning and keeps you up at
night. Fo r other people, it might be something they despise or some
injustice in the w orld they want to solve. I know a lot of the time,
doing an ything big and bold in the world is hard, unless you h ave
that emotional guiding star , that passion—most people fail by
giving up—not by something that stops them.
Notice t wo things Peter mentioned. It won’ t be easy . But if you have a
passion that keeps you going, you have an edge. This is yet another
reason why identifying your pa rticular calling—something that ignites
that passion in your mind, heart, and soul—is so important.
Peter also once told me: “If I had one superpower , it wou ld be
persistence. X Prize took me ten years to get of f the ground.”
Elon Musk told me something similar: “I have a high toleran ce for
pain.”
If you recall my story , you’ll notice a similar pattern. My failures and
misfortunes were often just as spectacular as my successes. I took a lot of
jobs jus t to keep body and sou l together . My career path look ed oddly
ordinary before a sudden burst of success in my later years.
Here’ s m y list of jobs at various ages. Notice how plain and sim ple my
career was, and the various dips in between. I hope this list inspires you
to know that if you’re on a dip at the moment, it may just be a kensho
moment.
--- Page 331 ---
TV commercial actor—(age) 18
Stage actor—19
Dishwasher—19
Stagehand—19
W eb designer—20
Theater troupe director—21
Java programmer—21
Photojournalist—21
Bug tester at Microsoft—22
V ice president of a nonprofit—23
Unemployed—24
B2B salesman—25
Unemployed again—25
Phone sales—25
Director of sales—26
Meditation instructor—27
Small website owner—28
Start-up founder—29
CEO of Mindvalley—35
Despite the long slog, I kept g oing. So, stick with it—but to ensure
that you’re able to handle the bumps and dips, make sure t hat your
mission is one that will sustain you.
As we part ways for now , I ho pe that you see the beautiful jo urney
waiting for you. Perhaps like me, you grew up in a world where children
were ask ed, “What do you want  to be when you grow up?” Tha t’ s a sure
setup fo r a Brule-based life. I believe that in the future we’ll instead be
asking c hildren, “What positive mark do you want to leave on t he world
in your lifetime?”
Remember that you can ask you rself that question now . It’ s never too
late.
Is there any downside? you may ask.
--- Page 332 ---
People might tell you that you’re crazy . They’ll worry about you.
They’ll try to talk you out of it.
But some people will want t o come play . There’ s nothing more
captivating than  a person vibran t with life and passion and pursuing their
calling. They come from having  end goals that bring meaning and from
being ha ppy in the now . Peopl e who radiate this ener gy are magnetic
because they’re living meaningf ul lives and helping others do the same.
When you live at the level of extraordinary , you’ll attract oth ers who
want to live there, too. And tog ether , you’ll create a better worl d for the
generations who follow .
--- Page 333 ---
Y o u r  t r u e  g r e a t n e s s  c o m e s  w h e n  y o u  f o c u s  n o t  o n
b u i l d i n g  a  c a r e e r  b u t  o n  f i n d i n g  y o u r  q u e s t .
SO TAKE A STEP AND TRUST
I w ant to share s ome wise advice from the book Think and Gr ow Rich  by
Napoleon Hill. Basically , he says that if you aren’ t sure what to do, just
take a step—a tiny baby step. When the universe calls on you , even if
you don’ t know the exact path to success—take a baby step.
Baby steps show intention. T hey show that you’re standing at
attention and you received the marching orders. Y ou may not know the
optimal path to get where you’re bound to go, but your boots are on and
you’re g oing. Y ou may be ste pping into the big wide unknown, but
you’ll take the marching orders anyway .
And something will come of th at. Y ou’ll get some feedback an d take
the n ext step. If it’ s in the wrong  direction, no worries. A little kensho  or
a nu dge of intu ition will be th ere to guide you. And then you’ll take
another step, which might lead  you to a person who can help or to a
resource you didn’ t even know existed.
Keep the steps as tiny as they need to be as you feel your way . One of
my f irst baby ste ps was to regis ter the company name Mindvalley . I had
a p iece of paper saying I owned that LLC. I didn’ t have anyth ing more
than that, but getting that piece of paper allowed me to begin to create a
vision ar ound a company that at  least already had a name. Baby steps are
more powerful than you think. They telegraph your intention to the
universe: “I heard you loud and  clear . Bring it on, baby! T ell me what
you need done. I’ll make it happen.”
So, don’ t worry  if you don’ t know exactly how to reach your goals.
Just take one small step at a time.
1. Step out of the culturescape.
2. T oss away the Brules.
3. Grab your toolkit for consciousness engineering.
4. Pick up your empowering models of reality .
5. Don’ t for get to pack your systems for living.
6. Keep your mind firmly on bending reality .
--- Page 334 ---
7. W alk with Blissipline.
8. Hold your end goals firmly in your hand.
9. Be unfuckwithable.
10. Open that door and march firmly toward your quest.
The world can’ t wait to see what you’re going to do next.
--- Page 335 ---
APPENDIX
TOOLS FOR YOUR JOURNEY
--- Page 336 ---
Practice Transcendence: Where You Learn
How to Integrate Key Systems from This Book
into a Powerful Personal Practice
It seems to me, therefore, that educated people no longer have a right to any form
of spiritual provincialism. The truths of Eastern spirituality are now no more Eastern
than the truths of Western science are Western. We are merely talking about
human consciousne ss and its possible  states. My purpose . . . is to encourage you
to investigate certain contemplative insights for yourself, without accepting the
metaphysical ideas that they inspired in ignorant and isolated peoples of the past.
—SAM HARRIS, W AKING UP
--- Page 337 ---
WHAT IS TRANSCENDENCE?
T ranscendence is the act of going beyond the physical world to embrace
that whi ch cannot be seen. In this book you learned about tran scendent
practices like gratitude and for giveness. Here we’ll go deeper and create
a s tructu red practice around these processes. Y ou’ve learned a to n of new
systems for living in this book. Here’ s where we bring it all together in
one daily habit.
Often pe ople ask  me, “V ishen, w hat do you do daily to integrate these
ideas—what is your daily practi ce?” In this section I’m going to share a
transcendent pra ctice that I custom-designed and use. I call it the Six-
Phase. The Six-Phase unifies several key ideas in this book into one
integrated daily practice that spans fifteen to twenty minutes and  leaves a
powerful mark on your state of  being. Y ou can use it as a me ditation,
though it’ s actually a lot more than meditation alone.
The Six -Phase is rooted in scien ce and personal study . The Six-Phase
will not just ma ke you happier and less stressed but will also make you
healthier and more powerful at living your quest. Several professional
sports te ams are currently using it as part of their mental traini ng as are
several major entrepreneurs.
Over the last ten years, I’ve built many of the world’ s top meditation
programs and apps, becoming on e of the biggest promoters of meditation
on t he planet. I taught classes  in New Y ork and London, launched
several meditatio n brands such as OmHarmonics, and my meditation app
Omvana, which became the number -one highest-grossing health and
fitness a pp on iT unes in more t han thirty countries. I share this so you
know I’m not just a dabbler in meditation. I’ve been researc hing and
innovating on meditation pract ices for a decade. Y et the Six-Phase is
NOT me ditation by conventiona l definition. I cannot stress this  enough.
People who get bored with meditation or who simply cannot meditate
thrive with the Six-Phase. And  many people who practice traditional
meditation switc h to the Six-Phase because they find that they get the
same health results as meditati on, but as a bonus they also see their
performance at work and life soar . This is why I prefer to call it a
transcendent practice rather than a meditation practice.
What I’ m about  to share with you is the VER Y BEST approach to
combining trans cendent practices that I’ve discovered. I’ll explain it and
give you clear directions on how to experience it.
This practice will help you:
--- Page 338 ---
Make B lissipline part of your d aily life and extend your happiness
levels throughout the day .
Focus on your end goals and the steps you need to take to get there.
Become unfuckwithable by cl earing out anxiety and practicing
for giveness.
Connect to your intuition and inner voice, find an optimal path to
your quest, and steer clear of Brules. Often during the Six-Phase,
flashes of insight, ideas, and eureka moments will come.
Gain res ilience to move past the inevitable bumps on the road to
your calling.
And that’ s just the beginning. Y ou also get the benefits of a meditation
practice. The sheer number of benefits of meditation are at this point so
vast that  I won’ t cover them her e. Just know that as of the time this book
was published, there have been some 1,400 studies done on the  benefits
of meditation.
--- Page 339 ---
THE PROBLEM WITH MEDITATION
There ar e thousa nds of dif ferent styles of meditation, but they all fall into
one of two categories: meditation methods derived from monastic
practices and meditation practices designed for the modern human being.
All m editation is beneficial, but unless you’re a monk, you don’ t want
to m editate like one. It’ s inef ficient and slow . Many of these prac tices are
still rooted in dogma and haven’ t been updated for centuries.
According to Emily Fletcher , who founded the Ziva meditation school
in New Y ork City , the biggest misconception about meditation is that its
purpose is to stop your mind from thinking. Just try to stop thinking.
Dif ficult, huh? As Emily says, when people try that, it’ s usually “the
beginning and end of their meditation career .” She continues:
But if we go into this thinking that the point of meditation is to
get g ood at life— not to get good  at meditation, and if we accept the
reality th at no one can give their mind a command to stop, then  it’ s
so much  more innocent, so much more playful, and so much more
enjoyable. T rying to give your mind a command to stop thinking is
as ef fective as giving your heart a command to stop beating—it
doesn’ t work.
The Six-Phase draws on many  dif ferent methods to bring y ou an
optimized meditation experience you can personalize to your schedule,
needs, and life. It’ s roo ted in science an d allows you to incorporate eve ry
idea of this boo k into your life  in just fifteen minutes a day . And you
won’ t be asked to clear your mind.
--- Page 340 ---
INTRODUCING THE SIX-PHASE
The Six -Phase i s a mental hack to get you to the level of extraordinary
faster than ever before.
Each ph ase of the Six-Phase is designed to enhance one of s ix key
skills. The first three contribute to happiness in the now . The next three
contribute to your vision for the future.
Here’ s why we’re focusing on these six phases:
1.COMP ASSION.  I believe that all human beings need love and
compassion in their lives. This phase is about helping you be
kinder toward others and kinder toward yourself. It’ s a powerful
self-love tool.
2.GRA TITUDE.  W e may have many goals, but it’ s important to
appreciate and be happy about what we’ve accomplished thus far .
Gratitude has a high correlation with well-being and happiness.
3.FORGIVENESS.  Being at peace with the world and the people around
you is one of the most ef fective ways to maintain Blissipline. Plus,
it makes you unfuckwithable.
4.FUTURE DREAMS.  As you learned in chapters 7  and 8 , it’ s hugely
ener gizing to have a vision pulling you forward—a picture of how
you want your life to unfold in the future.
5.THE PERFECT DA Y.  This phase gives you a sense of control over how
life unfolds every day . It translates your future dreams into
actionable steps.
6.THE BLESSING.  W e need to feel supported, resting in the knowledge
that whatever big projects we’re setting out to do, things are going
--- Page 341 ---
to be okay . This phase is about making you feel safe and supported
in your quest.
W e’ll first review each phase so  you can familiarize yourself with how
they unfold. Then I’ll share exactly how to perform each phase.
At th e e nd of this chapter , I’ll a lso make available an app and a video
you can watch th at will easily gu ide you through this meditation anytime
you want.
--- Page 342 ---
Phase 1: Compassion
This pha se is about feeling connected to others and feeling a sense of
kinship with and kindness toward all of life, which we discussed in
Chapter 10 . In this phase, you express your intention of extending
greater compass ion and love t o an ever -widening circle of h umanity ,
starting with your family and friends and then widening all the way to
encompass the planet. Compassion practices make you a bette r human
being, a nd some studies have found that men and women found
compassion or kindness to be one of the most attractive qualities in the
opposite sex (so this might improve your love life, too).
--- Page 343 ---
Phase 2: Gratitude
Science shows that gratitude increases ener gy , reduces anxiety , improves
sleep, and creates feelings of social connection—that’ s why several
exercises in this book focus on  it. In this phase, just think about three
things y ou’re grateful for in your personal life, three things you’re
grateful for in y our career , and three things you’re grateful f or about
yourself. This last one is important. Often we look for love from others
but fail to truly love ourselves.
--- Page 344 ---
Phase 3: Forgiveness
As I shared in Chapter 7 , for give ness is critical to Blissipline and the
peak sta tes needed for extraordinary living. Here you’ll incorporate the
for giveness exercise from that chapter into your daily practice.
Science is now showing that fo r giveness can lead to profound health
benefits, including reduced back pain, higher athletic performance, better
heart he alth, and greater feelings of happiness. One study of  a small
group of  people with chronic back pain showed that those who m editated
with a focus on moving from an ger to compassion reported less pain and
anxiety compare d to those who got regular care. Another stu dy found
that for giving someone improved blood pressure and reduced the
workload on the heart. Interesting that lightening the heart of negativity
should literally help it.
Research on the impact of for giveness by Xue Zheng of Er asmus
University’ s Rotterdam School of Management showed that for giveness
makes th e body seemingly stronger . “Our research shows that for givers
perceive a less daunting world and perform better on challenging
physical tasks,” said Zheng.
In one study , pa rticipants could  actually jump higher after writing an
account of for giving someone who had harmed them. In another study by
Zheng, p articipants who were asked to guess at the steepness of a hill
described the hill as less steep after they had written down an account of
an incid ent where they had for given someone. In a previous chapter , I
described my own powerful experiences with for giveness  during
meditation. That’ s why for giveness is one of the components of the Six-
Phase—it strengthens not only your body , but also your soul.
--- Page 345 ---
Phase 4: Future Dreams
Up to this poin t, you’ve focused on the present. In this ph ase, you
express intention s for your futu re happiness. I credit this phase with the
massive growth and joy I’ve e xperienced in my career . Y ears ago, I
visualized the life I have today . T oday , I visualize years ahead w hile still
being happy in the now . Doing  this on a daily basis seems to  help my
brain find the optimal paths to realizing my dreams.
When I’m visualizing my future life, I think three years ahead, and I
suggest you do t he same in this phase. And whatever you see th ree years
ahead—double it. Because your  brain will underestimate what you can
do. W e tend to  underestimate  what we can do in three y ears and
overestimate what we can do in one year .
Some people think that being “ spiritual” means having to be c ontent
with one ’ s current life. Rubbish. Y ou should be happy no matter where
you are. But that shouldn’ t stop you from dreaming, growing, and
contributing.
Choose an end goal from your answers to the Three Most Imp ortant
Questions in Chapter 8  and spend a few minutes just imagining and
thinking with joy about what life would be like if you had  already
attained this end goal.
--- Page 346 ---
Phase 5: The Perfect Day
Knowing what you want your life to look like three years fr om now ,
what do you need to do today to make this happen? This pha se brings
you to your per fect day—today—and you can see how you’d like your
day to unfold: s tarting your morning alert and excited, having  a great
meeting with amazing colleagues, feeling full of ideas, nailing that
presentation, meeting up with friends after work, having a delicious
dinner with your mate, playing with your kid before bed.
When yo u see your perfect day unfolding, you’re priming your brain’ s
reticular activating system (RAS) to notice the positives. The RA S is that
component of your brain that helps you notice patterns. In a common
example, when you buy a new car , say , a white T esla Model S, all of a
sudden you start to notice mor e Model S cars on the roads. The same
ef fect ha ppens here. So, let’ s say you imagine your lunch meeting today
going well—great ideas, wonderful food, amazing ambiance. A few
hours later , you’re actually at t hat meeting—and the waiter screws up
your order . Because you’ve im agined a beautiful reality , your RAS is
more lik ely to pay attention to t he ambiance, the company , and the food
than to the screw-up, because you told it to. Y ou see? Y ou’re  training
your bra in to ignore the negative and embrace the positive. Y ou don’ t
have to change the world. Y ou just have to change what you pay
attention to in the world. And that, it turns out, is hugely powerful.
--- Page 347 ---
Phase 6: The Blessing
Y ou can  do this final phase no  matter what your religious or  spiritual
beliefs a re. If you believe in a higher power , you imagine that you can
tap into it, call upon it, and feel the ener gy of this higher power flowing
down into you, through your hea d and all the way to your toes—you feel
loved an d supported. That’ s it. It takes thirty seconds. If you don’ t
believe in a hi gher power , you can imagine that you’re r ebooting
yourself, fine-tuning yourself, or calling on your inner strength.
Likewise, you feel this ener gy c oursing through you. Y ou’re now ready
to hit the ground running to pursue your quest.
--- Page 348 ---
GOING BEYOND “MEDITATION” WITH THE
SIX-PHASE
If m editation has so many be nefits, why do only about 20 million
Americans medi tate daily? I asked this question of 70,000-plus followers
on m y F acebook profile, and many of you completed a survey . I found
that if you’re no t meditating daily , you’re likely to have one of the three
outdated models of reality about meditation below . Here’ s a snapshot of
each and how the Six-Phase solves them.
--- Page 349 ---
1. “I’m Too Busy for This.”
I cal l thi s the busyness paradox because it simply does not mak e logical
sense. It’ s like saying, “I’m too hungry to eat.” People who meditate
regularly like Arianna Huf fingto n, futurist Ray Kurzweil, and I all know
that the massive  beneficial impact of meditation on your pro ductivity
makes u p for the fifteen minutes a day you might spend meditat ing. And
that’ s no t even counting other benefits such as the extension to life span,
the b oost in creativity and prob lem solving, or the fact that m editation
makes y ou happ ier during the day . If I start my workday without it, I’m
simply n ot goin g to be as ef ficient or productive. Y et many people buy
into this  paradox. The reason is not so much that they can’ t spend fifteen
minutes, but that they are unaware of exactly how they should be
meditating or what to do. The Six-Phase adds hours to your day by
priming your mind to be more productive and ef ficient. It’ s not worth
skipping.
--- Page 350 ---
2. “I Can’t Do It Right.”
The issue with m editation, unlik e, say , jogging, is that with jogging it’ s
easy to know if you’re doing it right. Y ou’ve gone from point A to point
B in X amount of time. Y et with meditation, you might feel yourself
fluttering from thought to thought, falling asleep, getting bored, or just
waiting for it to end. So you ma y conclude that meditation is in ef fective,
but these things are only happe ning because you’re not using the right
system. The right system—the Six-Phase—keeps you engag ed, isn’ t
boring, and actually gives you specific milestones to reach during your
fifteen-minute session. It makes a world of dif ference.
--- Page 351 ---
3. “That ‘Clear Your Mind’ Thing Never Works
for Me.”
There’ s an old Chinese saying : “The mind is like a drunken monkey
always j umping from tree to tree.” This is true. Do not think that you
must clear your mind in order to meditate. This is one of th e biggest
myths about meditation. It may  have been easier for hermits centuries
ago to sit in a ca ve and clear the ir minds. They didn’ t have jobs , careers,
families, kids, text messages, or  Facebook alerts to deal with. Our world
is dif fer ent, and meditation needs to adapt. So I don’ t advocate starting
with clear -the-mind methods. The Six-Phase engages your mind. It can
even be used for solving problems. If there’ s a pressing problem at work
or i n your personal life, you can bring the thought of it into your
meditation and turn the pr oblem  i nto a pr oject . In this style of
meditation, your  mind is active—but you’re STILL in meditation and are
reaping all the rewards of stillness.
Many in tensely busy entrepreneurs and people with ADD who could
never m editate b efore now do i t daily , thanks to the Six-Phase  and the
common meditation challenges it solves. I get letters about it daily .
John Davy , a B ritish entrepreneur who founded and sold the w orld’ s
lar gest comedy club, told me this the first time I met him:
I s tarted  doing the Six-Phase for  about one hundred days straight.
And the n I felt normal, so I stopped. All of a sudden within we eks
of stopp ing, my friends would come to me and go, “John, w hat
happened? Y ou’re all scratchy again. Y ou’re all stressed again.”
And then I realized it. As I had been doing the Six-Phase, I was
dramatically ch anging myself. When I stopped, some of the  old
stress and behavior came back. My friends thought I was of f my
meds. I’m now back to it. And I’m not stopping again. It’ s amazing.
Ready to begin?
--- Page 352 ---
HOW TO PRACTICE THE SIX-PHASE
There’ s a lot of  freedom in how  to do this method, but here are some
guidelines:
WHEN TO DO IT.  T yp ically it’ s ea siest to do it in the morning or at night
before bed. Some people can do  it in their of fices. The main th ing is to
find ten to twen ty minutes of u ninterrupted time. I like to do it in the
morning because it char ges me up for the day . But you can do it at night
if th at w orks bet ter for you: Just  visualize the next day unfoldin g, having
an incredible sleep, and then exploding into your day .
HOW TO SIT.  Y ou  can sit any way you want.  There’ s no major method
to it.
STAYING FOCUSED AND KEEPING AWAKE.  A lot of people have random
thoughts during meditation, or they drift of f to sleep. The Six-Phase is
geared t o the way the mind naturally works—which is to a lways be
active. Y ou don’ t have to silenc e your mind. If a random thought arises,
that’ s okay . Just push it aside. Or maybe you can use it in a later phase. Is
there a goal you’re excited about? Great! Save it for Phase 4: Future
Dreams. Got a w ork meeting on your mind? Play it out in Phase 5: The
Perfect D ay . Are there things you’re worried about? Pour the power of
The Blessing over it all.
Many people doze of f during co nventional meditation because it gets
boring. Y ou’re less likely to fa ll asleep during the Six-Phase because
your mi nd is active. If you still  have problems with this, fear not—you
can download the audio (see opposite) and be guided through the phases.
--- Page 353 ---
Let’s Get Started
In this section I explain exactly what to do in each phase. If you’re doing
this proc ess for the first time, start slowly . Begin with Phase 1 o n Day 1.
On Day 2, do Phas e 1 and add Phase 2. And so on, until by D ay 6,
you’re doing the full Six-Phase Meditation.
Read the instructions below bef ore you begin. If you’d rather listen to
the instructions, I’ve put together a simple six-day course you can
download for free that will train you from Day 1 to Day 6 to master the
full the Six-Phas e. By Day 6, you’re running the full meditation . At that
point you can c ontinue with your practice by listening to the S ix-Phase
track pro vided i n the final chap ter of the course. The course is available
at th is site for this book’ s online experience
www .mindvalley .com/extraordinary .
Now , let’ s explore exactly what you should do in each phase.
--- Page 354 ---
P h a s e  1 :  C o m p a s s i o n
Think of  someo ne you truly lov e—a face or smile that makes your heart
glow . For me, i t’ s my daughter , Eve. At the time of this writing, she’ s
two years old. Eve’ s smile is a  question I could spend my entire life
answering. I start by picturing her and her smile.
As y ou picture y our loved one—a partner , parent, child, close friend,
mentor , or even a pet—make a m ental note of the feelings of compassion
and love that well up. This sensation becomes an anchor .
Now im agine th is love as a bubble surrounding you. See yourse lf in a
white bubble of love.
Now imagine this bubble expan ding to fill the entire room. If there’ s
anyone e lse in the room, imagine their being included in your b ubble of
compassion and love.
Now imagine the bubble filling  your entire house. Mentally pr oject a
feeling o f love to everyone in t hat house. Y ou could “feel” love sent to
them. O r you could simply mentally repeat a statement such as, “I send
you love and compassion and wish you well.”
Now imagine the bubble filli ng up your entire neighborhood or
building . . .
Y our entire city . . .
Y our country . . .
Y our continent . . .
And now the entire planet Earth.
For each , see yourself sending love and compassion to all living things
within the bubble.
Don’ t get hung u p on how  you see or feel the bubble. Just the thought
of sending love and compassion to all the citizens of Earth is enough.
Y ou’ve just completed the compassion phase. Now on to Phase 2.
--- Page 355 ---
P h a s e  2 :  G r a t i t u d e
Start by thinking of three to five things you’re grateful for in your
personal life. It could be the fact that you have a warm bed or the fact
that you  have a terrific job. It c ould also be something simple, like the
fact that you have a warm cup of cof fee waiting for you in the kitchen.
Now think of th ree to five thing s you’re grateful for in your work life.
Perhaps the easy commute yo u have. Or that coworker who se smile
always lights you up. Or a boss who appreciates you.
So far , so good.
Now for  the most important part. Think of three to five things you’re
grateful for about yourself.
It could be the fact that you look so damn good in that favorite dress
of yours. Or tha t you can really  think on your feet in meetings. Or that
you never for get a friend’ s birt hday . Or your remarkable intellect and
your knack for picking incredible books to read.
Self-appreciation is something we all need to do in abundance.
--- Page 356 ---
P h a s e  3 :  F o r g i v e n e s s
For giveness is like a muscle: T he more you flex it, the stronger it gets.
Get it strong enough and you become unfuckwithable—negative people
and events just won’ t af fect you as much.
Start with the l ist of people or events to for give that you m ade in
Chapter 7 . Ea ch time you  do the Six-Phase, focus on just one  person or
event. Keep in mind that the person could be you. Y ou could be
for giving yourse lf for something you did in the past that still gnaws at
you.
Next, bring up in your imagination the person or event.
Y ou wil l now repeat the three steps we discussed in the for gi veness
exercise in Chapter 7 .
STEP 1 IS SET THE SCENE.  Brin g to  mind the scene or ima ge where you
will do the for g iveness exercise. For example, when I was for giving
myself for a bad business decision that cost me millions, I imagined
seeing a younger version of myself facing me in my of fice from 2005.
STEP 2 IS FEEL THE ANGER AND PAIN.  F or no more than two minutes ( it’ s
okay to estimat e), allow yourself to feel the pain and anger . It’ s even
okay to yell or p ound a pillow . L et the emotions out, but don’ t spend too
long on this.
STEP 3 IS FORGIVE INT O LOVE.  Practice asking the questions I mentioned
in Chapter 7 : What did I learn  fr om this? How did this situation make my
life better?  Als o remember the idea of “hu rt people, hurt people.” Ask:
What could have happened in the past to this person to cause them to
hurt me so?
As you start asking these questions, you learn to see the situations
from another ’ s perspective. The for giveness may not come f rom one
session, but no matter how gra ve the wrongdoing, the for giveness can
come. It just takes practice.
When th e for giveness comes, it often is so thorough and complete it
can be surprisin g. As Khaled H osseini wrote in the The Kite Runner:  “I
wondered if that was how for g iveness budded; not with the fanfare of
epiphany , but with pain gathering its things, packing up, and slipping
away unannounced in the middle of the night . ”
And now you’ve wrapped up the first half of the Six-Phase. This
segment should have taken six to fifteen minutes. I usually do it in seven.
Now we move to Phases 4 through 6—all of which have to do with your
vision for the future.
--- Page 357 ---
P h a s e  4 :  F u t u r e  D r e a m s
Remember your answers to the Three Most Important Questions from
Chapter 8 ? Here you start making use of them. Bring up one to three
items from your list of answers.
Now just allow yourself to daydream. See yourself having the
experiences, gro wth, and ability to contribute that you wrote on your list.
Remember to take a longer -term view—I suggest three years.
Bring in  emotions. Emotions are key . If you’re seeing yourself visiting
a ne w country , imagine the aw e and excitement you would f eel from
making such a journey . Or ima gine the pride and accomplishment you
might feel as you easily pick up a new skill.
I lik e to spend three to five minutes on this phase. If you have
problems visuali zing, don’ t fret. Instead of seeing the goal, think  about it
using a technique calle d lofty questions by author Christie Marie
Sheldon. Here you phrase the vision that you want for yourself as a
question in the present tense. F or example: Why am  I so ea sily able to
visit incr edible countries? Why am I so good at making, keeping, and
multiplying money? Why am I so successful in love? Why am I at my
ideal weight?  For many people, the phrases are easier to do than the
visualization. Or you could combine them. Ultimately it’ s having the
thought that matters. Just so yo u can hear the idea, see the id ea, even
smell the idea . . . and it will all work out fine.
--- Page 358 ---
P h a s e  5 :  T h e  P e r f e c t  D a y
Here yo u start with a simple qu estion: In o r der for me to start achieving
the items on my Thr ee Most Important Questions list, what should I be
doing today?
Now thi nk of your day unfolding—the commute, the morning huddle
with your team, your noon assignment, then that lunch meeting . . . all
the way  to wrapping up at work, coming home, and medi tating or
reading before going to bed.
For each of th ese tiny slices of your day , imagine the moment
unfolding perfectly . A uthor Esther Hicks suggests that if you’re prone to
skepticism or negative thoughts , start with the phrase, “W ouldn’ t it be
wonderful if ______________”. For example, ask yourself: W ouldn’ t it
be wond erful if I had a str ess-fr ee commute, listening to my favorite
songs?
Do this for every segment of your day until bedtime.
As you do this, just imagine, ju st pretend, that you have powe r over
how your life a nd day will unf old. Just pretending that it’ s so tends to
give you more control and power and will lead to your having more
positive experiences throughout the day , even if you’re simply noticing
positive experiences over negative ones.
Now we come to Phase 6.
--- Page 359 ---
P h a s e  6 :  T h e  B l e s s i n g
Here yo u imagi ne that there’ s a  higher power ready to suppor t you on
your qu est. It doesn’ t matter if you’re an atheist or what reli gion you
subscribe to. Y our higher power could be your cultural or mythological
god, your saints or prophets, or even a spiritual or angelic being. If
you’re an atheist, your higher power may simply be your o wn inner
reserves of strength and fortitude.
Feel this  higher power flow from  the top of your scalp down ove r your
forehead, eyes, face, neck, shou lders, arms, abdomen, hips, thighs, legs,
and feet.
Imagine yourself protected and surrounded by a force that’ s ready to
protect you and keep you on the right path to your dreams.
Now imagine yourself thanking this higher power or ener gy , and see
yourself ready to face the day .
When you’re ready , open your eyes. And you’re done.
--- Page 360 ---
THE RESULTS YOU SEE AND THOSE YOU
DON’T
When y ou prac tice the Six-Phase, you start to reap all the be nefits of
meditation that you might read a bout. But since this system goe s beyond
just relaxation, you also reap t he rewards of compassion, for giveness,
and much more.
The Six-Phase reminds you that  you can be happy and peaceful—but
that you  can still be a force for positive change in the world. And that we
should never , ever stop aiming for our beautiful dreams.
I con sider the S ix-Phase the most important thing I do every d ay . It’ s
the n umber -one secret to my success and the most important skill I teach.
I c annot  empha size enough just how powerful  it  is. I look fo rward to
hearing how it has be nefited you. W rite to me at
hellovishen@mindvalley .com  and share your stories and experiences.
I upd ate and refi ne the Six-Phase on average every six months. ( That’ s
my refre sh rate for the Six-Phase.) I’m continuously experimenting and
improving. So you might find that some older recordings of the exercise
on the Internet may be slightly dif ferent from what’ s in this book. Know
that the most updated and current version of the exercise will a lways be
on M indvalley’ s learning platform. Just sign up at
www .mindvalley .com/extraordinary  to  get your free six-day course and
guided meditation on the Six-Phase.
