--- Page 52 ---
CHAPTER 2
QUESTION THE BRULES
Where We Learn That Much of How the World
Runs Is Based on Bulls**t Rules Passed Down
from Generation to Generation
You will find that many of the truths we cling to depend greatly on our own point of
view.
Who’ s more foolish, the fool? Or the fool who follows him?
—SA YINGS OF OBI-W AN KENOBI, ST AR W ARS
--- Page 53 ---
THE LIES WE CHOOSE TO BELIEVE
In Chapter 1 , we looked at how human bei ngs simultaneously exist in
two worlds. There’ s the phys ical world of absolute truth and the
culturescape of relative truth. In the culturescape all the ideas  we hold
dear—our ident ity , our religion, our nationality , our beliefs about the
world—are nothing more than mental constructs we’ve chosen  to
believe. And like all mental co nstructs, many are merely opinions we
believe because they were drilled into us as children and accepted by the
culture we grew up in.
Human beings are far less rational than we think. Many ideas w e hold
dear and  cling to as “truth” fall apart under close inspection. Our mental
constructs of the world can change, pivot, expand, and shrink as human
cultures, ideologies, and opinions collide, dance, and clash with each
other . Ju st as disease is spread by contagion from host to victim , so ideas
are spread in the same way . W e often take on ideas not through  rational
choice but throu gh “social contagion”—the act of an idea spreading fro m
mind to mind without due questioning.
Thus our so-called “truths” a re rarely optimal ways of li fe. As
consumer psychologist Paul M arsden, PhD, wrote in a paper called
“Memetics and Social Contagion: T wo Sides of the Same Coin?”:
Whilst we may like to believe that we consciously and rationally
decide on how to respond to situations, social contagion evidence
suggests that some of the time this is simply not the case. Rather
than gen erating and “having” beliefs, emotions, and behavio urs,
social contagion research suggests that, in some very real sense,
those beliefs, emotions, and behaviours “have” us. . . . When we are
unsure o f how to react to a stimulus or a situation, these theo ries
suggest that we actively look to others for guidance and conscio usly
imitate them.
It’ s a stunning statement. Dr . M arsden is saying that when we  make
decisions, we’re  more likely to defer to the hive mind than to make a
decision based entirely on our o wn thoughts and best interests. W e don’ t
have beliefs so much as beliefs “have” us .
Dr . Marsden continues:
--- Page 54 ---
The evidence shows that we inherit and transmit behaviours,
emotions, beliefs, and religions not through rational choice but
contagion.
This is perhaps one of the most important lines in Dr . Marsden’ s paper .
W e think  we’ re making a  rational decision. But often, the decision has
little to do with rationality and more to do with ideas our family , culture,
and peers have approved.
There’ s nothing wrong with tak ing on ideas from the society we live
in. But as our w orld is under going exponential change at a st aggering
pace, fo llowing the masses and doing what’ s always been done isn’ t a
path tha t leads to being extrao rdinary . Ideas, memes, and culture are
meant to evolve and change, and we are best served when we question
them.
W e know intellectually that this sort of change happens, yet billions of
us cling  to self-defeating rules  from the past that should not exist in
today’ s world because technology , society , and human consciousness
have simply evolved beyond them.
In Chapter 1 , y ou learned ab out the Himba tribe and their dif ficulty
with seeing the color blue because they have no word for it. W ords play
an impo rtant ro le in cognition. So I coined a name for these outdated
rules so we can see them better: The word I use is “Brules.”
--- Page 55 ---
B r u l e :  A  D e f i n i t i o n
A Brule is a bulls**t rule that we adopt to simplify our understanding of the world.
W e use Brules to  categorize things, processes, and even people. Brules
are hand ed down by our tribe—o ften our family , culture, and educational
system. For example, do you remember choosing your religion? Or how
you got your ideas about love, money , or the way life works? Most of us
don’ t. M any of our most formative rules about how to live come  through
others. And these rules are tightly bound to ideas of what is good and
bad, right and wrong.
Each of us lives  by thousands of rules. When we aren’ t sure w hat to
do, we follow the example of those who came before us. Kid s follow
their parents, who followed their parents, who followed theirs, a nd so on
back in time.
This means that often we are not Christian or Jewish or poli tically
right or left beca use we decided we wanted to be, but simply because we
happened to be born in a particular family at a particular time and,
through memeti cs and social conditioning, adopted a particular set of
beliefs. W e may decide to take a certain job (as happened to me when I
became a computer engineer), go to law school, get an MBA, o r join the
family business,  not because w e made a rational decision that  this was
the p ath we wan ted to follow bu t because society programmed us that we
should.
Y ou can  see from an evolutionary standpoint how it would be ef ficient
to m imic the pa tterns modeled by those who came before. Ideas such as
how to harvest,  hunt, cook, an d communicate get passed down from
generation to generation, allowing civilization to steadily grow in
complexity and scale. But it means we may be living our lives according
to mode ls that haven’ t been upg raded for years, decades, even centuries.
Blindly following may be ef ficient, but it’ s not always smart.
When we look at them closely , we often find that Brules were imposed
on u s for conve nience. T o question and dissect these Brules is to take a
step into the extraordinary .
My life of questioning the Brules started at age nine. That’ s w hen a
McDonald’ s opened close to my home. Everywhere I turned, it seemed,
there were ads showing mouthwatering pictures of McDonald’ s
cheesebur gers. Man, they looked good. And I so so so craved a Happy
Meal. B ut I had been brought up  as a Hindu and therefore had been told
that I could absolutely , positively not eat beef. Ever .
--- Page 56 ---
McDonald’ s had created a phenomenon of manufactured demand. I
had nev er tasted beef, but thank s to all those ads and images o f people
“lovin’ it,” I co ncluded that McDonald’ s bur gers were going to be the
greatest meal I’d ever tasted in my nine years on planet Earth. The only
thing stopping me was that, cu lturally , I wasn’ t supposed to eat beef,
since it would anger the gods (or something similarly dreadful).
My pare nts had always encouraged me to question things, so I felt
comfortable asking my mom to explain to me why I couldn’ t eat beef.
She repl ied that  it was part of our family’ s culture and religion. “But
other people eat beef. Why can’ t Hindus eat it, too?” I persisted.
W ise tea cher th at she was, she  said, “Why don’ t you go find out?”
There was no I nternet back then, but I pored over my Encyclopedia
Britannica  and developed a theory about  ancient India, Hindus, cows,
and beef  eating that I took back to my mother . Basically , it went  like this:
“Mom, I think the ancient Hin dus loved having cows as pets because
they were gentle and had big, beautiful eyes. Cows were a lso very
useful: T hey cou ld plow the fiel ds and provide milk. So maybe  that was
why Hin dus bac k then wouldn’ t eat beef when they could so e asily eat
goat, pig, or any  other less awes ome animal. But last I checked, we have
a dog and not a cow , and so I think I should be allowed to eat beef
bur gers.”
I don’ t know what was going o n in my mom’ s head, but she a greed,
and tha t’ s how  I got to taste my first beef bur ger . Frankly , it was
overrated. But still—boom! Just like that, a dogmatic model of reality I’d
grown up blindly following was shattered.
I sta rted questioning everything else. By nineteen, I had discarded
religion—not be cause I wasn’ t spiritual but because I felt tha t calling
myself a Hindu was separatin g myself from the billions of spiritual
people who weren’ t Hindu. I wa nted to embrace the spiritual essence of
every religion, not just one. Ev en as a teen, I could not under stand the
whole idea of being bound to one singular religion for life.
I was fortunate to have parents who challenged me and allowed me to
create my own b eliefs. But if a nine-year -old can bust a Brule, th e rest of
us should be able to question them, too.
T ake a moment and think about the religious or cultural norms that
were transmitted  to you. How many would you say are truly rational?
They may be outmoded or proven untrue by today’ s thinkers or
researchers. Many might even cause terrible pain. I’m not advocating
that you  instantl y reject all the rules you’ve ever followed, but you must
question your rules constantly i n order to live by the code that is most
--- Page 57 ---
authentic to your goals and needs. “My family/culture/people have
always done it this way” is not an acceptable ar gument.
--- Page 58 ---
COMMON BRULES WORTH CHALLENGING
As you get on the path to the extraordinary , you must remember that
within the culturescape there are no sacred cows that cannot be
questioned. Our  politics, our education and work models, our traditions
and cult ure, and even our rel igions all contain Brules that are best
discarded.
Below are some common Bru les we live by , often withou t even
realizing it, and some dif ferent ways I’ve come to think about them.
They’re among the biggest Bru les I challenged. Escaping them shifted
my life forward in dramatic ways. These are the four areas in which I
decided to eliminate a Brule from my worldview:
1. The college Brule
2. The loyalty to our culture Brule
3. The religion Brule
4. The hard work Brule
As you read thi s, ask yourself if you might be held back by any of
these Brules.
--- Page 59 ---
1. We should get a college degree to
guarantee our success.
In a ddition to saddling many  young people with massive debt for
decades, studies have shown that a college education really doesn’ t
guarantee success. And does a college degree guarantee high
performance on the job? Not necessarily . T imes are changing fast. While
Internet giant Google looks at g ood grades in specific technical skills for
positions requiring them, a 2014 New Y ork T imes  arti cle detailing an
interview with Laszlo Bock, G oogle’ s senior vice president of people
operations, notes that college degrees aren’ t as important as they once
were. Bo ck states that “When you look at people who don’ t go to school
and make their way in the world, those are exceptional huma n beings.
And we should do everything we can to find those people.” He noted in a
2013 New Y ork T imes  article that the “proportion of people without any
college e ducation at Google has increased over time”—on certain teams
comprising as much as 14 percent.
Other c ompanies are taking note. According to a 2015 article in
iSchool-Guide, Ernst and Y oung, “the lar gest recruiter in the United
Kingdom and one of the world’ s lar gest financial consultancies, recently
announced that they will no longer consider grades as the main criteria
for r ecruitment.”  The article quo ted Maggie Stilwell, Ernst and Y oung’ s
Managing Partn er for T alent: “A cademic qualifications will still  be taken
into account and indeed remain an important consideration when
assessing candidates as a whole, but will no longer act as a barrier to
getting a foot in the door .”
I’ve personally interviewed and hired more than 1,000 people for my
companies over the years, and I’ve simply stopped looking at college
grades or even at the college an applicant graduated from. I’v e simply
found them to have no correlation with an employee’ s success.
College degrees as a path to a successful career may thus be nothing
more than a mas s societal Brule that’ s fading away quickly . This  is not to
say that going to college is unn ecessary—my life at college was one of
the best  memories and growth experiences I’ve ever had. Bu t little of
that had to do with my actual degree or what I was studying.
--- Page 60 ---
2. We should marry within our religion or
ethnicity.
I co me from a very small minority ethnicity from western In dia. My
culture is called Sindhi. The Sindhis left India after 1947 and are living
as a diaspora; that is, scattered all over the world. Like many cultures
that live  as a diaspora, there’ s a firm desire to protect and pre serve the
culture a nd the tradition. As pa rt of that, in my culture, it is considered
absolutely taboo to marry anyone outside our ethnicity—not even
another Indian. So you can imagine how shocked my family was when I
told them I wan ted to marry my  then-girlfriend, Kristina (now my wife),
who is Estonian. I remember we ll-meaning relatives asking me,  “Do you
really want to do  this? . . . Y our children are going to be so conf used! . . .
Why would you disappoint your family like this?”
At first I feared following my h eart because I felt I would cause great
disappointment for those I loved. But I realized that with a huge life
decision such as this, I shouldn’ t do something to make someone else
happy th at woul d make me so unhappy . I wanted to be with Kristina. So
I m arried her . I rejected the Brule, so common in my generation , that we
should m arry on ly people of our ethnicity , religion, and race as it was the
safest way to happiness and the “right” thing to do for the family or
creed. Kristina and I have been together for sixteen years, married for
thirteen. Our two kids, far from being “confused,” are learning multiple
languages and happily becoming  citizens of the world (my son, Hayden,
had trav eled to eighteen countries by the time he was eighteen months
old). My children participate in Russian Orthodox, Lutheran, an d Hindu
traditions with their grandparen ts. But they aren’ t limited to any one
religion. They get to experience all the beauty of human religions
without being locked into any o ne path. Which brings us to the next big
Brule.
--- Page 61 ---
3. We should adhere to a single religion.
Okay , h ere’ s a touchy question. Do we really need religion? Can
spirituality exist without religio us dogma? These are only a few of the
questions being asked about religion today . Right alongside a rise in
fundamentalism, we’re seeing a rise in questioning of the fundamentals.
Do you remember the day you chose your religion? Few p eople do
because few people get to choose their reli gion. G enerally , it’ s a se ries or
cluster of beliefs implanted in o ur minds at a young age, based on our
parents’ religiou s beliefs. And f or many , the desire to belong to a family
or tr ibe overrides our rational decision-making process and g ets us to
adopt beliefs that may be highly damaging.
While religion can have immense beauty , it can also have immense
dogma t hat caus es guilt, shame, and fear -based worldviews. T oday the
majority of people on planet Earth who are religious choose  a single
religion to subscribe to. But th is percentage is shrinking as m ore and
more people, especially millennials, are adopting the model “Spiritual
But Not Religious.”
I be lieve that re ligion was necessary for human evolution, helping us
develop guidelin es for good moral conduct and cooperation within the
tribe hundreds and thousands of years ago. But today , as humanity is
more co nnected than ever and many of us have access to the  various
wisdom and spiritual traditions of the world, the idea of adhe ring to a
singular religion might be obsolete. Furthermore, I believe that the blind
acceptance of religious dogm a is holding us back in our spiritual
evolution as a species.
The core of a religion may be beautiful spiritual ideas. But w rapped
around t hem are  usually centuries of outdated Brules that few bother to
question.
Can a person be  a good Muslim without fasting during Ramadan? A
good Christian without believing in sin? A good Hindu who eats beef? Is
religion an aging model that needs to be updated?
A be tter alternative, in my opinion, is not to subscribe to one religion
but to pick and choose beliefs from the entire pantheon of global
religions and spiritual practices.
I w as born in a H indu family , but over the years, I’ve created my own
set o f be liefs de rived from the best of every religion and spirit ual book
I’ve been exposed to. W e don’ t pick one food to eat every day . Why must
we pick one reli gion? Why can’ t we believe in Jesus’ model of love and
--- Page 62 ---
kindness, donate  10 percent of our income to charity like a good  Muslim,
and also think that reincarnation is awesome?
There is  much beauty in the tea chings of Christ, the Sufism of Islam,
the Kabbalah from Judaism, the wisdom of the Bhagavad Gita , or the
Buddhist teachin gs of the Dalai Lama. Y et humanity has widely  decided
that relig ion sho uld be absolutist: In short, pick one and stick to  it for the
rest of your life. And worse—pass it on to your children throu gh early
indoctrination, so they feel they have to stick to one true path for the rest
of their  lives. Then repeat for generations.
Choose a religion if it gives you meaning and satisfaction, but know
that you don’ t h ave to accept a ll aspects of your religion to fit in. Y ou
can believe in Je sus and not beli eve in hell. Y ou can be Jewish and enjoy
a ha m sandwich. Don’ t get tra pped in preset, strict definitions of one
singular path, thinking you must accept all of a particular tribe’ s beliefs.
Y our spirituality should be discovered, not inherited.
--- Page 63 ---
4. We must work hard to be successful.
This may start as a worthy idea and morph into a tyrannical Brule.
Parents want to encourage their kids to stick with challenges, work
toward goals, and not give up. But that can get twisted into a Brule: If
you are n’ t working hard all the time, you’re lazy and won’ t be
successful.
This Bru le also leads to a coro llary Brule that work must feel like a
slog. It can’ t be exciting or meaningful and certainly not fun. Y et a
Gallup s tudy sho ws that people who work in jobs that provide th em with
a sense of meaning and joy retir e much later than those who work in jobs
that provide no sense of meani ng. When you aren’ t suf fering for your
paycheck, you’re likely to be more engaged and committed to what
you’re d oing. A nd how long can you af ford to not like what you do
given th at most of us spend the majority of our waking hours at work?
As educator and minister Lawrence Pearsall Jacks wrote:
A maste r in the art of living draws no sharp distinction betwee n
his w ork and hi s play; his labo r and his leisure; his mind and his
body; his education and his recreation. He hardly knows which is
which. H e simply pursues his vision of excellence through what ever
he is  doi ng, and leaves others to determine whether he is workin g or
playing. T o himself, he always appears to be doing both.
In my life I’ve always made a conscious choice to work in fields
where I love wh at I do so much that it ceases to feel like wor k. When
you love what you do, life seems so much more beautiful—in fact, the
very ide a of “work” dissolves. Instead, it feels more like a cha llenge, a
mission, or a gam e you play . I encourage everyone to try to mov e toward
work that feels this way . It d oes not make any sense to spend the
majority of our waking hours at work, to earn a living, so  we can
continue living a life where we  spend the majority of o ur w aking h ours
at work.  It’ s a human hamster wheel. Therefore, always seek work that
you love. Any o ther way of livin g misses the point of life itself. It won’ t
happen o vernight, but it’ s doable. As you progress through this book, I’ll
share some mental models and practices to get you there faster .
--- Page 64 ---
FIVE WAYS WE TAKE ON BRULES
How can we spot Brules that limit us and break free? The first step is to
know how they got installed within you in the first place. There are five
ways I believe we take on Brules. When you understand these infection
mechanisms , you’ll  be better able to identify which rules of the
culturescape might be reasonabl e to use for planning your life a nd which
ones may be Brules.
--- Page 65 ---
1. Childhood Indoctrination
W e absorb most beliefs uncriti cally as children during our extremely
long maturity period. While other animals mature relatively quickly or
can run or swim for their lives  soon after birth, we human beings are
helpless at birth and remain highly dependent for years a fterward.
During t his time  we are, as Sapiens  author Y uval N oah Harari describes,
like “mo lten glass”—highly moldable by the environment and the people
around us:
Most mammals emer ge from the womb like glazed earthenware
emer ging from a kiln—any attempt at remolding will only scr atch
or break  them. Humans emer ge from the womb like molten glass
from a furnace.  They can be spun, stretched, and shaped with a
surprising degre e of freedom. Th is is why today we can educate our
children to become Christian or Buddhist, capitalist or socialist,
warlike or peace loving.
Our mal leable b rains as children make us amazing learners, rec eptive
to every experience and primed  to take any shape our culture decrees.
Think, f or exam ple, about how a child born in a multicultural h ome can
grow up  to speak two or three la nguages fluently . But it also cau ses us to
take on all forms of childhood conditioning.
Ever notice how often a child asks why? The typical parent’ s response
to the steady barrage of why , w hy , why is usually something a long the
lines of:
“Because I said so.”
“Because that’ s the way it is.”
“Because God wanted it this way .”
“Because Dad says you need to do it.”
Statements like these cause children to get trapped in a thicket of
Brules t hey may not even reali ze are open to question. Those children
grow up  to become adults trapped by restrictions and rules that t hey have
taken to be “truth.”
Thus we  absorb  the rules transm itted by culture and act in the world
based on  these beliefs. Much of this conditioning is in place b efore the
age of nine, and we may carry many of these beliefs until we die—until
or unless we learn to challenge them.
--- Page 66 ---
As a  parent myself, I know how dif ficult it can be to answer with
honesty and sincerity every question a child poses. I was in the  car with
my son in the s ummer of 2014 when Nicki Minaj’ s song “An aconda”
came on the radio without my noticing. As the key verse rang out about a
particular “anaconda” who doesn’ t “want none unless” it’ s “got buns
hun,” m y seven-year -old son, Hayden, asked me, “Dad, why does the
anaconda only want buns?”
I t urned red, as most parents would. And then in an act I know you’re
going to for give me for , I did w hat I think any other dad in my  situation
would do. I lied.
“It’ s a song about a snake that only loves bread,” I said.
Hayden bought it. Phew . Later that day , he told me he wanted to write
a song about a snake with healthier eating habits.
I’ve fielded my share of dif fic ult “why” questions from my kids. I
certainly asked my parents a lo t of them. I bet you did, too. And your
parents probably did their best to answer you. But some of their answers,
especially phra ses such as, “because that’ s the way it is ,” might
sometimes have set up Brules you’re still following.
--- Page 67 ---
2. Authority Figures
The me n and women of our tr ibe whom we see as authority  figures,
usually people we depend on i n some way , are powerful installers of
rules. Certainly that includes o ur parents but also relatives, caregivers,
teachers, cler gy ,  and friends. Many may be wise people with our best
interests in mind who want to im part rules that will serve us well in life
—such a s the Golden Rule about treating others as we would want to be
treated. But because we give t hem authority , we’re also vulnerable to
those wh o pass down Brules that they either seek to manipulate us with
or that they genuinely believe themselves, however wrongly .
Authority has proved to have an astonishing, and potentially
dangerous, hold over us.
During our evolution as a sen tient species, we needed leaders and
authority figure s to help us or ganize and survive. W ith the advent of
literacy and other skills for acquiring, retaining, and sharing info rmation,
knowledge is now far more eve nly distributed and widely available. It’ s
time we stopped behaving like s ubmissive prehistoric tribe members and
started questioning some of the things our leaders say .
T ake for example, fear -based po litics. It’ s common in the world  today
for politicians to gain support by creating fear of another group. The
Jews, th e Muslims, the Christians, the Mexican immigrants, the refugees,
the gays  are all blamed in one c ountry or another by a politician seeking
votes. W e need to stop buying into this type of misuse of authority .
But of course it’ s not just auth ority figures on the lar gest scal e who
dominate us. Interestingly , some people express feeling a sense of
freedom after their parents die, because they finally feel able to follow
their own desires, opinions, and goals, free of parental expectations and
the pressure to conform to rules their parents approved of.
--- Page 68 ---
3. The Need to Belong
W e h ave a tende ncy to take on Brules because we want to fit in. W e’re a
tribal species, evolved to find security and kinship with each  other in
groups. It was sa fer than going i t alone. Thus survival depended on being
accepted within the tribe. But so metimes in order to be part of a  tribe, we
take on the tribe’ s beliefs, irratio nal as those may be. So in exchange for
acceptance, we pay a price in individuality and independence. It ’ s almost
a cliché, for example, that teenagers struggle to balance individuality
with succumbing to peer pressure.
T ribe here refers to any kind of group with a set of beliefs and
traditions—it ca n be a religion, a political party , a club, team, and so on.
As soon as we  define ourselves by a particular view , even if it’ s
something that we genuinely agree with, we autom atically become more
likely to start taking on other beliefs of the party—even if these beliefs
challenge facts and science.
W e see this need for belonging at its strongest when looking at the
irrational beliefs  people take on  when they join cults. The desire to be
accepted causes them to shut d own their ability to question, and they
accept highly illogical, irrational beliefs.
T im Urb an, who runs the amazing blog waitbutwhy .com , calls this
blind tribalism. T im writes:
Humans also long for the com fort and safety of certainty , an d
nowhere is conviction more present than in the groupthink of blind
tribalism. While a scientist’ s data-based opinions are only as str ong
as th e evidence she has and i nherently subject to change, tribal
dogmatism is an exercise in faith, and with no data to be beholden
to, blind tribe members believe what they believe with certainty .
Y ou can take on the beliefs of your tribe, but you don’ t have to take on
all  o f their beliefs,  especially if th eir beliefs are unscientific, unhelpful,
or untrue.
--- Page 69 ---
4. Social Proof
When we take on rules becaus e someone says, in ef fect, “ev eryone’ s
doing it ,” we’re adopting beliefs through social proof. Think of it as
approval by proxy: W e believe what someone else tells us to save
ourselves the ef fort of assessing the truth of it ourselves. If we ’re led to
think that “everyone” is doing  it, believing it, or buying it, then we
decide maybe we should, too. A modern-day example is adv ertising:
Everyone eats this, buys this, wears this . . . this is healthy; that is
unhealthy . . . this is what you need in order to make people notice you . .
. a nd so on. Y ou ’ve seen the ads. The modern advertising age h as gotten
incredibly slick at using social proof to create what I call manufactured
demand. Nobody really needs that much high-fructose corn syrup
packaged as Happiness in a Red Can. Nor do we need the thousands of
other products that exist solely to fill a void that their own commercials
create. But manufactured deman d turns products that are unhealthy into
must-haves through the ef fective use of social proof to create desire. If
everyone’ s doing it—it must be legit.
--- Page 70 ---
5. Our Internal Insecurities
Suppose you go on a date with someone you’re really attracted  to. After
the date, the person doesn’ t call  you back. For many of us, our internal
insecurities go into overdrive: I didn’ t dr ess well enough . . . maybe I
talked to o much  . . . I shouldn’ t have told that joke . . .  and on and on.
Then, w ithout actually finding  out why the person hasn’ t called, we
invent a bunch o f Brules about l ove, dating, how we should act on dates,
and men and women in general. But reality may tell a dif ferent story .
Maybe the person lost his phon e and didn’ t have your numbe r . Maybe
she had a really tough week or had to deal with a family crisis.
Y et instead of looking at these logical ideas, we start to create
“meaning” around the events. The meaning-making machine in our
heads is  constan tly creating meaning about the events that we observe in
our lives—particularly when they involve people we are seeking love or
attention from.
Have you ever created meaning in your head about someone’ s attitude
or f eelings toward you becau se of something they do? T hat’ s the
meaning-making machine in action.
Y ou might already be tuning in  to how some of the Brules in your life
have bee n instal led. Can you think of authority figures who had a lot of
influence over you? Do you h ave a memory of doing something you
disliked just to follow the herd? Did you behave according to rules that
would help you fit in?
No j udgment here. Remember , this is part of how humans lea rn. It’ s
how all the in formation of past generations gets provided to us—
including good stuf f like how to  make fire, fashion a wheel, tell a knock-
knock joke, barbecue some meat, perform CPR, and de corate a
Christmas tree. It’ s not all ba d; it’ s just that many of us n eed help
realizing that it’ s not all good, e ither . Some rules aren’ t useful anymore
or w ere never true to begin with. It’ s time to uninstall w hat isn’ t
working.
--- Page 71 ---
HOW TO MAKE A DENT IN THE UNIVERSE
Our cult urescape is filled with m any ideas that are powerful because of
the shee r numb er of people wh o believe in them. Think of ideas like
nation-states, money , transportation, our education system, an d more.
But every now and then a rebel com es along and decides that some of
these co lossal constructs are nothing more than Brules. Most of these
rebels talk about changing things and are labeled idealists at best, or nut
jobs at worst, bu t once in a while, a rebel grabs reality by the h orns and,
slowly yet decisively , shifts things.
The drawing below illustrates th is point. The circle is the culturescape.
The mas s of dots in the middle represents most folks. At first a certain
person, perhaps you, decides to move away from viewing the world like
everyone else. Y ou get labeled a misfit, a rebel, a troublemaker .
But then  you do something original and wild. Perhaps you write a new
type of children’ s book, as J. K. Rowling did with the Harry Potter
books. Or , like the Beatles, you decide to move away from tr aditional
sounds a nd create an original type of music. Or , like entrepreneur Elon
Musk, you decide to popularize  the electric car . Some misfits will fail.
But som e will succeed, and w hen they do, they make a dent in a
culturescape.
And that’ s when the misfit is labeled a visionary .
--- Page 72 ---
One suc h visionary is Dean Kamen. I got to visit Dean in 2015 and
hear him  tell me one of the most incredible stories of Brule-breaking I’ve
ever heard.
Dean Kamen is a modern-day  Edison. He holds more tha n 440
patents. He revolutionized wheelchair technology with the iBOT
mobility device, spearheaded development of the leading home dialysis
system, and became an icon o f engineering with his invention of the
Segway Human  T ransporter . He is a recipient of the National Medal of
T echnology and a member of the National Inventors Hall of Fame. W ith
the Segway , Dean questioned the Brule of transportation: Could cities be
designed withou t the need for cars? But personally , I’m more impressed
by Dean’ s questioning of the Brule of the nation-state. Y ou see,
frustrated by government, Dean started his own nation. He is, by  his own
fiat, Lord Dumpling, president o f North Dumpling Island—a tiny island
nation in Long I sland Sound that he turned into his own count ry—only
the third country in North America after the United States and Canada.
Dean Kamen was never one to follow dumb rules. As one of
America’ s greatest inventors, he had a strict anti-bureaucracy attitude. A
healthy disregar d for senseless r ules and the mind of an innovator can be
explosive when combined. And as he explained to me and a small group
of others invited to visit him in May 2015, a giant wind turbine  sparked
it all.
It started out as  what you could call a practical joke, but it became
something much more. As a great proponent of alternative ener gy , Dean
wanted to build a wind turbine on North Dumpling Island, his home a
few miles of f the coast of Connecticut, to help power his house. But New
--- Page 73 ---
Y ork bu reaucrats (even though  it’ s close to Connecticut, the island is
actually part of New Y ork’ s jurisdiction) said the proposed turbine was
too big, and the noise would dis turb the neighbors. “It’ s an island ,” said
Dean. “There ar e  no neighbors!” The bureaucrats wouldn’ t budge. It was
a stalemate.
Dean Kamen is not a man who backs down. As he told us, he was
seriously bother ed that New Y ork State, which was miles aw ay from
North D umpling, had the power to tell him how to run his island. So
Dean de cided that he would tak e no more. Speaking to a friend of his at
Harvard who was an expert on c onstitutional law , Dean found a loophole
that allowed him to secede—not just from New Y ork but from the entire
United States. And so on April 22, 1988, the New Y ork T imes  carried an
article: “From Long Island Sound, A New Nation Asserts Itself.”
Dean di dn’ t just create his o wn island nation. He created North
Dumpling’ s own constitution, anthem, and currency called (what else?)
the dumpling.
How’ s th at for bending the Brules? Few of us grow up thinking  about
starting our own nation. Or curr ency . Dean, however , is not an  ordinary
person. Perhaps it was that s ame inquisitive mind that led him to
question the Brules of transporta tion and invent the Segway . He  had now
questioned the idea of nationhood itself. But Dean wasn’ t done yet.
New Y ork didn’ t relent. Its bureaucrats continued sending warning
letters to Dean about the wind turbine. Dean simply sent those letters to
the New  Y ork press with a statement: “See how disrespectful New Y ork
bureaucrats can be—they dare threaten the head of an ind ependent
nation-state.” The warning letters stopped.
A fe w months la ter while visiting the White House (Dean has f riends
in high places), Dean jokingly g ot President Geor ge H. W . Bush  to sign a
nonaggression pact with North Dumpling.
As you can ima gine, all of this caused tremendous publicity . A local
morning talk show decided to visit North Dumpling to do a b roadcast
from the  island. During the filming, Dean explained, he asked one of the
talk sho w hosts if he’d like to c onvert his US dollars to dumplings. The
host scof fed, asking if dumplin gs were real currency . Dean rep lied that
US dollars are the currency tha t should really be questioned. After all,
the dollar had been taken of f the gold standard decades ago and was now
backed by thin a ir . The dumpling, on the other hand, was backed by Ben
& Jerry’ s ice cream. (Seriously . Dean knows the founders.) And , as Dean
pointed out, since ice cream is frozen to 32ºF (0ºC), it had “rock-solid
backing.”
--- Page 74 ---
As I explored D ean’ s home, I fo und on one wall what struck me as the
most important document of all. It was a framed “Foreign Aid National
T reasure Bond” to President Bush in which North Dumpling Island
actually gave foreign aid to the United States—in the sum of $100.
I asked Dean for the story behi nd the picture. He told me that North
Dumpling had become the first nation in the world to provide foreign aid
to the United States. And here’ s why , according to the certificate:
Once the technological leaders of the world, America’ s Citizens
have been slipping into W oeful Ignorance of and Dismaying
Indif ference to the wonders of science and technology . This
threatens the United States with Dire Descent into scientific and
technological illiteracy . . . . The Nation of North Dumpling Island
hereby commits  itself to helping rescue its neighbor Nation from
such fate  by supporting the ef fo rts of the Foundation for Inspiration
and Re cognition of Science and T echnology in promo ting
excellence in and appreciation of these disciplines among the
peoples of the United States of America. . . .”
Dean wasn’ t giving $100 to a s uperpower as a joke. He was about to
pull of f yet another Brule-bustin g move using his newly formed role as
an indep endent nation to do it . He was seeking to change the global
education system to bring more attention to science and engineering.
Dean’ s d onation to the United S tates was for establishing FIRST  (For
Inspiration and Recognition of Science and T echnology), an or ganization
with a mission: “T o transform our culture by creating a wor ld where
science and technology are celeb rated and where young people dream of
becoming science and technol ogy leaders.” FIRST  does this through
huge co mpetitions where kids build robots of all kinds that compete in
Olympic-like settings.
When I attended the FIRST  r ob otics challenge in St. Louis, Missouri,
in 2 015, some 37,000 teams fr om high schools around the w orld had
competed to get their robots to  the finals. It was fantastic to see what
those kids could build.
Dean sa id that he thinks one of t he problems in the world today  is that
kids grow up idolizing sports superstars, and while there’ s nothing wrong
with ido lizing a thletic power , we also need to idolize brainpo wer—the
engineers, the scientists, the pe ople who are moving humanity forward
through innova tion. That’ s what he did with FIRST . And North
Dumpling Island certainly helped fuel publicity for the or ganization.
--- Page 75 ---
Whether North Dumpling Island is really a nation is beside the  point.
What’ s important is that Dean is a guy who plays at a dif ferent level
from most people. He is consta ntly bending and breaking the rules in
pursuit of a better way to live, hacking beliefs and cultural norms that
most of us accept without questioning:
W ith his  invention of the Segwa y , he redefined accepted models of
transportation.
W ith North Dumpling Island, he  playfully redefined the idea of  the
nation-state.
W ith FIRST , he  redefined the idea of science education being as
cool to teens as sports.
Extraordinary people think dif ferently , and they don’ t let their
society’ s Brules stop them from advocating for a better world for
themselves. Nei ther should you. All of us have both the ability and
responsibility to  toss out the Brules that are preventing us from pursuing
our dreams. It all starts with one thing: questioning your inherited
beliefs.
Y ou can  use the same amazing b rain that took those Brules onbo ard to
uninstall them and replace them  with beliefs that truly empo wer you.
This idea alone can be hugely liberating. Which leads us to Law 2.
--- Page 76 ---
Law 2: Question the Brules.
Extraordinary mind s question the Brules when they feel those Brules are out of
alignment with their dreams and desire s. They recognize that much of the way the
world works is due to people blindly following Brules that have long passe d their
expiration date.
--- Page 77 ---
TAKING THE BRULES BY THE HORNS
W e have to push our systems— internally and externally , personally and
institutionally—to catch up. W e do that by making the first move to
uninstall Brules in our own minds and then exerting upward pressure on
our soci al system s to evolve. It can feel a little like free fall w hen you
first star t—and it is, because you’re taking your life of f of a utopilot.
Sometimes things feel chaotic while you take over the controls but have
faith in yourself. Y ou were born to do this. The great gift of being human
is our capacity to see the world  anew , invent new solutions—and then
use what we know to transform our lives and change our world. Culture
isn’ t static. It liv es and breathes, made by us in real time in the flow of
life, meant to c hange as our w orld changes. So, let’ s do it! It starts at
home, with you. Y our life, on your terms.
--- Page 78 ---
E x e r c i s e :  T h e  B r u l e  T e s t
So, w hat might your Brules look like? I’m not talking here abou t getting
rid of moral and ethical standards that uphold the Golden Rule. But
certain rules that lock us into  long-held habits and irrational self-
judgment could be worth a look (for example: I sho uld work to  the point
of exhaustion every week or I’m not working har d enough . . . I should
call my par ents every day or I’ m not being a good daughter/s on . . . I
should o bserve my r eligion the way my family does or I’m not a spiritual
person . . . I should behave a certain way towar d my mate or I’m not a
good spouse . . .  ) to  see if a Brule is coming t o call. Apply the five-
question Brule T est for a reality check, and decide whether it’ s a rule you
want to live by or a Brule you want to bust.
--- Page 79 ---
Q u e s t i o n  1 :  I s  i t  b a s e d  o n  t r u s t  a n d  h o p e  i n
h u m a n i t y ?
Is the rule base d on the idea that human beings are primarily good or
primarily bad? If a rule is based on negative assumptio ns about
humanity , I tend to question it.
For exam ple, in  the world toda y there’ s a huge amount of guilt and
shame about sex, and many rules around it. India recently tried to ban
access to all p ornography websites—but there was so muc h public
outcry , the ban w as ended four days later . That’ s an example of a Brule
based on  the idea that humanity is primarily bad: Give people fr eedom to
access porn online, and they’ll go berserk and become sexual deviants.
The Christian idea of original sin is another example of fundamental
mistrust of humanity . It has caus ed so much guilt and shame for so many
people who feel undeserving of success and good things in life. Original
sin i s an  example of a relative truth. It’ s held by one particular segment
of the world po pulation; i.e., it is not universally held across cultures.
There’ s no scientific evidence  that we are born sinners, so it isn’ t
absolute truth. Y et it negatively af fects millions.
Always have faith and trust in humanity . I like to remember Ga ndhi’ s
words: “Y ou must not lose faith in humanity . Humanity is an ocean; if a
few drops of the ocean are dirty , the ocean does not become dirty .”
--- Page 80 ---
Q u e s t i o n  2 :  D o e s  i t  v i o l a t e  t h e  G o l d e n  R u l e ?
The Gol den Rul e is to do unto others as you would want them to do unto
you. Rules that elevate some while devaluing others are suspect as
Brules— such as rules that grant or restrict opportunities based on skin
color , sexual orientation, religion, nationality , whether a person has a
penis or a vagina, or any other arbitrary or subjective criteria.
--- Page 81 ---
Q u e s t i o n  3 :  D i d  I  t a k e  i t  o n  f r o m  c u l t u r e  o r
r e l i g i o n ?
Is th is a rule or a belief that the majority of human beings wer en’ t born
into believing? Is it a belief in a particular way of life or a rule about a
very par ticular habit, such as a  way of eating or dressing? If so, it’ s
probably a cultural or religious r ule. If it bothers you, I believe you don’ t
have to follow i t, just as I decided I would enjoy a steak or be ef bur ger
when I wanted to. Luckily for me, my family allowed me to question
these ru les, even though sometimes it might have made them
uncomfortable.
Y ou do not have to dress, eat, m arry , or worship in a manner that you
disagree with just because it’ s part of the culture you’re born into.
Culture is meant to be ever -evo lving, ever -flowing—in a way , just like
water . W ater is most beautiful and useful when it’ s moving—it creates
rivers, waterfall s, the waves of the ocean. But when water becomes
stagnant, it becomes poisonous.  Culture is like water . If it’ s sta gnant, as
in the case of d ogma or the rules of fundamentalist religion, it can be
poisonous. Appr eciate your culture, but let it flow and evolve. D on’ t buy
into the dogma that your culture’ s way of prayer , dress, food, or sexual
conduct must stay the same as it was generations ago.
--- Page 82 ---
Q u e s t i o n  4 :  I s  i t  b a s e d  o n  r a t i o n a l  c h o i c e  o r
c o n t a g i o n ?
Are you following a rule be cause it was installed in yo u during
childhood? Is it benefiting your life, or have you just never thought about
doing things dif ferently? W e follow a lar ge number of dan gerously
unhealthy rules merely because of memetics and social conditioning. Are
they hol ding yo u back? If so, try to understand them, dissect them, and
question them. Do they serve a purpose, or do you take them o n merely
by imitation? Ask yourself if the se rules truly serve you and if you want
to p ass them do wn to your children. Or are these ideas—for example,
ones about how to dress or traditional ideas of what is moral— stifling
and restr ictive. I f so, let’ s allow them to die a peaceful death and cut the
cord so they do not end up infecting our children.
--- Page 83 ---
Q u e s t i o n  5 :  D o e s  i t  s e r v e  m y  h a p p i n e s s ?
Sometimes we follow beliefs tha t don’ t serve our happiness, but that feel
as if they reflect an accepted a nd inescapable way of life. It could be
following a career path because our family or society tells us it’ s correct
(as happened to me with computer engineering), or marrying a particular
person, or living in a certain place or a certain way .
Place your happiness first. Only  when you’re happy can you truly give
your be st to others—in society , in relationships, in your family and
community .
It’ s worth remembering these w ise words from Steve Jobs wh en he
was asked to address the graduating class at Stanford:
Y our tim e is limited, so don’ t waste it living someone else’ s lif e.
Don’ t be trapped by dogma—which is living with the results of
other people’ s thinking. Don’ t  let the noise of others’ opinions
drown o ut your own inner voi ce. And most important, have the
courage to follow your heart an d intuition. They somehow already
know what you truly want to become. Everything else is secondary .
--- Page 84 ---
IT’S TIME TO START QUESTIONING
What are some b eliefs in your li fe you want to question? Pick a few and
try a pplying the Brule T est. Then try a few more. Don’ t rush, and don’ t
expect to wake up tomorrow free of all of your Brules just  because
you’ve f igured out what they are. Brules are powerful, and it ca n be hard
to look squarely  at the ones that have had the most influence over you.
Throughout this book I’ll be s haring strategies for throwing out your
Brules a nd replacing them with new blueprints that will inspire greater
happiness, connection, and success. But before you leap forward into a
new life, you have to untangle yourself from the old one. I like  to recall
the w ords of L. P . Hartley from the 1953 novel The Go-Between:  “The
past is a foreign country: They do things dif ferently there.” If s o, this is
your chance to cross the border , visit some place new and exciting, and
discover a whole new way of life.
As you pursue t his quest to que stion, know this: Certain people will
tell you that you’re wrong, that you’re being unfaithful to your family , or
to your tradition, or to your cultural norms. Or that you’re being selfish.
Here’ s what I want you to know . Some say the heart is the most selfish
or gan in the body because it keeps all the good blood for itself. It takes in
all t he good blo od, the most oxygenated blood, and then distri butes the
rest to every other or gan. So, in a sense maybe the heart is selfish.
But if the heart didn’ t keep the good blood for itself, the heart would
die. And if the heart died, it wo uld take every other or gan wit h it. The
liver . Th e kidneys. The brain. Th e heart, in a way , has to be selfish for its
own pre servation. So, don’ t let people tell you that you’re selfish and
wrong t o follow your own heart. I ur ge you, I give you permission, to
break th e rules, to think outsid e the norms of traditional society . The
Brules of the father should not be passed on to the son.
--- Page 85 ---
LIFE BEYOND THE BRULES
When y ou start hacking your li fe in this way , you gain a new  sense of
power a nd control. W ith it comes accountability and responsibility for
your act ions. Since you’re deciding what rules you’ll follow , yo ur life is
up t o you. Y ou can’ t hide behind excuses about who or what is holding
you bac k. It’ s also up to you to hack responsibly , applying the Brules
T est to make sure you aren’ t violating the Golden Rule as you go.
It takes a certain amount of courage to live in this way . When you hit a
certain p ain poi nt with a Brule and realize that you cannot continue to
live wit h it, part of abandoning it could feel like abandonment of an
important social structure in your life. Life beyond the Brule s can be
scary and surprising and exhilarating—often all at once. People might
push bac k or hassle you, but you must be prepared to stand firm  in your
pursuit of your own happiness.
I like to remem ber the advice from my friend Psalm Isado ra, an
actress and well-known tantra teacher: “The people making you feel
guilty for going your own way and choosing your own life are simply
saying, ‘Look at me. I’m better than you because my chains  are bigger .’
It takes courage to break those chains and define your own life.”
So dare to live your precious days on Earth to their fullest, true to
yourself, with open heart and thoughtful mind, and with the courage to
change what doesn’ t work and accept the consequences. Y ou may find
that you can fly farther than you ever imagined.
“What if . . . all the rules and ways we lay down in our heads, don’t even exist at all?
What if we only believe that they’re there, because we want to think that they’re
there? All the formalities of morality and the decisions that we see ourselves making
in order to be better  (or the best) . . . what if we think we’ve got it all under control—
but we don’t? What if the path for you is one that you would never dare take
because you never saw yourself going  that way? And then what if you realized that
one day, would you take the path for you? Or would you choose to believe in your
rules and your reasons? Your moralities and your hopes? What if your own hope,
and your own morality , are going the other way?”
—C. JOYBELL C.
--- Page 86 ---
PART II
THE AWAKENING
THE POWER TO CHOOSE YOUR VERSION
OF THE WORLD
W hen I was a kid, my dad enrolled me in T ae Kwan Do classes. T ae
Kwan Do is a form of Korean karate that builds discipline and self-
defense. I loved it. Every year , we’d strive to perfect our moves so we
could ac hieve th e next belt level. I started as a white belt and slowly
ascended to yellow , green, blue, brown, and eventually the much-coveted
black belt.
The belts were an elegant syste m dating back centuries that a llowed
students to rise to mastery level in attainable stages. It made growth
easier and motivated students far more than a vague goal such as
“become a master .” Each belt was a treasured validation of our hard
work and progress.
This book is lay ered like belts for consciousness. As you mov e from
Part I  to  Part II, you will ascend to  the next belt level in awareness.
Humanity today  is lar gely operating within the culturescape, or Level 1
—trapped by Brules from generations past.
Once you start to see the culturescape for what it is, something within
you will  begin to change. Rather than follow the status quo, you will
start to make yo ur own rules. Y ou will start to question. And the more
you question, the more your aware ness will expand. The more your
awareness expan ds, the more yo u will grow . And the more you grow , the
more extraordinary your life will become.
At this point you’ve ascended to  Level II: The A wakening. If I were to
draw this on a napkin, it would look like this:
--- Page 87 ---
Level I:
Life within the culturescape. The Xs represent potential Brules.
Level II:
You learn to create your own version of the world within the culturescape. Within your
world (the bubble around you), you can choose to eliminate and filter incoming Brules.
--- Page 88 ---
Think o f the little Xs as the Brules of the culturescape. Y ou’re rising
beyond it by creating your ow n bubble within the culturescape where
YOU make the rules.
At this higher level, your tool for influencing the world and creating
your own growth is a practice I call consciousness engineering. Think of
it as the interface between you and the culturescape around you. Y ou
decide what to let in or r eject. Y ou’re engineering ho w your
consciousness is shaped and influenced.
What ideas and values (we’ll call these your models of reality) do you
choose t o believ e? How do you  choose to live, learn, and grow (we’ll
call thos e your systems for living)? In the chapters that follow , you’ll
select the models and systems t hat will advance your journey toward an
extraordinary life.
