--- Page 245 ---
CHAPTER 8
CREATE A VISION FOR YOUR
FUTURE
Where We Learn How to Make Sure That the
Goals We’re Chasing Will Really Lead to
Long-Term Happiness
Man. Because he sacrifices his health in order to make money . Then he sacrifices
money to recuperat e his health. And then he is so anxious about the future that he
does not enjoy the present; the result being that he does not live in the present or
the future; he lives as if he is never going to die, and then dies having never really
lived.
—JAMES J. LACHARD,
ON WHA T IS MOST SURPRISING ABOUT HUMANITY
--- Page 246 ---
FORWARD MOMENTUM
Dreams, visions, aspirations, goals—call them what you will—these are
essential to an extraordinary life. I call them forward momentum. When
life doesn’ t hold meaning for us, it’ s like living in the desert, parched for
water .
In th is c hapter , you’ll learn how to embark on your own path toward
the extr aordinary by getting bolder and better with your goals. Every
extraordinary mind I’ve ever met—including those mentioned in this
book—dreams boldly and unapologetically . I’ll share a simple,
enjoyable, yet focused system f or setting goals and pursuing d reams in
all areas of your life. I want you to wake up ten years from now and not
say “Wh at have I done?” but “This has been incredible—now , what’ s
next?”
--- Page 247 ---
THE DANGERS OF GOAL SETTING
Goal setting is an absurd practice that I gave up long ago. It sim ply is too
dangerous when done without the right training.
See, mo dern goal setting, as it’ s explained in countless college c ourses
or to high-schoo l kids, is really  not about teaching you how to pursue
what wi ll really help you lead an extraordinary life. Rather , it’ s about
teaching you to pursue common Brules of the culturescape—Brules that
often lea d to your chasing things that you’ll ultimately find do n ot really
matter . It’ s about safety rather than about truly living.
The biggest of t hese Brules is th e idea that you need to map out your
life to move you  toward some ridiculous idea called a career . As  a result,
when most people think about  setting goals and their visions for the
future, their dominant model focuses on career and money . Bullshit.
As Zen philosopher Alan W atts famously said:
For get the money , because if y ou say that getting the money is
the mos t important thing, you will spend your life comple tely
wasting your time. Y ou’ll be do ing things you don’ t like doing in
order to  go on living—that is, to go on doing things you don’ t like
doing. W hich is stupid. Better to  have a short life that is full of w hat
you like doing than a long life spent in a miserable way .
T oo man y of us pursue goals w e think  w ill make us h appy—only to
wake up  one day in our forties, wondering what on earth happe ned to us
as we find ourselves stuck in uninspiring, boring, stagnant lives. How
does this happen?
First, the big problem with life in many industrialized countries is that
far too often, we’re expected to choose a career before we ca n legally
buy a beer . As a nineteen-year -old college student, I was sup posed to
choose a nd pursue a career in computer engineering before I even knew
what I truly loved. It took years of increasing misery and the drama of
getting fired from Microsoft b efore I figured out what a rut I’d dug
myself into. There is a fundamental flaw in our modern system of goal
setting: W ith our minds cloude d by Brules, we confuse the means  and
the end .
--- Page 248 ---
CHOOSE END GOALS; SKIP MEANS
GOALS
Y ou’ve probably  heard the exp ression “it was a means to an end.” It
applies to goals, too. Often peo ple confuse means goals with e nd goals.
W e choose college majors, career paths, life paths as if they were ends in
themselves, whe n in reality the y’re a means to  an end . W e may invest
years of toil and money for mean s goals masquerading as end go als. This
can get us into t rouble. The dif ference between a means goal an d an end
goal is one of the lessons that I  wish more people could learn earlier in
life. End goals are the beautifu l, exciting rewards of being h uman on
planet E arth. End goals are abou t experiencing love, traveling around the
world b eing truly happy , contributing to the planet because doing so
gives you meaning, and learning a new skill for the pure joy of it.
End go als spea k to your sou l. They bring you joy in and of
themselves, not because they confer any outward label, standard, or
value at tached b y society . Nor a re end goals undertaken for the purpose
of pay or for m aterial reward. They are the experiences that c reate the
best memories in our lives.
My most amazing end goals were:
Reaching the top of Mount Kina balu and gazing down at the clouds
below me as the sun rose over the island of Borneo.
My honeymoon with Kristina in Svalbard, Norway , hiking through
blizzards in Arctic weather .
Inviting my employees to witness a gor geous, state-of-the-art new
steampunk of fice I’d been dreaming up for years, and witnes sing
the l ook of awe  on their faces when we opened the doors for  the
first time.
Seeing my baby daughter dance for the first time (to Billy Ray
Cyrus’ s “Achy Breaky Heart”).
But for most of my life, I pursued means goals. Means goals a re the
things th at socie ty tells us we need to have in place to get to happiness.
Almost everythi ng I wrote dow n as a goal was actually a means to an
end, not an end in itself, including:
Graduating from high school with a good GP A.
--- Page 249 ---
Qualifing for the right college.
Securing a summer internship.
Getting a job at T rilogy Software in Austin, T exas.
Other common means goals include hitting certain income levels,
getting good reviews and promotions to a certain level at w ork, and
being with one particular someone.
But when means goals become your focus, you miss the point.
I lov e th is advic e from author J oe V itale: “A good goal should  scare
you a little and excite you a lo t.” Scary and exciting are two beautiful
feelings that good end goals often bring out. Scary is a good thing
because it means you’re pushin g your boundaries—that’ s how you take
steps toward the extraordinary .  Excitement signifies that your goal is
genuinely close  to your heart—not something you’re doing to please
someone else or to conform to society’ s Brules.
--- Page 250 ---
THE DAY I QUIT
My wake-up call happened in 2010. I had made a promise to myself that
if I ever woke up two weeks in  a row dreading going to work, I should
quit and think of another job. In 2010 for the first time, I felt that dread.
Mindvalley was  a dif ferent comp any back then, and I ran it with  Mike,
my cofo under and college friend from the University of M ichigan.
Mindvalley was  a venture builder , a small start-up spinning of f  dif ferent
small w eb businesses with the goal of generating revenue. W e had
launched several e-commerce stores, a software algorithm for calculating
the q uality of a blog post, and ev en a social bookmarking engine that we
had sold.
Mike and I were both good at what we did, but our friendship had long
ended a nd working together no longer had that certain spark. While
Mindvalley ran on its own, I w as pursuing other business ventures, and
so was Mike. One of my goals was to start and exit a start-up, so I could
notch another entrepreneurial w in on my belt. And I was c lose. My
second start-up, a daily deals s ite for Southeast Asia, was pi cking up
steam an d had just received a he althy round of venture capital f unding. I
was run ning tw o businesses at once, and according to my goal list, I
should have been happy:
Fast-growing business. Check.
Funding. Check.
Press and media attention. Check.
Money . Check.
T itles and rewards. Check.
Y et I wasn’ t happy . I was bored at work. I hated what I did and
dreaded going to the of fice. I fe lt lonely . When most of your friends are
your business partners or employees and you dislike your work,
friendships suf fer , too. Mindval ley existed to generate cash flow but not
to fulfill any grand meaning for me or contribute to humanity .
How had things gotten this way?
I was bending re ality: I had been happy , and I had visions pulli ng me
forward. And I had become wildly successful and wealthy . Bu t while I
had hit all my goals as an entrepreneur , something was missing.
--- Page 251 ---
I had inadverten tly fallen into th e trap of confusing means goals with
end goal s. I had ended up as an entrepreneur with a business an d cash in
the bank. I was my own boss. But I had not bothered to set true end goals
that went beyond this.
So, what did my heart truly crave?
I wa nted to be able to travel to exotic countries and beautiful
locations around the world.
I wa nted to be able to stay at five-star hotels with my family and
experience luxury .
I w anted  to be able to travel with my kids and expose them  to
unique learning opportunities.
I wa nted to have friends from  all around the world who were
amazing men and women driven by humanity-focused values and
doing big things in the world.
I wa nted to meet many of the bu siness and personal growth legends
who had inspired me.
I w anted  to be able to teach an d put down on paper my personal
growth models for the world.
And I wanted my job to be spectacular fun.
In 2 010 I wrote  down these go als. It was no longer just about start-
ups, ma king mo ney , and growing a business. I wanted a life that was
enjoyable and meaningful.
Something inter esting happens when you give your mind a clear
vision. W hether the goal is a means goal or an end goal—your mind will
find a way to bring it to you. This is why I say that to the untrained mind,
goal setting can be dangerous. Y ou could end up somewhere you don’ t
want to be. But when you learn  about end goals and their significance
and do the exerc ise I’ll share in this chapter , you’re more likely to end up
with what your heart and soul really crave.
When I made th at list, I had no idea how those goals were go ing to
come about. But the human min d, driven by an exciting vision, can be an
amazing force for change. Sometimes the path to your end goal can be
unexpected. It certainly was in my case.
Bored, lonely , and thirsting for meaning and adventure, I was
definitely experiencing one of  those life dips we’ve talked about in
--- Page 252 ---
earlier c hapters. And in the de pths of those doldrums, I got the crazy
inspiration to start a festival.
While attending a lot of semina rs to invest in my growth, I had been
turned o f f by how many hosted dodgy speakers pitching shady ,  get-rich-
quick m odels un der the guise o f personal growth. But I was inspired by
events that brought together trib es of like-minded souls for networking
and learning. I had been invited to speak at events like Summit Series
and loved the tribal dynamics I saw as people connected with each other
outside the seminar room. How could I make these better?,  I thought.
I was speaking on stage in W ashington, DC, sharing some of the ideas
in this book. At the end of my speech, I asked the audience if anyone
wanted to come and spend a w eekend with me exploring these ideas
further . I had no date and no event plan—yet sixty people e xpressed
interest. I invited them to a room and asked them what they wou ld like to
experience. What I learned was that people wanted to understand more
about m y uniqu e models for pe rsonal growth, and they wanted to do it
with a curated tribe, in a fun, paradise location. “This is goi ng to be
awesome,” one of them said.
“I like the wor d,” I replied. “Let’ s call this A wesomeness Fest  for
now .” Then and there, with no date or location, I sold $60,000 worth of
tickets. I now had seed funding.
Over the next several months,  I put together the “fest.” I invited
several amazin g speakers, including hotelier Chip Conley , MBA
professor Srikum ar Rao, Summit Series founder Elliott Bisnow , plus a
host of fitness experts, and o ther speakers. W orking with just my
assistant, Miriam, we planned an entire event for 250 people in Costa
Rica. It was a wild success.
W e l ater renamed it A-Fest—and  that’ s how it started. Now every year
thousands of people from forty-p lus countries apply for limited tickets to
two A-Fests happening somewhere on the planet. I, along with a roster of
world-class speakers and trainers on dif ferent aspects of human
performance, sh are our latest lea rnings on personal growth onstage, with
themes like Biohacking, Brain and Body , and Belief Hackin g. In the
evenings the guests experience spectacular adventures and parties that
bring people together to connect and create profound memories.
W e rent space at  some of the most spectacular spots in the world , from
paradise islands in the Caribbean to castles in Europe to wo rld-class
cultural spots in Bali. W e bring in music, art, and other ele ments to
create environments where people connect so deeply that best
friendships, marriages, and business partnerships are formed. A nd in the
--- Page 253 ---
midst of all this, I have some of  the most incredible fun and adventure I
can imagine—an d get to share it with hundreds of extraordinar y people
who become new friends.
A-Fest g rew and grew . It has become one of the most exciting things I
do. Y et it fits in no category or  box. But here’ s the beautiful thing—it
fulfills all the goals I set that were missing in my life at that time:
Friendship. Check.
Being able to stay in amazing hotels. Check.
T raveling to wonderful locations around the world. Check.
Exposing my children to amazing minds and learning opportunities.
Check.
Meeting experts and business legends whom I admire. Check.
Spectacular fun. Double check.
A-Fest was never a goal in itself . Rather , it emer ged as an evolution  of
all the items on  my bucket list coalescing, mer ging, dancing w ith each
other , an d pointing me toward the creation of a model of reality  that was
completely new in the world.
And tha t’ s the most important aspect of end goals. They help ta ke you
of f the beaten path and move you away from the restrictive models of
reality , systems of living, and Brules that school and society prod you
into foll owing. E nd goals help y ou step of f the treadmill of the ordinary
and get on a trajectory toward the extraordinary .
T oday , 80 percent of my closest  friends in the world are people I met
at A-Fe st. And  it was just one thing in my life that emer ged from
focusing on end goals. But other things happened, too.
I sold my second business. It w as making me miserable. I of f-loaded
shares to a friend and got out. The money was not worth it.
I dec ided I would either leave Mindvalley or remake it into something
I felt proud of. And if my business partner and I did not get along, one of
us would need t o leave. Since I had started the company and fe lt it close
to my heart, I decided to buy him out. I went into debt to pay him
millions of dollars to buy back every share. By 201 1, I ow ned my
company again. I was broke—b ut I was happy . Fueled by this happiness,
I grew the com pany 69 percent in one year , and I’ve not loo ked back
since.
Correcting the way I set goals helped me shift my life from a mundane
and tiresome slog to a life of adventure and meaning. I only wish I had
--- Page 254 ---
learned about the idea of end goals sooner—I wouldn’ t have wasted so
many years pursuing goals tha t seemed great on the outside but that
contributed little to what my heart felt was important.
So, don’ t choose a career , lest you end up in a mind-numbing
occupation. No r should you just declare that you want to be an
entrepreneur—lest you turn into a stressed out, bored one. Inste ad, think
of your end goals and let your career or creation find you .
Now , how do yo u know if you’re on the right path? Here’ s ho w you
can check whether your goals are means goals or end goals.
--- Page 255 ---
THE IMPORTANT DISTINCTION: MEANS
GOALS VERSUS END GOALS
It’ s a simple distinction, really , with four hallmarks to watch for .
--- Page 256 ---
HOW TO IDENTIFY MEANS GOALS
1.MEANS GOALS USUALL Y HA VE A “SO” IN THEM.  Means goals don’ t
stand alone but are stepping-stones to something else. They’re part
of a sequence. For example: Get a good GP A so  you can get into a
good college. This often means that goals get strung together into
(life) long sequences, like this one: Get a good GP A so  you can get
into a good college, so  you can get a good job, so  you can make
lots of money , so  you can af ford a nice house, car , etc., so  you’ll
have money saved to do all the stuf f you really want to do after
you retire. Does your goal have a “so” attached?
2.MEANS GOALS ARE OFTEN ABOUT MEETING OR CONFORMING T O
BRULES.  Is your goal one you think you “should” meet as part of
achieving your ultimate goal—for example, thinking that you
should get a college degree in order to have a fulfilling job or that
you should get married in order to have love in your life? Many
means goals are cleverly concealed Brules. Y ou do not have  to get
married. Or get a college degree. Or be an entrepreneur . Or join the
family business. What you really want is to be in beautiful loving
relationships, to have consistent opportunities to learn and grow ,
and to have freedom. These can come in many dif ferent forms. See
the dif ference?
--- Page 257 ---
HOW TO IDENTIFY END GOALS
1.END GOALS ARE ABOUT FOLLOWING YOUR HEAR T.  T ime flies when
you’re pursuing them. Y ou may work hard toward these goals, but
you feel it’ s worth it. They remind you of how fantastic it is to be
human. When you’re working on an end goal, it doesn’ t feel like
“work.” Y ou could be doing it for hours on end, but it genuinely
makes you happy or gives you meaning. Y ou don’ t need to step
away to get “rechar ged.” W orking on the end goal itself rechar ges
you—it doesn’ t drain you. For example, for me, writing this book
is an end goal. It’ s so much fun that I’d do it even if I never got
paid.
2.END GOALS ARE OFTEN FEELINGS.  T o be happy , to be in love, to
consistently feel loving, to consistently feel joyous are all very
good end goals. A diploma, an award, a big business deal, or other
achievements can certainly bring good feelings, but they are not
end goals UNLESS you’re happy AS you’re pursuing them—in
other words, unless the act of studying for your diploma or closing
the business deal itself brings you happiness. End goals have
happiness baked into the pursuit.
--- Page 258 ---
THE THREE MOST IMPORTANT
QUESTIONS
How do  we avoid the means goa ls trap? I developed this improv ed goal-
setting t echnique to get you th ere. I call it the Three Most I mportant
Questions. When these questio ns are asked in the correct order , this
exercise can help you jump stra ight to the end goals that really matter in
your life.
I’ve found that all end goals fall into three dif ferent buckets.
The first is expe riences. No matter what you believe about hum anity’ s
origins, one thing is clear . W e’r e here to experience all the world has to
of fer—not objects, not money , but experiences. Money and objects only
generate experiences. Experiences also give us happiness in th e now , a
key com ponent of the extraordinary life. W e need to feel that daily life
holds wonder and excitement to  sustain our happiness—which fuels our
movement toward our goals.
The seco nd is growth. Growth d eepens our wisdom and awareness. It
may be growth we choose or gr owth that chooses us. Growth m akes life
an endless journey of discovery .
The third is con tribution. It is what we give back from the we alth of
our expe riences and growth. What we give is the special mark we can
make on  the world. Giving m oves us toward awakening, the highest
level of happine ss, by providing meaning in our lives, and it is a key
component of the extraordinary life.
Think about these three essentials framed as questions.
--- Page 259 ---
THE THREE MOST IMPORTANT QUESTIONS
1. What experiences do you want to have in this lifetime?
2. How do you want to grow?
3. How do you want to contribute?
As you do the T hree Most Important Questions exercise later in this
chapter , you’ll see how the T w elve Areas of Balance that you ’ve been
exploring and developing in chapters throughout this book match
perfectly with the Three Most Important Questions. In fact, I derived the
T welve Areas of Balance from these questions. The graphic below shows
how and where they fit.
Let’ s play out these questions in more detail. I suggest yo u read
through the process and finish this chapter (which ends with  tips for
doing the exercise). Then do the exercise when you feel ready .
--- Page 260 ---
Question 1: What Experiences Do You Want to
Have?
In this section, you are asking yourself this question:
--- Page 261 ---
I f  t i m e  a n d  m o n e y  w e r e  n o  o b j e c t  a n d  I  d i d  n o t
h a v e  t o  s e e k  a n y o n e ’ s  p e r m i s s i o n ,  w h a t  k i n d s  o f
e x p e r i e n c e s  w o u l d  m y  s o u l  c r a v e ?
Let’ s apply this to the first four items in the T welve Areas of Ba lance.
Each of these four items relates to experiences:
1.YOUR LOVE RELA TIONSHIP .  What does your ideal love relationship
look like? Imagine it in all its facets: how you communicate, what
you have in common, the activities you do together , what a day in
your life together looks like, what holidays are like, what moral
and ethical beliefs you share, what type of wild passionate sex you
are having.
2.YOUR FRIENDSHIPS.  What experiences would you like to share with
friends? Who are the friends you’d share these experiences with?
What are your ideal friends like? Picture your social life in a
perfect world—the people, the places, the conversation, the
activities. What does the perfect weekend with your friends look
like?
3.YOUR ADVENTURES.  Spend a few minutes thinking about people
who’ve had what you consider to be amazing adventures. What did
they do? Where did they go? How do you define adventure? What
places have you always wanted to see? What adventurous things
have you always wanted to do? What kinds of adventures would
make your soul sing?
4.YOUR ENVIRONMENT .  In this amazing life of yours, what would your
home look like? What would it feel like to come back to this
place? Describe your favorite room—what would be in this
wonderful space? What would be the most heavenly bed you can
imagine sleeping in? What kind of car would you drive if you
could have any car you wanted? Now imagine the perfect
workspace: Describe where you could do your best work. When
you go out, what kinds of restaurants and hotels would you love to
visit?
--- Page 262 ---
Question 2: How Do You Want to Grow?
When y ou watch how young ch ildren soak up information, you realize
how dee ply wir ed we are to learn and grow . Personal growth  can and
should h appen throughout life,  not just when we’re children. In this
section, you’re essentially asking yourself:
--- Page 263 ---
I n  o r d e r  t o  h a v e  t h e  e x p e r i e n c e s  a b o v e ,  h o w  d o  I
h a v e  t o  g r o w ?  W h a t  s o r t  o f  m a n  o r  w o m a n  d o  I
n e e d  t o  e v o l v e  i n t o ?
Notice how this question ties to the previous one? Now , conside r these
four categories from the T welve Areas of Balance:
5.YOUR HEAL TH AND FITNESS.  Describe how you want to feel and look
every day . What about five, ten, or twenty years from now? What
eating and fitness systems would you like to have? What health or
fitness systems would you like to explore, not because you think
you ought to but because you’re curious and want to? Are there
fitness goals you’d like to achieve purely for the thrill of knowing
you accomplished them (whether it’ s hiking a mountain, learning
to tap dance, or getting in a routine of going to the gym)?
6.YOUR INTELLECTUAL LIFE.  What do you need to learn in order to
have the experiences you listed above? What would you love to
learn? What books and movies would stretch your mind and
tastes? What kinds of art, music, or theater would you like to know
more about? Are there languages you want to master? Remember
to focus on end goals—choosing learning opportunities where the
joy is in the learning itself, and the learning is not merely a means
to an end, such as a diploma.
7.YOUR SKILLS.  What skills would help you thrive at your job and
would you enjoy mastering? If you’d love to switch gears
professionally , what skills would it take to do that? What are some
skills you want to learn just for fun? What would make you happy
and proud to know how to do? If you could go back to school to
learn anything you wanted just for the joy of it, what would that
be?
8.YOUR SPIRITUAL LIFE.  Where are you now spiritually , and where
would you like to be? W ould you like to move deeper into the
spiritual practice you already have or try out others? What is your
highest aspiration for your spiritual practice? W ould you like to
learn things like lucid dreaming, deep states of meditation, or ways
to overcome fear , worry , or stress?
--- Page 264 ---
Question 3: How Do You Want to Contribute?
In keepi ng with His Holiness the Dalai Lama’ s message, as I m entioned
earlier , i f you want to be happy ,  make other people happy . This  question
explores how all of your unique experiences and growth can help you
contribute to the world. It doesn’ t have to be a big dramatic gesture—
perhaps it’ s inviting the new neighbors over for a cookout or taking the
new hir e out for lunch, playing the piano at a nursing home , helping
rescued animals get adopted, or spearheading a clothing drive at work.
In this section, you’re essentially asking yourself:
--- Page 265 ---
I f  I  h a v e  t h e  e x p e r i e n c e s  a b o v e  a n d  h a v e  g r o w n  i n
t h e s e  r e m a r k a b l e  w a y s ,  t h e n  h o w  c a n  I  g i v e  b a c k  t o
t h e  w o r l d ?
Again, notice how this question connects to the previous two. Im agine
what you can give in these areas of the T welve Areas of Balance:
9.YOUR CAREER.  What are your visions for your career? What level of
competence do you want to achieve and why? How would you like
to improve your workplace or company? What contribution to
your field would you like to make? If your career does not
currently seem to contribute anything meaningful to the world,
take a closer look—is that because the work is truly meaningless
or does it just not have meaning to you? What career would you
like to get into?
10.YOUR CREA TIVE LIFE.  What creative activities do you love to do or
what would you like to learn? It could be anything from cooking to
singing to photography (my own passion) to painting to writing
poetry to developing software. What are some ways you can share
your creative self with the world?
11.YOUR F AMIL Y LIFE.  Picture yourself being with your family not as
you think you “should” be but in ways that fill you with happiness.
What are you doing and saying? What wonderful experiences are
you having together? What values do you want to embody and
pass along? What can you contribute to your family that is unique
to you? Keep in mind that your family doesn’ t have to be a
traditional family—ideas along those lines are often Brules.
“Family” may be cohabiting partners, a same-sex partner , a
marriage where you decided not to have children, or a single life
where you consider a few close friends as family . Don’ t fall into
society’ s definition of family . Instead, create a new model of
reality and think of family as those whom you truly love and want
to spend time with.
12.YOUR COMMUNITY LIFE.  This could be your friends, your
neighborhood, your city , state, nation, religious community , or the
world community . How would you like to contribute to your
--- Page 266 ---
community? Looking at all of your abilities, all of your ideas, all
of the unique experiences you’ve had that make you the person
you are, what is the mark you want to leave on the world that
excites and deeply satisfies you? For me, it’ s reforming global
education for our children. What is it for you?
This brings us to Law 8.
--- Page 267 ---
Law 8: Create a vision for your future.
Extraordinary minds create a vision for their future that is decidedly their own and
free from expectations of the culturesca pe. Their vision is focused on end goals that
strike a direct chord with their happiness.
--- Page 268 ---
Applying the Three Most Important Questions
to Work, Life, and Communities
Y ou can do the Three Most Important Questions exercise alon e or with
others. Schools in the United Sta tes and in villages in Africa have used it
to inspire students. Companies use it to create more bonding and
employee engagement. Many people do this exercise with a partner—
sharing your answers creates instant connection. T ry the exercise with
your partner on your respectiv e birthdays or on your anniver sary . It’ s
fascinating to see how your own and others’ goals evolve and change
over time.
--- Page 269 ---
B l u e p r i n t s  f o r  t h e  S o u l
The Thr ee Most  Important Questions exercise is so important that we do
it with every p erson who joins the Mindvalley family . New hires go
through a training in consciousness engineering, following a curriculum
similar t o this book. They end t heir induction by doing the Th ree Most
Important Quest ions exercise. On a piece of letter -size paper , th ey draw
three columns marked Experien ces, Growth, and Contribution . W ithin
the columns, they write down their visions and aspirations for each of the
three areas. In the end, the sheet looks like this:
These are more than just sheets of paper to me. Each represents the
dreams, ambitio ns, and motivations of someone who has joined our
company . And so we lovingly call these sheets “blueprints for the soul.”
W e pos t everyone’ s blueprint, along with their photo, on a giant
corkboard so we can see and sh are our dreams. Each floor in our of fice
has a  co rkboard with the blueprints of the people who work ther e. Seeing
all of those s hining aspirations collected in one place gives of f
indescribable power . It’ s one of the most beautiful things to behold at
--- Page 270 ---
Mindvalley—the collective dreams of hundreds of employees on one
giant wall.
It’ s also the ultimate in transpa rency: Coworkers know what drives
other coworkers. Managers kn ow what drives their team members. I
know what drives everyone, and they know what drives me.
Many su ccess stories started as blueprints on this wall. Amir joined
Mindvalley from Sudan. He did the exercise when he was twenty-two,
and he had big dreams. He wrote about how he wanted to be a
professional speaker and write a book. Those were incredibly bold
dreams consider ing his circumstances, but by age twenty-six, Amir had
scratched of f most of them. H e’d written that book: My Islam: How
Fundamentalism Stole My Min d—And Doubt Fr eed My Soul , which
For eign Policy  magazine recommended as one of the twenty-five must-
read boo ks of 2013. T oday he writes, consults, and speaks a t top-tier
venues, from Google to Columbia University .
Luminita Saviuc joined our team from Romania. On her list she wrote
goals su ch as “be a world-renowned author and speaker” and “be a world
leader in the fie ld of spirituality .” The goals came to her in the most
interesting way .  She had written  a blog post called “15 Things to Give
Up to Be Happy” on her personal blog PurposeFairy .com . Somehow a
year late r the post resurfaced and went viral on Facebook. It t ouched a
nerve an d 1.2 million people shared it. W ithin months she got a book
deal. T wo big goals checked of f.
These stories are not unusual. T i me and time again I would see the big
goals being checked of f in the most unusual ways.
Best of all, this model is an opportunity for growing and giving: W e
can look at the board, see what others are doing, and say , “I love that!”
and add it to our own blueprint. After all, there is no monopoly on
dreams.
The wall also allows collabor ation on shared visions. Mariana, a
product manager from Ukraine who worked for us, dreamed of  going to
Nepal to  hike the Himalayas. She scoured the wall for others who had
Nepal on their blueprints and found three others. All four took a week of f
to hike in Nepal, bonding as they supported each other in striking an item
of f their list.
T alking openly about your dreams and end goals helps to make them a
reality . It’ s rare that people confide their dreams—or even admi t them to
themselves. The Three Most Important Questions exercise brings dreams
to light for the universe—that’ s you, me, and the mysterious beyond.
--- Page 271 ---
That’ s what makes the Three Most Important Questions exercise one of
the most powerful ideas in this book.
As a  bo nus tip, remember that once you know the blueprint fo r your
team members or a family member , you can always practice giving by
of fering them simple little gifts  or reminders to help them grow . Over
time, I developed a simple management technique that I consider one of
the most important tools I us e as a leader . I take a pictur e on my
smartphone of every employee’ s Three Most Important Questions sheet
and carr y it with me. I then read  their blueprints and surprise the m with a
book to help them achieve their dream. For example, one recent new hire
had writ ten that she dreamed o f learning public speaking and someday
giving a  TEDx talk. I bought her a copy of T alk Like TED  and wrote a
little note of appreciation inside the book. Something magical happens
when yo u do this at work. Y ou  aren’ t just showing that you care—you
are m aking someone totally light up as they recognize that their dreams
are supported by others. It’ s a  great way to build trust. Meaningful
gestures need not be expensive; they simply need to be genuine.
--- Page 272 ---
E x e r c i s e :  A s k  Y o u r s e l f  t h e  T h r e e  M o s t
I m p o r t a n t  Q u e s t i o n s
BEGIN BY KEEPING IT SIMPLE.  All you  need is a place to write down your
responses—it could be your journal, your computer , a smartphone, or
anything else. For each catego ry , set a timer or your watch for three
minutes or so. Setting a timer helps shut down your logical mind  so your
intuitive and creative mind can come out to play before hairy o ld Brules
or o utdated models of reality can rear up and rain on your parade. W ith
the timer , you can complete the entire exercise in ten minutes.
DON’T OVER THINK IT.  T ru st y our intu ition to know th e answers to these
questions. Don’ t spend too long, and don’ t worry about being
grammatical. Ju st let your word s flow . Draw pictures if that helps. This
is why the three-minute timer works. It forces your logical mind to shut
up so your intuitive mind can b e allowed a free-flowing expression of
what you truly want. Y ou can always go back after the three mi nutes are
up and spend time analyzing and sorting out your list. But start  with the
three-minute rule.
REMEMBER THE DIFFERENCE BETW EEN A MEANS GOAL AND AN END GOAL.
The quickest way is to focus on feelings. What feelings will a goal
bring? F or exam ple, a feeling-focused end goal about your env ironment
might b e: “I want a house I’m blissfully happy to wake up in every
morning” or “At least twice a m onth, I get to go out for a delicious meal
with friends or family I love to be with.”
FOLLOW THESE FIVE STEPS TO STAY ON TRACK.  Use  this quick guide to
double-check your goals to see if they’re in full alignment with what you
really want. Mia Koning, our chief facilitator at A-Fest, designed these
five steps, which added further clarity to the process:
1. Identify a goal.
2. Answer this question exhaustive ly until you have no more answers:
When I achieve this goal, I will be able to __, __, __, [etc.].
3. Answer this question exhaustively , until you have no more
answers: When I achieve all this, I will feel __, __, __ [etc.].
4. Identify the true underlying obje ctives of your goal, based on your
answers to questions 2 and 3.
5. Compare these objectives with the original goal and ask:
--- Page 273 ---
Is this original goal the only way/best way to achieve these
objectives?
Is this original goal enough to achieve them?
Can I achieve them in a more ef fective way?
When y ou do this, you will oft en find that what you think is an end
goal is really a means goal. Y ou will also get clarity on what the actual
end goal might be. This will free you to ensure that you’ re really
pursuing the right end goal.
WHA T TO DO WITH  YOUR LIST.  S tick it up on a  wall where you  can see it
and keep consciously and subconsciously working toward your goals.
Share i t with others for all the reasons I mentioned. Y ou’ll be
empowering others to grow and giving yourself new opportunities to
grow as well. I cannot express how powerful this is as an exercise for
companies. It’ s one of the most important exercises for cultivat ing great
culture at Mindvalley , and thousands of companies are doing the same.
Why not introduce it to your workplace?
--- Page 274 ---
THE GOOD NEWS
The goo d news is that you’re a lready on your way . Something amazing
happens when you set big, beautiful end goals. Y our brain latches on to
what yo u’re see ing and feeling. It goes to work, hacking its wa y toward
your goals. Steve Jobs said it wisely:
Y ou can’ t connect the dots looking forward; you can only connect
them looking backward. So you have to trust that the dots will
somehow connect in your future. Y ou have to trust in something—
your gut, destiny , life, karma, w hatever . Because believing that the
dots will connect down the roa d will give you the confidenc e to
follow your heart even when it leads you of f the well-worn p ath;
and that will make all the dif ference.
When you ask the Three Mo st Important Questions right, you’re
“believing that the dots will connect down the road.” Y ou will start
noticing and discovering the pa ths that bring you closer and closer to
where y ou wan t to be. Scientists may call this one thing (such as the
brain’ s reticular  activating system); mystics may call it ano ther (the
universe, God, fate, synchronicity , the law of attraction, or thoughts
create reality). Steve Jobs calls it “your gut, destiny , life, karma,
whatever .”
I call it the extraordinary mind.
Use this weapon wisely .
T o provide you with additional resources for the Three Most Important
Questions, Mindvalley has produced several short videos that you can
access on www .mindvalley .com/extraordinary :
A guided summary of the brainstorming process
How to bring t he Three Most Important Questions to your own
or ganization: W atch how Mindvalley applies the process within its
own or g anization. (I strongly feel every company should be do ing
this and every manager should take an interest in the blueprints for
the soul of the people they lead.)
--- Page 275 ---
PART IV
BECOMING EXTRAORDINARY
CHANGING THE WORLD
I n Part I  y ou learned to observe the cult urescape, the world around you,
and see it for what it is.
In Part II  y ou learned that you get to choose the world you wish to
experience. Through consciousness engineering, you can choose your
own mo dels of reality and systems for living and speed up you r growth
and awakening.
In Part III  you learned about the world within and how to strike a
balance between  happiness in th e now and having a vision for th e future.
T aken together , these abilities allow you to seemingly “bend reality .”
In Part IV I build on all of these to take you to the next level. Here you
learn to change the world.
Extraordinary minds are not content to merely be in the world. They
have a calling, a pull, to shift thi ngs. At this point in your journey toward
the extraordinary , you may begin feeling an ur ge to shake  up the
culturescape by creating new models, new ideas, and new ways of life
and livin g that move others to ne w places, too. Y ou go from escaping the
culturescape to returning to it and helping it evolve. All extraordinary
minds go through this passage . They return to shake things up and
change things.
But this is no small feat. T o do it, you need to learn the final two laws.
In Chapter 9  we start with the first lesson: Be unfuckwithable. T rying
to change the world requires a certain level of boldness and toughness.
In Chapter 10  we’ll look at fin ding your quest—how to know WHA T
to change. Y ou’ll learn that you are not alone and that there is an inner
guidance system that is going to come to your aid.
Finally , in the appendix, T ools for Y our Journey , you’ll learn how to
take all the syste ms for living I’v e shared with you and put them together
in a daily fifteen-minute practice that allows you to bring together
everything you’ve learned from this book.
