--- Page 119 ---
CHAPTER 4
REWRITE YOUR MODELS OF
REALITY
Where We Learn to Choose and Upgrade Our
Beliefs
Our beliefs are like unquestioned commands, telling us how things are, what’ s
possible and impossible and what we can and cannot do. They shape every action,
every thought, and every feeling that we experience. As a result, changing our
belief systems is central to making any real and lasting change in our lives.
—T ONY ROBBINS
--- Page 120 ---
ADVICE FROM A MONK IN A HOT TUB
“Do you have time right now?” the young monk asks me. “Let’ s go
talk.”
Did I have time?  It was our last night in Fiji. W e were sitting ar ound a
lar ge table, enjoying one of the grandest meals I’ve ever seen. It was
2009 and my then business partner , Mike, and I were guests at a nine-day
advanced medit ation retreat at Namale, a magnificent resort owned by
author and world-famous train er T ony Robbins. Our group was an
interesting assortment that included Hollywood actors, a stock market
prodigy , and a f ormer Miss America—plus the monks from India who
led the retreat. I was honored th at T ony and his wife had invited me to
join this group and experience their beautiful island home.
It was a celebra tory close to ni ne days of intensive self-exploration,
during which we tried to truly understand ourselves and our potential.
And on the final  day , we were told we would have a private con sultation
with a monk who would give us a “revelation.”
For reasons I’ll never know , my monk decided to have his consultation
with me  in the m iddle of this sumptuous dinner , just after my th ird glass
of wine.
But whe n your monk calls, you listen. “Where would you like t o go?”
I ask.
“Let’ s go to the hot tub,” he says.
Naturally .
W e go to the open-air hot tub u nder the starry Fijian sky . I climb in.
He sits on the edge, dipping his feet into the water . He looks at me and
says:
“Y ou know what your problem is?
“No,” I respond,  surprised and, to be honest, mildly annoyed, “What is
my problem?
“Y ou have low self-esteem.”
What the . . . ?
“I don’ t  think so,” I reply , as r easonably as I can, trying to hide my
growing irritation. “I think I’m pretty confident. I run a business. I’m
thrilled with my life—”
“No no no no no .” He cuts me of f. “Y ou have low self-esteem. This is
the cause of a ll your problems. I’ve observed you. When you’re
brainstorming w ith your partner and he shoots down one of your ideas,
you get agitated and defensive. I bet you have issues with your wife, and
--- Page 121 ---
I be t you have issues with others. Y ou cannot take criticism. It’ s all
because of one thing: Y ou have low self-esteem.”
It was like a sm ack in the face . The warm water in the hot tub no
longer fe lt so comforting. The monk was dead-on. And after nine days of
meditation and self-reflection, I was more open to this sort of insight,
even if it was painful to hear .
I w as overly def ensive in brainstorming meetings, especially w ith my
business partne r . I did often feel hurt or misunderstood i n family
situations. But the real problem wasn’ t that someone was shooting down
my idea, not listening to me, or misunderstanding me. It all boiled down
to a deeply buried belief that I, by myself, was not enough .
It was why I got  defensive in meetings. I felt the dismissal of my ideas
as a dismissal of me .
It’ s why I became an entrepreneur . T o prove I was worthy and enough.
It’ s why I built the most beautiful of fice in my city . T o prove I could
do it.
It was why I became wealthy . T o prove something.
I c ould see how  this belief that I needed to prove that I was eno ugh—
this mod el of reality I’d held for so long—had driven me into th e arms of
success. But I co uld also see how  the idea that I had to prove myself had
caused g reat pa in in my life. W as it possible that without this limiting
belief, I might be even more su ccessful in my work and relationships—
without paying such a high personal price?
What might happen if I develop ed a belief that I was enough a nd had
nothing to prove?
Our mod els of reality are often u nknown to us. Some models we  know
we have. For example, I know I believe in the importance of having a
calling, in the po wer of gratitude, and in being kind to the people I work
with. Bu t we also have models of reality embedded deep within that
we’re m ostly unaware of. What you know you believe is much smaller
than what you don’ t know you believe.
LESSON 1: Our models of reality lie below the surface. Often we
do not realize we have them until some intervention or
contemplative practice makes us aware.
--- Page 122 ---
Much of  growing wiser and mo ving toward the extraordinary is really
about be coming aware of the m odels of reality that you carry with you
without realizing it.
I was unaware I had a belief tha t I was not enough. Identifying  it and
learning to resolve it made a hu ge impact on the quality of my life and
how I behaved as a friend, colleague, and lover .
In this chapter we’ll explore how  the world of our past infused us with
certain beliefs—and how these  beliefs now shape the world of our
present and future. W e’ll also e xplore how we can become more aware
of our hidden models and then how to swap the unhealthy ones with
updated models. The first step is to discover how we take on these
models.
--- Page 123 ---
THE GIRL AT THE DANCE
Where does this belief of “I am not enough” and other limiting models of
reality come from? For most of us, they come from our childhood.
I g rew up in K uala Lumpur , Malaysia, but was of northern Indian
origin, s o I looked dif ferent from  the other kids at my school, w ho were
of Chinese or Southeast Asian origin. I had skin of a dif ferent color , a
bigger n ose, more body hair . It was tough being a minority k id. I was
ridiculed and called names in e lementary school, including Gorilla Boy
because I had h air on my legs and Hook Nose because of my lar ge
Roman n ose. As  a result, I grew up believing I was dif ferent. I hated my
long nose and my “gorilla” legs.
When I turned thirteen, my father enrolled me in a private school for
expat children. Surrounded by diversity , with kids from som e fifteen
countries in my class, I felt som ewhat normal. But adolescence had other
challenges. I developed severe chronic acne that landed me in
dermatologists’ of fices, and I was on frequent acne medication by age
sixteen. That earned me yet another name at school: Pimple Face. It got
worse. B y my teen years, my eyes had deteriorated to the poin t where I
had to wear gla sses with superthick lenses. They broke frequently , and
I’d patch them with tape, making me a walking stereotype of the nerd
with tap e on his glasses. As you  can imagine, teenage life for me was not
particularly easy .
My negative beliefs about my appearance wrecked my confidence for
the first decades of my life. I w as socially awkward. I hardly went out
with friends. I had crushes on girls but never had the guts to ask anyone
out.
In c ollege at the University of Michigan, I saw myself as the
engineering geek, the guy girls m ight want as a friend but no one wanted
to d ate. Thus I  found myself at twenty-two, a college junio r , never
having had a girlfriend.
Then something changed. And it started with a kiss.
It ha ppened at a  college dance. I’d had one too many beers, which is
probably the only reason I was dancing with the prettiest girl in the
room. H er nam e was Mary . I’ d known her for years and had always
admired her , but she was way out of my league.
T o this day I don’ t know what came over me, but while we were
dancing, I leaned in and kissed her . Immediately I pulled back, babbling
--- Page 124 ---
something like, “I’m so sorry—I didn’ t mean to do that.” I expected
Mary to be of fended.
Instead, she looked at me and sa id, “Are you kidding? Y ou’re f* *king
hot.” Then the prettiest girl in the room grabbed me and locked  her lips
with mine. One thing led to ano ther , and that ended up being one of the
most amazing nights of my college life.
When a model of reality changes, the way you operate in the world
changes, too. I w oke the next day feeling as if I’d awakened in  a whole
new rea lity . If Mary , the prettie st girl in the room, thought I was hot,
maybe I  wasn’ t so unattractive, and maybe other women could think so,
too.
That single realization ended my  belief that I was invisible to w omen.
It radically transformed my ability to communicate with the opposite
sex. Th anks to Mary , my dating life took of f. Nothing about my
appearance had changed. But armed with a new model of reality about
my attractivene ss, I suddenly seemed to be a magnet fo r female
attention. It was amazing how a belief, when shifted, could create such a
dramatic turnaround in my world.
Shortly thereafter , I met up with another beautiful woman, K ristina,
whom I’d had a crush on for a long time. I’d known her for years as a
friend and always considered her the dream woman. Beautiful, bold,
highly intelligent. And a redhead. I loved redheads.
But this time, w ith my new model of reality , I approached K ristina
dif ferently . W e started dating. Three years later , I proposed. T oday ,
fifteen years later , we’re still together , with two wonderful kids.
Now I go on sta ge without feeling awkward. I go on camera without
fearing how I look. All because one girl I had great admiration for helped
me t urn around a long-held model of reality . I had a lot more d amaging
beliefs t o heal, but it was proof that with the right force, even en trenched
childhood models of reality can be completely disrupted. And when it
happens, the rewards can be amazing.
LESSON 2: W e often carry disempowering models of reality that
we inherited as far back as childhood.
--- Page 125 ---
THE HYPNOTIST IN THE HOTEL ROOM
In 2 015 I had an experience that helped me knock down anoth er model
of reality that was having an incredibly limiting impact on my life: I
could not hold onto money . My business was doing well, but I was
extremely uncomfortable taking ownership of the financial gains. My
festival-like event, A-Fest, for example, was profitable, but I was giving
away 10 0 percent of the profits to good causes without actually keeping
anything as a reward. I was the coauthor of several personal development
courses, but I’d never negotiate d for the higher royalty I felt I deserved.
This det achment from material wealth wasn’ t a totally bad thi ng. But I
also felt it had a downside, as it  could limit the growth of my businesses
and projects.
In 2 015 I was wrapping up another great A-Fest, a festival I had
founded in 2010, this time in Dubrovnik, Croatia. The event had just
ended, and hundreds of participants were heading home. W alking into
the r estaurant overlooking the A driatic Sea, I saw hypnotherapist Marisa
Peer and her husband, British entrepreneur John Davy , having breakfast.
Marisa is an ex traordinary ind ividual who has helped people with
serious problems have profound breakthroughs in personal growth very
quickly . Marisa is one of the most powerful transformers of human belief
systems I had ever come across; her work and her results are legendary .
She cou nts the British royal family and a Who’ s Who list of Hollywood
celebs among her clientele.
Marisa’ s speech at that A-Fest h ad commanded a standing ovation and
was vot ed the best presentation of the event. In her speech, Marisa
explained that the biggest ailme nt af flicting human beings is the idea of
“I am  not enough.” This childho od belief carries well into adult hood and
becomes the root cause of a lot of our problems.
As we had breakfast and discussed her work, I asked Marisa if she
could hypnotize me. I’d never had hypnotherapy and was curious about
the ef fects.
A fe w hours late r , Marisa came to my hotel suite, and we talked about
my goal s for the session. My aim was this: I wanted to under stand my
attitude about money . I wondered if it connected with some models of
reality I might need to get rid of.
Marisa guided me into a regre ssion, sifting through memories and
images from my life. I felt as if  I was drifting of f into a light nap as she
--- Page 126 ---
guided me with her voice. “Go b ack to a moment in your past when you
first developed this belief,” she said.
Suddenly , I saw Mr . John, a te acher I’d had as a teenager . I adored
him, and  he was an incredible teacher . But while everyone in the class
liked him, we all felt sorry for him. He always seemed so lonely . W e
knew his wife h ad left him. W e  knew he lived in a small apartment and
didn’ t h ave much money . But we loved him; we spent a lot  of time
talking a bout what a great guy he was and what a shame it was that he
was in that situation.
“Can you see a thought pattern that you may have developed from this
moment?” Marisa asked. And I realized that the Brule I’d internalized
was:
--- Page 127 ---
T o  b e  a  g r e a t  t e a c h e r ,  y o u  h a v e  t o  s u f f e r .
I saw myself as a teacher because I run an education company and
speak an d write on personal growth. And I had an unconscious belief
that I had to suf fer in order to  be a great teacher—which in my case
manifested as having to be broke.
But Marisa didn’ t stop there. Sh e made me regress to another moment.
I saw myself in the back seat of my parents’ car . It was my birthday . I
was maybe nine or ten. My pare nts were driving me to a store to buy me
a birthday gift. I was pretending to be asleep, but I could h ear them
talking i n a worried way about money . At the time my parents were not
wealthy , but they had enough. My mom was a public school tea cher and
my dad  was a small entrepreneur . I remembered a feeling of guilt
washing over me about my bir thday gift. At the store, I picked out a
book. “That’ s all?” my mom ask ed. “Y ou can pick out somethin g more.”
So I picked up a hockey stick. She said, “It’ s your birthday . Y ou can have
more.” B ut I didn’ t want to burd en my parents with any more expenses.
That memory crystallized anot her model of reality I’d been carrying
around:
--- Page 128 ---
D o n ’ t  a s k  f o r  t o o  m u c h  b e c a u s e  s o m e o n e  w i l l  g e t
h u r t  i f  y o u  d o .
W e k ept going. I regressed to another moment. I was sixteen, standing
in th e hot sun on a basketball court. The head of my school , a burly
former w eight lifter who, for w hatever reason, seemed to despise me,
even though I was a top stud ent, was punishing me. That day , I’d
for gotten my shorts for physical  education class. He punished me for this
small in fraction by making me stand in the sun for two hou rs. Then,
because I didn’ t seem afraid, h e amped up the punishment by  phoning
my fath er in front of me and saying to me, “Y ou’re expelled from the
school.” Then he walked away .
When my father arrived at the s chool, the headmaster told him, “I’m
not really expelling your son. I’m just trying to scare him to teach him a
lesson.” My father was livid a nd confronted him about this extreme
behavior in response to such a minor infraction.
I had tolerated being treated in this way .
“Now that you’re an adult, can you see why he did this to you?”
Marisa asked. In my mind another Brule surfaced:
--- Page 129 ---
D o  n o t  s t a n d  o u t .  I t ’ s  n o t  s a f e  t o  s t a n d  o u t .
I immediately saw how these three childhood models of reality were
holding me back in numerous ways. My beliefs that it was dangerous to
stand out, that being a good teacher meant not having wealth, and that
I’d hurt or disappoint others if I asked for more, all were undermining
me. I had never even realized I held  those beliefs. When the beliefs were
removed, massive changes occurred in my life.
What ha ppened in the months afterward was incredible. Because my
belief about standing out disappeared, I started speaking more. Almost
immediately I got two major speaking engagements and my biggest
speaking payme nt yet. I got on camera more and hired my first PR firm.
It seeme d as if requests for interviews and appearances cam e out of
nowhere. I made the cover of thr ee magazines, was more active on social
media, and saw massive rises in the number of followers I had on
Facebook.
I also decided I wouldn’ t be a suf fering teacher anymore. I gave
myself the first raise I’d had in five years.
The resu lt? In just four months , I doubled my income. My business
began to  grow , too. W e hit new revenue milestones. It turned ou t that not
only had  my beliefs held me back but they had also been hold ing back
my business and everyone wh o worked for me. These exp eriences
proved t o me how erasing old models of reality can have a profound
impact on our lives.
LESSON 3: When you replace disempowering models of reality
with empowering ones, tremendous changes can occur in your life
at a very rapid pace.
--- Page 130 ---
THE MEANING-MAKING MACHINE IN YOUR
HEAD
Most of us hav e our own versions of disempowering beliefs. Beliefs
about the way w e look, about our relationship with money , about our
self-worth. Thes e beliefs can co me from unexpected sources: a bullying
teacher , overhearing a conversation between parents or other authority
figures, or the attention (or lack thereof) from people we’re attracted to.
As we believe th ese things to be true, they become  tr ue. All of us v iew
the world through our own lens, colored by the experiences, meanings,
and beliefs we’ve accumulated over the years.
It’ s a s if  we have a meaning-making machine in our minds tha t kicks
in an d c reates B rules about every experience we have. So, the k ids tease
me a nd call me names. This means I must be ugly . Never mind  the fact
that a more likely explanation is that those kids were simply be ing kids,
and children sometimes make fu n of others. But as a kid I wasn’ t mature
enough to understand this, so instead I installed the model of re ality that
I was unattractive.
The meaning-making machine never sleeps. It runs during childhood
and in adulthood, too: while on a date, dealing with your mate and your
kids, int eracting with your boss, trying to close a business deal, getting a
raise (or not), and much more.
W e add meanings to every sit uation we see and then carry these
meanings around  as simplistic and often distorted and dangerous models
of reality about our world. W e t hen act as if these models are laws. The
experiences I’ve just described proved it to me personally , but scientists
are beginning to study th is pheno menon, and the results are astonishing.
While the bad news is that o ur models of reality can caus e stress,
sadness, lonelin ess, and worry , the good news is that we can  upgrade
them. W hen we swap in op timized models that work better , we
dramatically improve our lives.
Here are just a few of the amaz ing studies that speak to the power of
our beliefs.
--- Page 131 ---
HOW OUR BELIEFS AFFECT OUR LOOKS
AND OUR HEALTH
A si mple suggestion can change what we think about ourselves and even
our bodies, inside and out. In their report in Psychological Science  on the
famous study of the hotel maids, the researchers noted that just by being
“told that the work they do (cleaning hotel rooms) is good exercise and
satisfies the Sur geon General’ s recommendations for an active lifestyle,”
the women “perceived themselves to be getting significantly more
exercise than before” and “show ed a decrease in weight, blood pressure,
body fat, waist-to-hip ratio, an d body mass index” compared to those
who weren’ t told this.
W eirder still, in a 1994 study , t en men with knee pain agreed to take
part in a sur gical procedure to relieve them of their pain. Th ey were
going to go thro ugh arthroscopic sur gery—or so they thought. In reality ,
not a ll ten were going to actually receive the full sur gery—inst ead, they
were par t of an intriguing experiment. J. Bruce Moseley , MD, was about
to te st an idea that the placebo e f fect so common with simple pills might
actually extend to more serious  conditions including those that required
sur gery . The men were going to be fully prepped for sur gery , and they
were go ing to leave the hospital with crutches and pain pills. But Dr .
Moseley performed the full sur gery on only two. On three others, he
performed only one part of the procedure. On the knees of the remaining
five, he made just three incisions so the patients would have the sight and
sensation of incisions and then scars, but he performed no actual sur gery .
Even Dr . Moseley didn’ t know which procedure each patient would
receive until just before he performed the sur gery , so that he would not
unconsciously tip of f the patients in any way . When all ten me n left the
hospital, all of them believed  that they might have had the sur gery to
alleviate their condition.
Six months later , none of the men knew who had gotten th e full
sur gery and who had gotten the sham. Y et all ten  said their pain was
greatly reduced.
Imagine that! Marked improvement from a serious medical ailment for
which sur gery is performed—yet no sur gery was performed.
The plac ebo ef fe ct, as it’ s genera lly known, can be so powerful that all
modern drugs have to be tested against a placebo before they are released
to th e public. Ac cording to W ir ed  magazine, “half of all drugs that fail in
--- Page 132 ---
late-stage trials drop out of the pipeline due to their inability to beat”
placebos. Dr . Moseley’ s work rocked the medical establishment by
showing that the placebo ef fect  could apply to ailments for which they
were performing  sur gery . Our b eliefs about our bodies seem to  have an
uncanny impact on how we experience our bodies—for good or bad.
--- Page 133 ---
HOW OUR BELIEFS INFLUENCE OTHERS
If our beliefs can influence our bodies to such a dramatic deg ree, what
else can they do? Can our beliefs influence the people around us?
The landmark studies by Robert Rosenthal, PhD, on the expectation
effect  prove just how much our lives are af fected by other people’ s
models of reality , however true or false they might be. After dis covering
that even lab ra ts navigated mazes better or worse dependin g on the
expectations of the researchers doing the training (the researchers were
basically told that they had eithe r smarter or dumber rats, when in fact all
the rats were, well, just rats), Dr . Rosenthal took the inquiry into the
classroom. First, he administe red an IQ test to the students. Then
teachers were told that five part icular students had extra-high scores and
were likely to outperform the others. In fact, the kids were randomly
selected. But guess what? While the IQ of all of the kids had increased
over the school year , those five h ad much better scores. The now -famous
findings, publish ed in 1968, were called the Pygmalion Ef fect, after the
myth ab out Pyg malion, who fell in love with his sculpture of a gor geous
woman who came alive—much  as the teachers’ expectations of those
five students became reality .
Dr . R osenthal and his colleague s spent the next thirty years verifying
the ef fec t and learning how it ha ppens. It has also been found in business
settings, the courtroom, and nu rsing homes. Bottom line: Y our beliefs
can influence both you and the peop le around you. What you expect, you
get.
W e c reate models of reality abou t the behaviors of our spouses, lovers,
bosses, employees, children—but as the research shows, our beliefs
influence how others respond to us. How much of the irritating or
negative characteristics you see in others is really a belief you’re
projecting onto them?
This brings us to Law 4.
--- Page 134 ---
Law 4: Rewrite your models of reality.
Extraordinary minds  have models of reality that empower them to feel good  about
themselves and powerful in shifting the world to match the visions in their minds.
--- Page 135 ---
HEALTHIER MODELS FOR OURSELVES
AND OUR CHILDREN
Each disempow ering model of reality we have is really noth ing more
than a Brule we’ve set up for ourselves—and, like any Brule, it should
be questioned.
The monk in the hot tub helped me see past a Brule that I had to keep
proving myself to validate my o wn self-worth. Mary’ s kiss shattered my
Brule that I was unattractive to women. My session with Marisa
shattered my Brules that only th ose who suf fer make good teac hers and
that my visibility and success could hurt me or others.
What’ s the primary source of these Brules?
It’ s got to do with how we were raised as children.
In Chapter 2 , I quoted historian Y uval Noah Harari, PhD, who
compared child ren to molten glass when they’re born. Kids are
incredibly malleable, taking a huge number of beliefs onboard as they
grow up and make meaning of the world around them. Under the age of
nine, we’re particularly suscept ible to making false meanings and then
clinging to them as disempowering models of reality .
While w e work to clear our ow n limiting models, it’ s crucial to also
make sure that we’re not saddling our children with models that are
disempowering. Incidentally , the ideas below can be applied to
interacting with  adults, too. Re member , our meaning-making machine
never tu rns of f—it doesn’ t stop just because we aren’ t kids anymore.
There ar e always opportunities to help others develop new beliefs and
get rid of old, destructive ones.
--- Page 136 ---
How We Form Beliefs as Children
Author Shelly Lefkoe and her late husband, Morty—who passed away
just as I was writing this book—developed an incredible understanding
of h ow beliefs influence our l ives. I once asked Shelly , “W hat’ s the
single biggest piece of advice you could give a parent?”
Shelly s aid this:  “No matter wh at you do, in any situation with your
child, as k yourse lf, What beliefs is my child going to take away fr om this
encounter?  W il l your child walk away thinking: I just made a mistake
and I learned something gr eat  or I’m insignificant ?”
There are many opportunities to practice this wise advice.
Suppose you’re at the dinner table with your kids and your son drops
his fork  on the floor . Y ou might say , “Billy , don’ t do that.” Now he
throws h is spoon on the ground.  Y ou say , “Billy , I T OLD YOU not to do
that. Y ou need t o go stand in the corner for ten minutes and thi nk about
what you’ve done.”
Now , you might believe this is an okay way to handle things. Y ou
were calm. Y ou simply sent Billy to a corner . But we’re lo sing the
chance t o influence the beliefs Billy might be developing from what’ s
happened. Reme mber to ask yourself: What ar e the beliefs my child i s
going to take away fr om this encounter?
Maybe Billy dropped his fork by accident, so when you reprimand
him, he’ s confused: Why doesn’ t Mom trust me?
He drops the spoon to validate that belief, and sure enough, Mom gets
angry an d puts him in a corner . N ow he forms a new belief: Mom doesn’ t
trust me, and I bother her . In the corner , B illy forms yet a nother belief: I
am not worthy  and I don’ t have a right to speak my mind .
See how the meaning-making machine amps up?
Shelly’ s advice is, at the end of any situation like that, ask your  child,
“Billy , what happened? What w as the consequence? What can y ou learn
from this?”
Shelly m akes it very clear . Don’ t ask Billy , “Why did you do  that?”
Why  question s corne r a child and put the child on the defensive. For one
thing, th e child is emotional, and even many adults can’ t answer why in
the grip of emotion. For another , it’ s not appropriate to expect a young
child to be psychologically savvy enough to dive into his own mind and
accurately answer why he did what he did.
Instead, ask what  questions: “Billy , what happened that made you drop
that spoo n?” Th is allows him to  look within and think. He might answer ,
--- Page 137 ---
“I d ropped it b ecause I thought you weren’ t listening to m e.” What
questions allow you to get to the root of the problem and work to heal it
faster .
Shelly notes that why  has to d o with meaning, and m eaning is always
made up—a mental construct f rom the world of relative truth . Even if
Billy did know why he dropped the spoon, it wouldn’ t be emp owering.
Getting to the bottom of the situation itself—figuring out the  what—
allows y ou to work with your child to do something about it . Bottom
line, She lly sugg ests that when you walk away from an interaction with
your child, ask yourself: What did my child just conclude about that
interaction?  D id your child walk away thinking: I’m a winner  or I’m a
loser ? I made a mistake and learned something new  or I’m an idiot ?
Now , even if y ou’re not a par ent, the idea here is quite profound.
Imagine all the d angerous belief s you may have taken on about t he world
even wh en the people around y ou were well-meaning, not to mention
what happened when people’ s intentions weren’ t always the best.
--- Page 138 ---
NIGHTTIME EXERCISES TO REWIRE
BELIEFS
Realizing just how much we absorb as children has made me extra
careful about what I say to my kids. Over time I developed th is simple
hack to help remove negative b eliefs in my children before th ey fester
too long.
Every evening after work, I try to spend some time with my son,
Hayden. W e call this Dad and H ayden time. After playing with Legos or
reading books, I tuck Hayden in to bed. As I do so, I ask him two simple
questions that I hope will end h is day with positivity . First, I ask him to
think of one thing he  was grateful for that da y . It could be the soft sheets
he’ s sleeping on, a friend he played with, a conversation we had, or a
book he  read. I show him that h e can be grateful for anything. Second, I
ask, “Ha yden, w hat did you love about yourself today?” I ask him to talk
about something  he did. Mayb e it was an act of kindness—he helped
another kid at school. Or a demonstration of intelligence—something he
figured out or something smart that he said. Maybe it was being helpful
—the way he took care of his b aby sister . If he can’ t think of anything,
then I tell him something I love about him. As we play before bedtime, I
try to notice little things about him. As I tuck him in, I tell him what I
saw . La st week it was, “I love  the questions you ask about science. I
think yo u have a great mind for solving problems.” If you can d o this for
your chi ldren, y ou end up raisin g children who are far more resistant to
Brules, because inside, they are a lot more secure.
Instilling this habit into Hayden’ s life is my way of trying to keep his
models o f reality  clear of Brules  before they form—but it’ s neve r too late
to start.  I encourage you to integrate these exercises into your own
evening routine  so that you, too, will have a way of rooting out any
damaging models of reality before they take hold. These two exercises
work just as we ll for adults as they do for kids. T ry it on your kids—or
yourself—each night before going to bed.
--- Page 139 ---
E x e r c i s e :  T h e  G r a t i t u d e  E x e r c i s e
T ake a few minutes and think of three to five things you’re gr ateful for
today:
Perhaps it’ s how the sun felt on  your face when you left the house
this morning.
Or the music you listened to on your way to work.
W as it the smile and thank you that you exchanged with a store
clerk?
Or a laugh you shared with some people at work?
Maybe it was that special look your partner , best friend, child, or pet
gave you.
Or the good workout tips you got from the trainer at the gym.
Or w as it just how great it feel s to get home, kick of f your sh oes,
and call it a day?
--- Page 140 ---
E x e r c i s e :  T h e  “ W h a t  I  L o v e  a b o u t  M y s e l f ”
E x e r c i s e
Think about a quality or an action of yours that made you pro ud today .
Maybe n obody else told you th at they appreciated it, but it’ s time that
you af firmed it f or yourself. Think about what it is about you as a human
being th at you can love. Is it you r unique style? Did you solve a complex
problem at work? Is it your way  with animals? Y our dance mov es? Y our
jump sh ot? That  awesome meal you cooked last night? The fact that you
know the lyrics to every Disney song since The Little Mermaid ? Y ou can
identify qualities that are big or small, but you must pinpoint three to five
things every day that make you proud to be who you are.
Y ou can practice this simple s elf-af firmation in the morning when
waking up or just before going to sleep. For me, it’ s helped  me heal
much of what the monk in the hot tub pointed out to me.
Marisa Peer suggests that all of us have a child within who  never
received all the l ove and appreciation we deserved. W e can’ t go back and
fix the past. But we can take responsibility to heal ourselves now by
giving ourselves the love and ap preciation we once craved. Y ou can help
heal your own inner child.
--- Page 141 ---
EXTERNAL MODELS OF REALITY
Thus far we’ve looked at internal models of reality , models that apply to
how we  perceive ourselves. But external models of reality are just as
powerful in our lives. Y our external models of reality are the beliefs you
have about the world around you.
Below are four of the most powerful new models I’ve deci ded to
believe are true about the world.
I ca me to acce pt these four m odels as I went through life.  They
replaced older , less evolved mod els and added immense value to  my life.
Read with an open mind.
--- Page 142 ---
1. We all possess human intuition.
This model of re ality replaced an earlier model that all “knowing ” comes
purely fr om hard  facts and data.  T oday I strongly believe in intuition and
use it in my daily life. It helps me make better decisions, know whom to
hire, and even helps me with creative pursuits like writing th is book.
Remember how  my phone sales  career took of f when I used int uition as
part of my selling strategy? Hum an beings can function as logic al beings
and  a s intuitive bei ngs. When we use both capabilities, we’re priming
ourselves for extraordinary results.
Science is finding that we operate on two levels. One is what we might
call instinct, which runs below rational awareness. It’ s connected with
prehistoric brain  areas and is lightning fast. The other is the rati onal side
that evolved later , but on which we rely heavily in our lives today .
In one study , sc ientists gave participants two decks of cards and told
them they were going to play a card game for money . Unbeknownst to
the players, both decks were s tacked: one like a roller -coaster ride—
major w ins, major losses; the o ther a smoother ride—few losses, small
wins. A fter drawing fifty cards or so, players suspected one deck
promised a smoother ride. By ei ghty cards or so, they had the whole ruse
figured out. But here’ s the thin g: Their sweat glands knew something
was up after just ten  cards. Y up, these glands on the players’ palms
opened up a little with every reach toward the roller -coaster d eck. Not
only tha t, but at about the same  time, the players began reach ing more
often for  the smoother -ride deck without even realizing it! Their intuitive
selves recognized and somehow drew them to the safer choice.
I b elieve human intuition is real , and with practice we can get better at
tuning into it fo r decision making. I do not believe you can fo retell the
future, but I do believe in gut in stinct in decision making. I try  to listen
to m y gut on a daily basis. See what happens when you try t o do the
same.
--- Page 143 ---
2. There is power in mind-body healing.
Earlier I  talked about the terrib le acne I had as a teenager . W ith little
social life to speak of, I spent a lot of time reading. One thing I read
about w as creat ive visualization . Creative visualization is a pr actice of
shifting beliefs by meditating and then visualizing your life as you want
it to evolve. It’ s based on the idea that the subconscious mind cannot
dif ferentiate between a real and imagined experience. So I started
visualizing my skin getting better . I spent just five minutes, three times a
day visu alizing my skin under going healing. I used imagery that felt
powerful to me: looking at the sky , reaching out and scooping up s ome
of that radiant b lueness, and smoothing it on my face. I saw the blue
hardening and then saw it being  pulled of f, taking the dead skin with it,
leaving glowing  new skin beneath. Essentially this process trains the
subconscious mind to develop a new belief—in my case, my skin is
becoming beautiful .
In one month of practicing this technique three times a day fo r five
minutes per session, I ended my acne problem. Mind-body healing
involves the conscious practice of certain mindfulness or visualization
techniques to heal certain aspect s of yourself. I’d had acne for f ive years
and seen  many doctors, to litt le avail. Using creative visualization, I
healed m y skin in four weeks—giving myself a huge boost of co nfidence
and self-worth.
For thos e of you who’d like to try this practice, I’ve recorded  a video
explaining how I worked with creative visualization. I also explain the
exact method I used to heal my skin. Y ou can download it as part of the
free resources on www .mindvalley .com/extraordinary .
--- Page 144 ---
3. Happiness at work is the new productivity.
Most of  us are told to work hard. Few of us are encouraged to work
happy . In the developed world, we spend close to 70 percent of our
waking hours at work—but according to multiple studies, close to 50
percent of us dis like our jobs. T hat’ s an unfortunate situation for billions
of p eople today . Unless we’re pa ssionate about some aspect of o ur work,
a big part of life will feel unsatisfying.
W ork, I believe, should be something that inspires you to jump out of
bed each  morning. From the start at Mindvalley , we embraced  the idea
that “ha ppiness is the new pro ductivity .” Our unique work culture is
designed to ensure that while employees get things done, we have
immense fun doing it. W e do this through various models and  systems
designed to boost happiness. These include investing in beautiful,
inspiring of fice design, of fering flexible working hours, hosting annual
team retreats to paradise islands if we hit our goals, and almost weekly
social gatherings and parties to foster friendship and connection.
This culture of happiness at work significantly helps reduce the
immense stress of racing t o build a fast-growing company . It’ s helped me
keep my  sanity while working lo ng hours to hit our goals. It’ s possible to
bring a culture o f happiness to any work environment. Whether  you’re a
CEO or a freelancer , an assistant or a manager , it is critically important
that you find a way to enjoy your work. Have lunch with someone from
your of fice or s omeone in your business network once a mon th, even
once a week. Pay someone a c ompliment about his or her wo rk every
day . Or take Richard Branson’ s advice. He said: “I have always believed
that the benefits of letting your staf f have the occasional blast at  an after -
hours get-togeth er is a hugely important ingredient in the mix that makes
for a  family atmosphere and a fun-loving, free-spirited corporat e culture.
It also goes a l ong way to tea ring down any semblance of h ierarchy
when you’ve seen the CFO doing the limbo with a bottle of beer in her
hand.”
In short, happiness and work need to go hand in hand.
W ant to learn m ore about my models for bringing happiness to work?
I’ve giv en several detailed talks on my methods for injecting happiness
at w ork to fuel a company’ s productivity . Y ou can watch a sho rt TEDx
talk or a longer 90-minute train ing session with information on how to
--- Page 145 ---
apply th ese mod els to your com pany or business. Both are available on
www .mindvalley .com/extraordinary .
--- Page 146 ---
4. It is possible to be spiritual but not religious.
The trad itional m odel of reality goes like this: I can only be spiritual if I
follow a particular religion. But  why not consider that our spiritual self
exists apart from religious system s, and that morality is not dependent on
religion or belief in God?
Goodness, kindn ess, and the Go lden Rule do not just have to be  taught
via religion. According to the book Good without God  by Greg M.
Epstein, the humanist chaplain at Harvard University , the fourth biggest
life adherence in the world toda y after Christianity , Islam, and H induism
is now humanism. Humanism is the idea that we do not need religion in
order to  be good. It dif fers fro m atheism in the sense that humanists
believe that there is a “God,” but He’ s certainly not the jud gmental,
angry be ing that  many religious texts make Him out to be. Instead, to a
humanist, “God ” might be the universe, or the connectedness o f life on
Earth, or spirit. Humanism is opening up a new spiritual path for people
who wan t to reject the Brules of  religion but who don’ t embrace  atheism.
One billion humanists now exi st on the planet, and their numbers are
growing.
In addit ion to exploring humanism, you could also try to craft your
own religion—rich in tradition and self-discovered experiences, but free
of th e Brules of or ganized religi on. In the book A Religion of One’ s Own
by Thomas Moore, the author suggests that we should all create our own
religion. He writes:
This new  kind of religion asks t hat you move away from being  a
follower to being a creator . I  foresee a new kind of spiritual
creativity , in which we no long er decide whether to believe in a
given creed and follow a certain tradition blindly . Now we allow
ourselves a healthy and even pi ous skepticism. Most important, we
no l onger feel pressure to cho ose one tradition over another but
rather are able to appreciate many routes to spiritual richness. This
new religion is a blend of in dividual inspiration and inspi ring
tradition.
Personally , I struggled when I left religion. I believed in a higher
power , so pure a theism did not feel right to me. Then I started exploring
models such as humanism and p antheism and found my answer . T oday I
combine ideas from humanism, pantheism, and spiritual practices like
--- Page 147 ---
meditation with my family’ s own beliefs from Hinduism and
Christianity , which I pick and choose depending on how empowering
these models feel.
--- Page 148 ---
E x e r c i s e :  E x a m i n i n g  Y o u r  M o d e l s  o f  R e a l i t y  i n
t h e  T w e l v e  A r e a s  o f  B a l a n c e
Below is a list of the T welve Areas of Balance from the previous chapter .
On your  compu ter or in your journal, write down the models of reality
that you have in  each of these categories. I’ve listed a few comm on ones
to ge t yo u starte d. Y ou should n otice a correlation with your res ults from
rating these categories in Chapter 3 ; in other words, the categories where
you assigned the lowest rating may also have the most disemp owering
models of reality .
1.YOUR LOVE RELA TIONSHIP .  How do you define love? What do you
expect from a love relationship, both to receive and to give? Do
you believe love brings hurt? Do you believe love can endure? Do
you believe you have the capacity to love greatly? Do you believe
you deserve to be loved and treasured?
2. YOUR FRIENDSHIPS. How do you define friendship? Do you
believe that friendships can be long lasting? Do you believe your
friends take more from you than they give? Do you believe making
friends is easy or hard?
3.YOUR ADVENTURES.  What’ s your idea of an adventure? Is it about
travel? Physical activity? Art and culture? Urban or rural sights
and sounds? Seeing how people live in places totally dif ferent
from yours? Are you making time and space for adventure in your
life? Do you believe you need to save for retirement before taking
a long trip? W ould you feel guilty if you left your job or your
family to take a holiday by yourself? Do you think that spending
money on experiences (such as skydiving) is frivolous?
4.YOUR ENVIRONMENT .  Where do you feel happiest? Are you content
with where and how you live? How do you define “home”? What
aspects of your environment are most important to you (colors,
sounds, type of furniture, proximity to nature or culture, neatness,
level of convenience/luxury items, etc.)? Do you believe you
deserve a gor geous home, to stay in five-star hotels when you
travel, and to work in great environments?
5.YOUR HEAL TH AND FITNESS.  How do you define physical health?
How do you define healthy eating? Do you believe you’re
--- Page 149 ---
genetically inclined toward obesity or any other health issues? Do
you believe you’ll live as long as or longer than your parents? Do
you believe you’re aging well or poorly?
6.YOUR INTELLECTUAL LIFE.  How much are you learning? How much
are you growing? How much control do you have over your mind
and your daily thoughts? Do you believe you have adequate
intelligence to accomplish your goals?
7.YOUR SKILLS.  What do you consider something you’re “good” at?
And what not so much? Where did those perceptions come from?
What holds you back from learning new things? Are there some
skills you’re ready to let go of? What keeps you from making the
change? What special abilities and character traits do you have that
you feel are most valuable? What do you feel you “suck” at?
8.YOUR SPIRITUAL LIFE.  What type of spiritual values do you believe
in? How do you practice them and how often? Is spirituality a
social or individual experience for you? Are you stuck in models
of culture and religion that hold little appeal but that you’re afraid
to abandon for fear of hurting others?
9.YOUR CAREER.  What is your definition of work? How do you define
a career? How much do you enjoy your career? Do you feel you’re
being noticed and appreciated in your career? Do you feel you
have what it takes to succeed?
10.YOUR CREA TIVE LIFE.  Do you believe that you are creative? Is there
a creative person you admire? What do you admire about him or
her? What creative pursuits do you engage in? Do you believe you
have a talent for a specific creative project?
11.YOUR F AMIL Y LIFE . What do you believe is your main role as a life
partner? How about as a son or daughter? Is your family life
satisfying to you? What were your values about family growing
up? Do you believe a family is a burden or an asset to your
happiness?
12.YOUR COMMUNITY LIFE.  Do you share the values of the communities
that you’re a part of? What do you believe is the highest purpose
of a community? Do you believe you’re able to contribute? Do you
feel like contributing?
--- Page 150 ---
TWO TOOLS TO REWRITE YOUR MODELS
OF REALITY
After do ing the exercise above, you should have some idea of th e models
of reality you need to upgrade. Y ou don’ t need to meet with monks in hot
tubs or get hypn otherapy to upgrade your models. (Though wouldn’ t it
be nice if w e co uld all get an instant up grade with a kiss?) Bad model s
can evaporate through sudden realizations—sometimes spontaneous ones
(such as I had in the hot tub)—or through meditation, inspirational
reading, or other mindfulness practices, including just sitting in a room
by yourself, reflecting on your  life, and asking yourself, Wher e did I
come up with this particular world view?
As y ou progress through this bo ok, you’ll gain insights and expe rience
“ah-hahs” that will open you up  for letting go of certain disempowering
models. There will also be specific exercises that will help you shed
models through the awakening these exercises will bring. For now ,
though, here are two instant techniques you can apply to remove
negative models  of reality that you might develop on a day-to-day basis.
Both are  based on the idea of activating your rational mind before you
unconsciously adopt a model.
--- Page 151 ---
Question 1: Is my model of reality absolute or
relative truth?
While so me things in the world are absolute truths (they hold tr ue for all
human b eings across every culture—such as the idea that parents must
take care of their children when children can’ t take care of themselves, or
that we all need  to eat in order t o survive), many things are only relative
truth: Th ey’re done dif ferently by dif ferent cultures, such as p articular
ways of parenting, eating, spiritual expression, handling a love
relationship, and much more.
Is your model of reality absolut e truth or relative truth? If you have a
model that isn’ t scientifically validated, feel free to challenge i t. This is
certainly true of religious belief s. One reason why as a kid I questioned
my culture’ s rules on eating beef was that I noticed that mi llions of
people all around the world could enjoy eating beef. Why couldn’ t I?
Is there an aspe ct of your culture you know is relative truth f or the
greater p art of humanity? If you  still enjoy believing it, do so. B ut if it’ s
harmful or results in your havin g to dress in a certain way , m arry in a
certain w ay , or restrict your diet  or life in a way you dislike, you owe it
to yourself to abandon it. Brules are made to be broken.
Remember that no single culture  or religion dominates the majo rity of
the p lanet today . No major religion holds sway over the majority of the
human populati on. Know that whatever your culture trained you to
believe, the vast majority of human beings probably do not believe. And
you can choose to disbelieve, to o. The power to choose what we want to
believe a nd what we want to disbelieve is one of the greatest gif ts we can
give ourselves.
The best advice is often to listen to your heart and int uition.
Remember that our models of reality all have expiration dates. Even
what we  take to be absolute truth today may not always be a tru th in the
future. T his question is wonderful for situations where our models are
indoctrinated th rough our culture and society . But it’ s important to
understand that  we ourselves also create models of reality via our
meaning-making machine. That’ s where Question 2 comes in.
--- Page 152 ---
Question 2: Does this really mean what I think
it means?
Morty and Shelly Lefkoe have an interesting model for hacking beliefs
that has to do with turning of f your mind’ s meaning-making machine.
According to Morty , we can manufacture as many as 500 dif ferent
“meanings” a week. But as we learn to ask ourselves, Is th is r e ally tru e?
Am I 100 per ce nt sur e that this is what’ s r eally going on? —we start to
reduce the number of meanings.
Morty says it’ s easy to get from 500 to 200 a week if you just do an
internal invento ry at regular int ervals to check whether you’re creating
meaning where none should exist. Then it’ s just about practice.
Eventually you stop adding meaning to events. Y ou will become less
reactive to stress and less upse t with others in your life. It he lps your
marriage, and I can tell you it w ill help your relationships with your boss
and coworkers. As a CEO leading a team of 200 people, I’ve consistently
found th at those who had their meaning-making machines under control
at work were more ef fective leaders.
I record ed a longer conversation with Morty on his Lefkoe belief
process. This video is very personal to me as it was the last training
Morty L efkoe ev er gave before h e passed away in November 20 15. I feel
it is my duty to share his final words of wisdom with you. Y ou can watch
the full experience at www .mindvalley .com/extraordinary .
I believe  the best thing we can d o with outdated models of realit y is to
let them go gracefully . T urn them into history . Let’ s celebrate our
extraordinary ability to evolve emotionally , mentally , spiritually
throughout life, taking on new id eas, thoughts, philosophies, and ways of
being and living. When enough  people challenge the Brules a nd adopt
optimal models, you have evolutionary progress of the human race. And
when enough people optimize their models all at the same t ime, you
have rev olutionary change that acts like a slingshot to hurl us to a new
order , powered by the impetus of our collective awakening.
True brillia nce is not a function of unde rstanding one’s view of the world and finding
order , logic, and spirituality in it. True brilliance is understanding that your view of
order , logic, and spirituality is what created your world and therefore being forever
capable of changing everything.
—MIKE DOOLEY
--- Page 153 ---
Now that you’ve taken a closer l ook at how models of reality take root
and identified some of the key models of reality in your life, it’ s time to
connect those insights with the next step in consciousness eng ineering.
In the next chapter , yo u’ll discover how your everyday life—your
systems for living—dovetails with your models and learn  how to
optimize your systems to set the stage for extraordinary grow th in all
areas of your life.
