--- Page 27 ---
CHAPTER 1
TRANSCEND THE CULTURESCAPE
Where We Learn to Question the Rules of the
World We Live In
When you grow up, you tend to get told that the world is the way it is and your life is
just to live your life inside the world. Try not to bash into the walls too much.  Try to
have a nice family life, have fun, save money . That’ s a very limited life. Life can be
much broader once  you discover one simple fact. That is—everything aroun d you
that you call life was made up by people no smarter than you. And you can change
it. You can influence it. . . . Once you learn that, you’ll never be the same again.
—STEVE JOBS
T he g leaming waters of Lake W ashington were stunning from where I
stood on the gra ssy lawn of a grand home. Conversation humme d around
me. Gla sses clinked as wine was poured. The sweet, spicy aroma of
barbecue filled the air .
Just beh ind me stood Bill Gates , the owner of that home. One of the
wealthiest men in the world a nd the legendary founder of tech giant
Microsoft, he was chatting with his other young guests.
I w as twenty-two and a few weeks into my job as a Microsoft intern,
celebrating at the annual barb ecue at Bill Gates’ s home to welcome
Microsoft’ s newbies. Back then, Microsoft was the company to get into,
equivalent to working for Apple or Google today . And I was in!
There was so much exciteme nt in the air—we were like young
Hogwarts students meeting Dumbledore for the first time.
I’d labored toward this goal for years, first working my butt of f to get
good grades in high school so I could gain admission to one of  the best
engineering colleges in the world—the University of Michigan, where I
studied electrical engineering and computer science. In Malaysia, where
I’d lived  until the age of nineteen, as in other parts of Asia, it  was the
norm for families and educators to promote the idea of growing up to
become an engineer , lawyer , or doctor . As a kid, I remember being told
that if you were smart, that’ s w hat you did. It was just kind of how that
world operated.
--- Page 28 ---
Y et the sad truth  was that I dreaded my computer engineering classes
in college. What I really wante d to be was a photographer or a stage
actor . Photograp hy and performing arts were the only classes where I got
As. But those were not acceptable careers at all, according to the rules.
So, I gave them up for program ming. After all, I had to be practical  and
r ealistic . G et good grad es. Get a good job. W ork the nine-to-five. Sav e
my mon ey for a healthy retir ement. Do it right and I would be a
“success.”
And I was beginning to succeed. It felt amazing to be honore d with
this opp ortunity to be in Bill’ s home and to be working at this company ,
then in its heyday . My professors were elated for me. My pare nts were
thrilled. It made the hours of study and my parents’ sacrifices
worthwhile. I’d done everything that had been asked of me. No w it was
time to reap the  rewards. I had arrived. And I was standing in t he home
of Bill frickin’ Gates with my career laid out before me.
But deep inside, I knew I had a problem.
On that  fateful day in the summer of 1998, I had simultan eously
accomplished two things: first, the completion of a long, many-year
journey , and second, the painful realization that I had been walking in the
wrong direction the entire damn time.
See, I genuinely disliked my job. I’d sit in my private of fice at
Microsoft headquarters, staring at my triple-screen monitor , and count
the m inutes until I could escape. I disliked the work so much that, even
though B ill Gate s was standing just a few feet away from me surrounded
by my colleagues, I felt too asha med to shake his hand. I felt I shouldn’ t
be there.
So a few weeks later , I quit.
Okay , I got fired.
I was too chicken to take char ge  and quit. T o study at a top computer
engineering coll ege, get the coveted interview , and then snag t he even-
more-coveted jo b at the compan y my fellow students were dying to get
into—to get that far and then quit was going to disappoint a lot of
people.
So I did the next best thing a spineless twenty-two-year -old could do. I
deliberately got myself fired. I simply goofed of f and got caught playing
video ga mes at my desk way to o many times during of fice ho urs until
my manager was forced to fire me. So, as they say , that  happened.
I w ent back to c ollege and limped to the finish line. I had no ide a what
I was going do after graduation and felt almost stupid for blowing my
huge opportunity with Microsoft.
--- Page 29 ---
As i t turns out, getting out of there was the smart thing to do. I wasn’ t
just quitting a job (and a car eer path)—I had also decided to quit
following the socially approved rules for how life is supposed to work.
--- Page 30 ---
LET’S ADMIT IT’S NOT WORKING
When I went my own way rathe r than choosing the path of the practical
and realistic job, it wasn’ t because I thought there was anything wrong
with being a co mputer engineer . But I did—and still do—think there’ s
something wron g with the idea  that we should work at something we
have no  passion  for , just because it’ s the norm or the rule in t he world
we’re born into.
Y et man y of us do just that. According to a Gallup study sur veying
more tha n 150,000 Americans, 70 percent of respondents said they were
“disengaged” fr om their jobs. Given the amount of time we spend at
work, a job we have no passion for puts us at risk of living a life  we have
no p assion for . But it’ s not just our ideas about careers that are faulty .
Consider these additional stats:
40 to 50 percent of US marriages end in divorce.
A Harri s poll showed that onl y 33 percent of Americans po lled
claimed to be “very happy .”
According to CNBC, “a new re port by the Pew Charitable T rusts,
which examined  debt through th e generations . . . found that e ight
in ten Americans are in debt in som e fashion, most often because o f
a mortgage.”
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, m ore
than one-third of adults in the United States are now obese.
Thus, our careers, our love lives, our happiness, our financial standing,
and our health are all in conditi ons that are pretty inadequate. How did
we get here, and how do we escape?
There are many reasons why these things happen. But I submit to you
that one big re ason is the tyranny of rules—rules that sug gest we
“should” do life in a particular way because everyone else seems to be
doing it, too:
I should  take this job.
I should  date/marry this type of person.
I should  go to this college.
I should  major in this subject.
--- Page 31 ---
I should  live in this city .
This is how I should  look.
This is how I should  feel.
Don’ t get me w rong. People sometimes have to take jobs they dislike
in order  to make ends meet. Th ey have to live in places they wouldn’ t
choose because it’ s all they can  af ford at the time or because they have
family responsibilities.
But there’ s a big  dif ference between bending to life’ s necessities and
blindly acceptin g that you must live your life according to preconceived
rules. O ne of the keys to being  extraordinary is knowing what rules to
follow and what rules to break. Outside the rules of physics and  the rules
of law , all other rules are open to questioning.
T o understand this, we first have to understand why these rules exist in
the first place.
--- Page 32 ---
THE DAWN OF THE RULES
Who made up the rules of the m odern world anyway? T o try to answer
that que stion, let’ s take a qui ck leap into the beginnings of human
history .
In his fascinating book Sapiens,  hist orian Y uval Noah Harari, PhD,
puts forward the idea that at a c ertain point in history , there could have
been as many as six dif ferent types of humans living on the planet at
once. Th ere was  Homo sapiens,  whi ch is what we all are. But there were
also Homo n eanderthalensis, Homo s oloensis,  and Homo er ectus,  among
others.
But over time, all of the nonsa piens, such as the Neanderthals, died
out, leaving Homo sapiens  as our prehistoric grandmother or grandfather .
What helped sapiens survive?
The reason for o ur ultimate dominance, according to Dr . Harari, was
our use of language—and specifically , its complexity in comparison to
others’. Primatologists who have studied monkeys have found that
monkeys can alert others in their group to danger , along the lines of, say ,
“Look out—tiger!”
But our  sapiens forebears had very dif ferent brains. In co ntrast,
sapiens could say , in ef fect, “He y , this morning I saw a tiger by the river ,
so le t’ s chill here until the tiger leaves to hunt, and then we can  go there
to eat, okay?”
Our sapiens ancestors had the ability to communicate complex
information important to surviv al through the ef fective use of language.
Language allowed us to or ganize groups of people—to share news of
dangers or opportunities. T o cr eate and teach practices and h abits: to
communicate no t just where the  berries were on the riverbank  but also
how to pick, co ok, and preserve them, what to do if someone ate too
many , and even who should hav e the first and biggest helping. Language
allowed us to preserve knowledge by passing it from person to person,
parent to child, generation to generation.
It’ s dif ficult to o verstate the power successive generations gaine d from
literally not having to reinvent the wheel. Language gave rise to beautiful
complexity on every level.
But the biggest advantage of language is that it allowed us to create a
whole new world within our he ads. W e could use it to create th ings that
didn’ t exist in the physical worl d but simply as “understandings” in our
heads: to form alliances, establish tribes, and develop guidelines for
--- Page 33 ---
cooperation within and between lar ger and lar ger groups. It allow ed us to
form cultures, mythologies, and religions. On the flip side, though, it also
allowed us to go to war over those cultures, mythologies, and religions.
These c hanges and more, driven by advances in our thinking and
enhanced by our ability to use language to share what we kn ew , were
truly revolutionary—indeed, taken together , Dr . Harari calls this the
cognitive revolution.
--- Page 34 ---
CAN YOU SEE SOMETHING IF YOU DON’T
HAVE A WORD FOR IT?
If you don’ t beli eve how pervasively language shaped us and our world,
here’ s some intriguing research pointing to its power .
Did the color blue exist in anci ent cultures? According to a Radiolab
podcast entitled “Why Isn’ t the Sky Blue?” in ancient times there was no
word for blue in numerous languages. Homer , in The Odyssey ,  didn’ t
mention the color blue for the sky or for the Aegean Sea, which he called
wine-dark. Nor  did the word blue appear in other ancient writings
otherwise rich with description and visual detail.
So the question arises: If there’ s no word for a thing, can you see it?
Researcher Jules Davidof f studied this question among a particular
tribe cal led the Himba, in Nam ibia. The Himba have many dif ferent
words for green but no word for blue.
As part of the research, the tr ibe members were shown a circular
pattern o f square s. All of the squares were green except for one that was
obviously blue like in the image below:
Oddly , w hen tribe members were shown the image and were asked to
point to  the outlier , they either couldn’ t select the blue square as the
dif ferent one, were slower to do so, or chose the wrong square.
--- Page 35 ---
But whe n shown a similar circular pattern of green squares with one
square a  subtly dif ferent (and to many of us dif ficult to discern)  shade of
green, they quickly found it.
What would be easy for us was not easy for them. What wo uld be
dif ficult for us was easy for them. The Himba had no word for blue and
thus cou ld not easily identify a blue square from a collection of green
squares—a task simple enough for most of us. Y et they could discern
shades of green we would never notice.
So it seems that what language d elineates, we can more easily discern.
Our language shapes what we “see.”
--- Page 36 ---
THE DUAL WORLDS WE LIVE IN
How m iraculous was this ability language gave us to step back and
observe our lives—to scope out that riverbank, assess risk and
opportunity , and  then seek not only advantage for ourselves but also go
back to  our tribe and share our thoughts with others. T ogether we
became more aware, better able to plan for and prevail over challenges,
and capable of inventing soluti ons to problems and then being able to
teach tho se solutions to others. Language became the building blocks to
culture.
These guidelines for living, developed and passed on through
language, eventually evolved in to the rules that govern our cultures. Our
cultures helped us make sense  of our world, process events  quickly ,
create re ligions and nation-state s, train our children so they’d be more
likely to  thrive, and open up me ntal and physical bandwidth to do more
with our big brains than just try to survive until tomorrow .
Of course, there’ s a darker side to culture: when we get so focu sed on
our rules  that we turn them into  decrees about how life “should” be and
label pe ople or processes as go od or bad if they don’ t follow t he rules.
This is how you should live. Th is is how you should dress. This is how
women, children, the sick, the elderly , or the “dif ferent” should be
treated. My tribe is superior to your tribe. My ways are righ t, which
means th at your s are wrong. M y beliefs are right, and yours are wrong.
My God is the only God. W e create these complex worlds and then
literally defend them with our l ives. The language and rules that define
our culture can cost lives as much as cultivate them.
--- Page 37 ---
WELCOME TO THE CULTURESCAPE
W ith this vast structure of beliefs and practices that we developed for
navigating the world, we actually created a new world layered on top of
the one we lived  every day on the proverbial riverbank. W e’ve been
living in two worlds ever since.
There’ s the physical world of absolute truth. This world contains
things w e’re all likely to agree on: This is the riverbank; rocks are hard;
water is wet; fire is hot; tigers have big teeth and it hurts when they bite
you. No ar guments there.
But ther e’ s also  the world of relative truth. It’ s the mental world of
ideas, co nstructs, concepts, mod els, myths, patterns, and rules th at we’ve
developed and passed from generation to generation—sometimes for
thousands of years. This is wh ere concepts such as marriage, money ,
religion, and laws reside. This is relative truth because these ideas are
true only for a particular culture or tribe. Socialism, democracy , your
religion, ideas about education, love, marriage, career , and ev ery other
“should” are nothing more than  relative truths. They are simply not true
for ALL human beings.
I call this world of relative truth the culturescape.
From the moment we’re born, we’re swimming in the culturescape.
Our beliefs about the world and our systems for functioning in the world
are a ll e mbedded in us through the flow and progression of cult ure from
the m inds of the  people around us into our baby brains. But there’ s just
one problem. Many of these beliefs and systems are dysfunctional, and
while th e intent ion is that thes e ideas should guide us, in reality they
keep us locked into lives far more limited than what we’re truly capable
of. A fish is the last to discover water because it’ s been swimming in it
all its life. Similarly , few people discover how pervasive and powerful
the secondary world of our culturescape really is. W e are not as
independent and freethinking as we’d like to think we are.
--- Page 38 ---
T h e  w o r l d  o f  a b s o l u t e  t r u t h  i s  f a c t - b a s e d .  T h e
w o r l d  o f  t h e  c u l t u r e s c a p e  i s  o p i n i o n - b a s e d  a n d
a g r e e m e n t - b a s e d .  Y e t  e v e n  t h o u g h  i t  e x i s t s  s o l e l y  i n
o u r  h e a d s ,  i t  i s  v e r y ,  v e r y  r e a l .
How can a world that exists in our heads be real? Consider these
examples of mental constructs we have created that do not exist in the
physical world—but that are very real to us:
W e can’ t draw a calorie  or poin t to one, but we believe  that eating
too many will give us love handles.
W e can’ t touch or see meditation,  but  more than 1,400 scientific
studies show that it influences body and mind in positive ways,
from improving longevity to enhancing creativity .
Y ou and  I may not agree on ho w to define God,  but God exists in
dif ferent and unique ways to many people and much of human
society is based on it. Even if one takes the view that God  is
imaginary , it remains a powerfu l syntax in the brain that influences
how billions live their lives.
Corporations  don’ t actually exist in the physical world—you fill
out form s and get a piece of paper declaring the formation of the
entity . B ut that piece of paper establishes a series of laws and
constructs that allow a group of people to come together and build
something they couldn’ t have built on their own.
W e can’ t see or touch laws —they’re just agreements among groups
clustered in communities called cities, states,  and countries . But
they allow enormous groups of people to live in relative harmony .
There’ s a widespread construc t called marriage  in which two
people a re expe cted to commit to each other for the rest of their
lives, a nd yet every culture has dif ferent ideas of what that
commitment should mean—physically , emotionally , and
financially .
In many  cultures, there’ s a construct called r etir ement  in which
people a re expected to alter their activities dramatically after a
--- Page 39 ---
certain age.
There ar e no actual borders drawn on the Earth, and the subjectivity
of borders becomes painfully obvious when we summarily redraw
them, as  often happens at treaty time. Y et billions of people bel ong
to border -defined places called nations .
In this way our  thoughts literally do construct our world. W e create
and receive these constructs. W e transmit them from generation to
generation. Th ey can be incredibly empowering or completely
restrictive. For the convenience of being able to operate mindle ssly in a
complex world, we accept many  of these culturescape constructs as true.
The problem is—much of them are long past their expiration dates.
--- Page 40 ---
STEPPING OUT OF THE CULTURESCAPE
If so much of w hat we call life is mostly created by our thoughts and
beliefs, then much of what we t ake to be real—all the construc ts, rules,
and “shoulds” of the culturescape—is nothing more than an accidental
tweak of history . For the most p art there’ s no rational basis to prove that
what we ’re doing is the right way or the only way to do things. Much of
what you think is true is all in your head.
How’d it get the re? As Steve Jo bs said, it was “made up by people no
smarter than you.” Once you u nderstand that the rules aren’ t absolute,
you can learn to  think outside the box and live beyond limits imposed by
the culturescape.
Realizing that the world you’re  living in exists inside your head puts
you in the driver ’ s seat. Y ou ca n use your own mind to deconstruct the
beliefs, systems, and rules you’ve been living with. The rules are very
real in the sense that they actua lly govern how people and soci eties act,
but very real does not mean very right .
The culturescap e is so strong, so self-reinforcing that it convin ces us
that life must un fold in a particu lar way . This is fine if you’d like to live
a regula r , safe life. There’ s n othing wrong with that. The problem
happens when “safety” gives rise to boredom and eventually stagnation.
W e s tart our lives strong; as children we learn, grow , and chang e at an
exhilarating pace. Y et for most people, once they graduate from college
and start  their careers, that growth slows down and eventually leads to a
creeping, boring stagnation. If you were to draw this as a graph,  it would
look something like this:
--- Page 41 ---
But what if we changed the definition of life from the drawing above
to the drawing below:
Notice t he shift from slow , steady growth to irregular , up-and -down
growth. Dif ferent, right? What if life was not meant to be safe? Instead,
--- Page 42 ---
what if it was m eant to be a beautiful joyride, with ups and downs as we
take of f the training wheels of th e culturescape and try out thing s outside
what is practical or realistic?
What if we accepted that things will  go wrong—but that this is simply
part of life’ s beautiful unfoldin g and that even the biggest failures can
have within them the seeds of growth and possibility?
Our culturescape evolved to keep us safe—but in this day and age, we
no longer need to fear tigers by the riverbank. Safety is overrated; taking
risks is much less likely to kill us than ever before, and that means that
playing it safe is more likely just holding us back from the thrills  of a life
filled with meaning and discovery .
--- Page 43 ---
G i v e  m e  t h e  t h r i l l  a n d  e x c i t e m e n t  o f  t h e  u n s a f e ,
r u l e - b r e a k i n g ,  d o g m a - q u e s t i o n i n g  l i f e  a n y t i m e  o v e r
t h e  b o r i n g  u n f o l d i n g  o f  a  s a f e  l i f e .
The common thread between every extraordinary individual we’ll talk
about in this bo ok is that they  all questioned their culturescape. They
questioned the meaning of careers, degrees, religions, ways of living, and
other “b e safe” rules. In many  cases, their willingness to break away
from the  culture scape has resulted in innovations and new be ginnings
that will shift the future of humanity . One such person is Elon Musk.
In 2013 I got to visit the SpaceX headquarters in Hawthorne,
California, where I met the legendary Elon Musk. Elon is a living icon—
a man who is changing the course of human history with innovations to
electric cars via T esla Motors, s olar ener gy via Solar City , transportation
via h is H yperloop idea, and space travel via SpaceX. He is ar gu ably the
greatest entrepreneur on the planet today .
I h ad a simple question to ask E lon. Being in the presence of a living
legend made me a little nervou s, so my question came out awkwardly:
“Elon, y ou’ve done some pretty epic things, stuf f most people would
never ev en drea m about. Y et w hat makes Elon Musk? I mea n, if we
could put you in  a blender and  blend you to distill your essence, what
would that essence be?”
Elon laughed at the oddness of my question and the idea of being
“blended,” but then shared the following story:
“When I was just starting out, I walked into Netscape to get a job. I
just sat in the lo bby holding my résumé, waiting quietly for so meone to
talk to me. No one did. I waited and waited.”
Elon me ntioned that he had no idea what protocol to follow . He just
waited, hoping someone would come and invite him for an interview .
“But no one spoke to me,” he said.
“So I said: ‘Fuck it! I’ll just start my own company .’”
The world was forever changed that day .
Elon went on to start a little classified ad company in 1995 that was
called Z ip2 with  $28,000. He so ld it in 1999 and pocketed $22 million.
He t hen used th e windfall to st art a company to challenge the rules of
commercial online banking—which evolved into PayPal. But he didn’ t
stop there.
--- Page 44 ---
In 2002  he started SpaceX to b uild a better rocket. And in 2008 he
assumed the leadership of T e sla Motors to help make elec tric cars
mainstream.
From banking to space exploration to electric cars, Elon challenged
rules that few others dared question and in the process is leaving the
planet with a legacy that is jaw-droppingly huge.
Elon sha red a lot more, too. An d we’ll explore those other nug gets of
wisdom in later chapters.
But first, let me introduce Law 1.
--- Page 45 ---
Law 1: Transcend the culturescape.
Extraordinary minds are good at seeing the culturescape and are able to selectively
choose the rules and conditions to follow versus those to question or ignore.
Therefore, they tend to take the path less traveled and innovate on the idea of what
it means to truly live.
--- Page 46 ---
WHY SAFETY IS OVERRATED
The culturescap e is designed to  keep us safe. But as I’ve m entioned,
safety is  often overrated. Elon Musk answered my question, he  spoke at
length a bout his journey and what drove him—but he ended with one
memorable line: “I have a high tolerance for pain.”
Elon bounced back from amazi ng dips as he built his companies. He
spoke ab out how , in 2008, Spac eX’ s first three rockets had blow n up. A
fourth fa ilure wo uld have made the company go bust. At the sa me time,
T esla M otors ha d failed a finan cing round and was running out  of cash.
Elon had to use up most of his windfall from the PayPal sale to  finance
these co mpanies, and he had to borrow money to pay rent. Y et  he came
through.
While breaking away from the rules of the culturescape may indeed
feel scary , I’ve often noticed a repeated pattern. The dips contain
amazing learnin gs and wisdom t hat lead to sharper rises in the q uality of
life afterward. But you will need to brave the momentary pain of these
dips. I assure you it will be worthwhile, and in this book you’ll learn how
to have the power to weather those downturns.
Every cr appy experience I’ve had—from having my heart broken, to
almost having to leave my own company due to a conflict with a
business partner , to depression and staring down gaping dark ho les of the
mind—led to some small-but-significant insight or awakening that
boosted the quality of my life and made me stronger . I now welcome
these dip s with an inner delight: W ow , this sucks! I can’ t wait to see what
I’m going to learn her e!
One of these dip s, of course, was my Microsoft mishap, follow ed by
my mediocre graduation. W ith no other job prospects after losing my
Microsoft oppor tunity , I moved to New Y ork City and went to w ork at a
nonprofit at a sa lary level of ficially below t he poverty line. My family
and friends thought I was crazy .
Earning a salary of ficially belo w the poverty line meant that I could
not a f ford my ow n apartment. At Microsoft I had a killer apartm ent with
my o wn bedroom. In New Y ork  City I shared a studio in Chels ea with a
coworker named  James—a dirty little apartment with furniture that the
previous tenants had salvaged from the street. Our sofa and mattresses
were co vered with black marks that could have been soot, mold, or
worse. I dared n ot imagine what. But I do vividly remember one night in
May 2000.
--- Page 47 ---
I had convinced the hot redhea d from Estonia whom I had met on a
work-related trip to Europe to c ome to New Y ork to visit me. The only
problem was that she was going to be staying with me in my awful
Chelsea apartme nt—something I was deeply embarrassed about. Kristina
arrived at my apartment and wa s so thrilled to be in New Y ork  that she
immediately hopped onto James’ s bed and started jumping up and down
in the excitement of finally visiting New Y ork.
“Um, that’ s my roommate’ s bed,” I said. “Mine is over there.”
“Y ou ha ve a roommate? So you don’ t live here by yourself? Bu t how
do we . . . you know . . . have s ome privacy?” she asked, shocked and a
little bewildered.
I pointed to the  inspired solution I had rigged up so we could  have
privacy: a pink shower curtain  that, with a few pulls, created a mock
“wall” separatin g my little nook in the studio from the rest of the shared
space with James. (Y es, I was too broke to af ford real curtains.) It was
plastic and ugly—but it of fered just enough privacy to, um, make our
nights memorable.
I ser iously don’ t know what Kristina saw in me, but three year s later
we got married. T oday we have two beautiful kids and a home with
really nice curtains.
I would never have met my wife if I had not quit Microsoft, lost all my
other jo b options, and ended up broke in New Y ork—a series of
unfortunate dips  lined up one by one by one that resulted in one sharp,
booming spike: meeting the woman I would marry and having the
children I have today .
See, there is bea uty in the dips.  W e try to avoid them by sticking to the
passed-down rules of the culturescape, only to wake up one day
wondering how we missed out on so much. Don’ t let that be you. Life
has a way of taking ca re of you no matter how dark it can sometimes feel
—I promise. There’ s more to it, of course. Y ou need to learn  how to
change t he rules  ( Chapter 2 ), ho w to  heal your mind ( Chapter 3 ), how to
remove dangerous beliefs ( Chapter 4 ), h ow to lea rn new things
incredibly fast ( Chapter 5 ), how to be lu cky ( Chapter 6 ), how to find
happiness ( Chapter 7 ), how to know what to seek ( Chapter 8 ). And then
there’ s w eathering the inevitable  storm ( Chapter 9 ), fin ding your c alling
( Chapter 10 ), and lots, lots more. But when we set forth on this path,
anyone can become truly extraordinary .
--- Page 48 ---
I love this quote by American f ootball player and actor T erry Crews:
“I const antly ge t out of my comfort zone. Once you push yourself into
something new , a whole new world of opportunities opens up.  But you
might get hurt. But amazingly when you heal—you are somewhere
you’ve never been.”
Y ou can be 12 or 80—it’ s never too late to question the rules and step
out of your comfort zone.
--- Page 49 ---
WHAT’S NEXT
In th e co ming ch apters, I’ll help you examine the beliefs and sy stems of
your life  and decide which ones are moving you forward and w hich are
holding you back. I’ll provide  keys for unlocking your pot ential to
become extraordinary . This mea ns shaking of f the shackles from cultural
baggage of the past, expanding your vision of your future, and
experiencing a dramatic shift in how you view life, function in th e world,
pursue goals, and interact with others.
T ogether , let’ s seek a level of advanced awareness in which we can see
our patterns and go beyond them and understand that, while  we may
belong to a parti cular culture or nation or religion, we’re only part of that
culture o r nation or religion because we happen to be born in a p articular
family at a parti cular time and place, and that the same is true of every
other hu man being on the Ea rth. Our individual experiences of the
culturescape made us who we are. But what happens when we learn to
transcend the culturescape? When we learn that no one is better  of f than
another? That none of us is more superior? And that each of u s can be
extraordinary?
--- Page 50 ---
A SERIOUS WORD OF WARNING
Before we continue, I must issu e a word of warning. Questioni ng many
rules of the cult urescape will not be easy . Here’ s a partial list of all the
things that could go “wrong” if you continue reading this book:
Y ou might anger loved ones as you decide to question t heir
expectations of you.
Y ou might decide to leave your current relationship.
Y ou might decide to raise your kids with dif ferent beliefs.
Y ou might choose to question your religion or create your own
customized religious system.
Y ou might rethink your career .
Y ou might become obsessed with being happy .
Y ou might decide to for give someone who hurt you in the past.
Y ou might rip apart your current goal sheet and start anew .
Y ou might start a daily spiritual practice.
Y ou might fall out of love with someone and fall in love with
yourself.
Y ou might decide to leave your career and start a business.
Y ou might decide to leave your business and start a career .
Y ou mig ht find a mission that excites you a lot and scares yo u a
little.
It all  starts with questioning the accepted rules of the culturescap e. My
friend P eter Diamandis, founder and chairman of the X Prize
Foundation, famously said:
--- Page 51 ---
I f  y o u  c a n ’ t  w i n ,  c h a n g e  t h e  r u l e s .  I f  y o u  c a n ’ t
c h a n g e  t h e  r u l e s ,  i g n o r e  t h e m .
I lo ve this adv ice. But before you can challenge the rules of the
culturescape, you have to identify the limiting rules that might be
holding you back. It starts with  discovering the ones you’re loc ked into
and operating under right now (whether you know it or not).
Maybe you won’ t be surprised  to know that the process starts with
language—with a new word, to be precise—for what language
delineates, we can more easily discern.
The new word is Brule.
