--- Page 55 ---
Steven Pressfield 98
Start (Again) Before You’re Ready
I was living in a little town in northern California when I finally, 
after seventeen years of trying, finished my first novel. I drove over to my friend and mentor Paul Rink’s house and told him what I had done. “Good for you, ” he said. “Now start the next one.”
That’s what I say now to you.T ake the rest of the day off. T ake your wife or husband out to 
dinner. Pop some champagne. Give yourself a standing ovation.
Then get back to work. Begin the 
next one tomorrow.
Stay stupid.
T rust the soup.
Start before you’re ready.

--- Page 56 ---
About The Domino Project
Books worth buying are books worth sharing. W e hope you’ll 
find someone to give this copy to. Y ou can find more about what we’re up to at www.thedominoproject.com. 
Here are three ways you can spread the ideas in this manifesto: 
1. Hold a discussion group in your office. Get people to read 
the book and come in and argue about it. How open is 
your company to innovation and failure? What will you do if your competitors get better at it than you are? 
2. Give away copies. Lots of them. It turns out that when 
everyone in a group reads the same thing, conversations 
go differently. 
3. W rite the names of some of your peers on the inside back cover of this book (or scrawl them on a Post-it on 
your Kindle). As each person reads the book, have them 
scratch off their name and add someone else’s. 
W e hope you’ll share. Acknowledgments
Thanks to Seth, Ishita, Willie, and Michael for being the brains 
behind this project. Thanks to Shawn and Callie for being my comrades in the trenches. Thanks to Amazon for supplying the muscle.
And thanks to you who’ve read this, for taking yourself (and us) 
forward.

--- Page 57 ---
W e are now faced with the fact, my friends, that tomorrow is 
today. W e are confronted with the fierce urgency of now. In 
this unfolding conundrum of life and history, there is such 
a thing as being too late. Procrastination is still the thief of time. Life often leaves us standing bare, naked, and dejected with a lost opportunity. The tide in the affairs of men does 
not remain at flood—it ebbs. W e may cry out desperately for 
time to pause in her passage, but time is adamant to every plea and rushes on. Over the bleached bones and jumbled residues of numerous civilizations are written the pathetic 
words, “T oo late.”
  Martin Luther King, Jr.
  Beyond Vietnam – A Time to Break Silence
  New Y ork City, April 4, 1967About the Cover
In 1885, Vincent V an Gogh created this cover drawing, 
Man with Hoe, as a part of his life-long pursuit “to give happiness 
by creating beauty.” W e at The Domino Project were drawn to 
this image because it represents the quiet strength of a person who actually does the work, regardless of glamour or crowds or the resistance. The drawing is also a reminder that there’s an artist 
within each of us, and we must encourage that artist to do the 
work, to make something that matters, regardless of anything else that is going on.
In a letter to his brother Theo, Vincent shared this thought, 
“Blessed is he who has found his work.” 
Perhaps he was talking about you.

