
--The Publishers                                 Chapter One                       Learning the Science of the SelfDiscovering the Self
Who are you?... Are you your body? Or your mind? Or are you somethinghigher? Do you know who you are, or do you merely think you know? Anddoes it really matter? Our materialistic society, with its unenlightenedleadership, has made it virtually taboo to inquire into our real, higherself. Instead we use our valuable time maintaining, decorating, andpampering the body for its own sake. Might there be an alternative?     This very important Krsna consciousness movement is meant to savehuman society from spiritual death. At present human society is beingmisled by leaders who are blind, for they do not know the aim andobjective of human life, which is self-realization and thereestablishment of our lost relationship with the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. That is the missing point. The Krsna consciousness movement istrying to enlighten human society in this important matter.     According to Vedic civilization, the perfection of life is torealize one's relationship with Krsna, or God. In the Bhagavad-gita,which is accepted by all authorities in transcendental science as thebasis of all Vedic knowledge, we understand that not only human beingsbut all living entities are parts and parcels of God. The parts aremeant for serving the whole, just as the legs, hands, fingers, and earsare meant for serving the total body. We living entities, being partsand parcels of God, are duty-bound to serve Him.     Actually our position is that we are always rendering service tosomeone, either to our family, country, or society. If we have no one toserve, sometimes we keep a pet cat or dog and render service to it. Allthese factors prove that we are constitutionally meant to renderservice, yet in spite of serving to the best of our ability, we are notsatisfied. Nor is the person to whom we are rendering that servicesatisfied. On the material platform, everyone is frustrated. The reasonfor this is that the service being rendered is not properly directed.
--- Page 7 ---
For example, if we want to render service to a tree, we must water the
root. If we pour water on the leaves, branches, and twigs, there islittle benefit. If the Supreme Personality of Godhead is served, allother parts and parcels will be automatically satisfied. Consequentlyall welfare activities as well as service to society, family, and nationare realized by serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead.     It is the duty of every human being to understand hisconstitutional position with God and to act accordingly. If this ispossible, then our lives become successful. Sometimes, however, we feelchallenging and say, "There is no God," or "I am God," or even, "I don'tcare for God." But in actuality this challenging spirit will not saveus. God is there, and we can see Him at every moment. If we refuse tosee God in our life, then He will be present before us as cruel death.If we do not choose to see Him in one feature, we will see Him inanother. There are different features of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead because He is the original root of the entire cosmicmanifestation. In one sense, it is not possible for us to escape Him.     This Krsna consciousness movement is not blind religiousfanaticism, nor is it a revolt by some recent upstart; rather, it is anauthorized, scientific approach to the matter of our eternal necessityin relation with the Absolute Personality of Godhead, the SupremeEnjoyer. Krsna consciousness simply deals with our eternal relationshipwith Him and the process of discharging our relative duties to Him.Thus, Krsna consciousness enables us to achieve the highest perfectionof life attainable in the present human form of existence.     We must always remember that this particular form of human life isattained after an evolution of many millions of years in the cycle oftransmigration of the spirit soul. In this particular form of life, theeconomic question is more easily solved than in the lower, animal forms.There are swine, dogs, camels, asses, and so on, whose economicnecessities are just as important as ours, but the economic questions ofthese animals and others are solved under primitive conditions, whereasthe human being is given all the facilities for leading a comfortablelife by the laws of nature.     Why is a man given a better chance to live than swine or otheranimals? Why is a highly posted government officer given betterfacilities for a comfortable life than an ordinary clerk? The answer isvery simple: the important officer has to discharge duties of a moreresponsible nature than those of an ordinary clerk. Similarly, the humanbeing has to discharge higher duties than the animals, who are alwaysbusy with filling their hungry stomachs. But by the laws of nature, themodern animalistic standard of civilization has only increased theproblems of filling the stomach. When we approach some of these polishedanimals for spiritual life, they say that they only want to work for thesatisfaction of their stomachs and that there is no necessity ofinquiring about the Godhead. Yet despite their eagerness to work hard,there is always the question of unemployment and so many otherimpediments incurred by the laws of nature. Despite this, they stilldenounce the necessity of acknowledging the Godhead.     We are given this human form of life not just to work hard like theswine or dog, but to attain the highest perfection of life. If we do notwant that perfection, then we will have to work very hard, for we willbe forced to by the laws of nature. In the closing days of Kali-yuga(this present age) men will have to work hard like asses for only a
--- Page 8 ---
scrap of bread. This process has already begun, and every year the
necessity for harder work for lesser wages will increase. Yet humanbeings are not meant to work hard like animals, and if a man fails todischarge his duties as a human being, he is forced to transmigrate tothe lower species of life by the laws of nature. The Bhagavad-gita veryvividly describes how a spirit soul, by the laws of nature, takes hisbirth and gets a suitable body and sense organs for enjoying matter inthe material world.     In the Bhagavad-gita it is also stated that those who attempt butdo not complete the path of approaching God--in other words, those whohave failed to achieve complete success in Krsna consciousness--aregiven the chance to appear in the families of the spiritually advancedor in financially well-to-do mercantile families. If the unsuccessfulspiritual aspirants are offered such chances of noble parentage, what ofthose who have actually attained the required success? Therefore anattempt to go back to Godhead, even if half finished, guarantees a goodbirth in the next life. Both the spiritual and the financially well-to-do families are beneficial for spiritual progress because in bothfamilies one can get a good chance to make further progress from thepoint where he stopped in his previous birth. In spiritual realizationthe atmosphere generated by a good family is favorable for thecultivation of spiritual knowledge. The Bhagavad-gita reminds suchfortunate well-born persons that their good fortune is due to their pastdevotional activities. Unfortunately, the children of these families donot consult the Bhagavad-gita, being misguided by maya (illusion).     Birth in a well-to-do family solves the problem of having to findsufficient food from the beginning of life, and later a comparativelyeasier and more comfortable way of life can be led. Being so situated,one has a good chance to make progress in spiritual realization, but asill luck would have it, due to the influence of the present iron age(which is full of machines and mechanical people) the sons of thewealthy are misguided for sense enjoyment, and they forget the goodchance they have for spiritual enlightenment. Therefore nature, by herlaws, is setting fires in these golden homes. It was the golden city ofLanka, under the regime of the demoniac Ravana, that was burned toashes. That is the law of nature.     The Bhagavad-gita is the preliminary study of the transcendentalscience of Krsna consciousness, and it is the duty of all responsibleheads of state to chalk out their economic and other programs byreferring to the Bhagavad-gita. We are not meant to solve economicquestions of life by balancing on a tottering platform; rather, we aremeant to solve the ultimate problems of life which arise due to the lawsof nature. Civilization is static unless there is spiritual movement.The soul moves the body, and the living body moves the world. We areconcerned about the body, but we have no knowledge of the spirit that ismoving that body. Without the spirit, the body is motionless, or dead.     The human body is an excellent vehicle by which we can reacheternal life. It is a rare and very important boat for crossing over theocean of nescience which is material existence. On this boat there isthe service of an expert boatman, the spiritual master. By divine grace,the boat plies the water in a favorable wind. With all these auspiciousfactors, who would not take the opportunity to cross over the ocean ofnescience? If one neglects this good chance, it should be known that heis simply committing suicide.
--- Page 9 ---
     There is certainly a great deal of comfort in the first-class coach
of a train, but if the train does not move toward its destination, whatis the benefit of an air-conditioned compartment? Contemporarycivilization is much too concerned with making the material bodycomfortable. No one has information of the real destination of life,which is to go back to Godhead. We must not just remain seated in acomfortable compartment; we should see whether or not our vehicle ismoving toward its real destination. There is no ultimate benefit inmaking the material body comfortable at the expense of forgetting theprime necessity of life, which is to regain our lost spiritual identity.The boat of human life is constructed in such a way that it must movetoward a spiritual destination. Unfortunately this body is anchored tomundane consciousness by five strong chains, which are: (1) attachmentto the material body due to ignorance of spiritual facts, (2) attachmentto kinsmen due to bodily relations, (3) attachment to the land of birthand to material possessions such as house, furniture, estates, property,business papers, etc., (4) attachment to material science, which alwaysremains mysterious for want of spiritual light, and (5) attachment toreligious forms and holy rituals without knowing the Personality ofGodhead or His devotees, who make them holy. These attachments, whichanchor the boat of the human body, are explained in detail in theFifteenth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita. There they are compared to adeeply rooted banyan tree which is ever increasing its hold on theearth. It is very difficult to uproot such a strong banyan tree, but theLord recommends the following process: "The real form of this treecannot be perceived in this world. No one can understand where it ends,where it begins, or where its foundation is. But with determination onemust cut down this tree with the weapon of detachment. So doing, onemust seek that place from which, having once gone, one never returns,and there surrender to that Supreme Personality of Godhead from whomeverything has begun and in whom everything is abiding since timeimmemorial." (Bg. 15.3-4)     Neither the scientists nor speculative philosophers have yetarrived at any conclusion concerning the cosmic situation. All they havedone is posit different theories about it. Some of them say that thematerial world is real, others say that it is a dream, and yet otherssay that it is ever existing. In this way different views are held bymundane scholars, but the fact is that no mundane scientist orspeculative philosopher has ever discovered the beginning of the cosmosor its limitations. No one can say when it began or how it floats inspace. They theoretically propose some laws, like the law ofgravitation, but actually they cannot put this law to practical use. Forwant of actual knowledge of the truth, everyone is anxious to promotehis own theory to gain certain fame, but the actual fact is that thismaterial world is full of miseries and that no one can overcome themsimply by promoting some theories about the subject. The Personality ofGodhead, who is fully cognizant of everything in His creation, informsus that it is in our best interest that we desire to get out of thismiserable existence. We must detach ourselves from everything material.To make the best use of a bad bargain, our material existence must beone-hundred-percent spiritualized. Iron is not fire, but it can beturned into fire by constant association with fire. Similarly,detachment from material activities can be effected by spiritualactivities, not by material inertia. Material inertia is the negative
--- Page 10 ---
side of material action, but spiritual activity is not only the negation
of material action but the activation of our real life. We must beanxious to search out eternal life, or spiritual existence in Brahman,the Absolute. The eternal kingdom of Brahman is described in theBhagavad-gita as that eternal country from which no one returns. That isthe kingdom of God.     The beginning of our present material life cannot be traced, nor isit necessary for us to know how we became conditioned in materialexistence. We have to be satisfied with the understanding that somehowor other this material life has been going on since time immemorial andnow our duty is to surrender unto the Supreme Lord, who is the originalcause of all causes. The preliminary qualification for going back toGodhead is given in the Bhagavad-gita (15.5): "One who is free fromillusion, false prestige, and false association, who understands theeternal, who is done with material lust and is free from the duality ofhappiness and distress, and who knows how to surrender unto the SupremePerson attains that eternal kingdom."     One who is convinced of his spiritual identity and is freed fromthe material conception of existence, who is free from illusion and istranscendental to the modes of material nature, who constantly engagesin understanding spiritual knowledge and who has completely severedhimself from sense enjoyment can go back to Godhead. Such a person iscalled amudha, as distinguished from mudha, or the foolish and ignorant,for he is freed from the duality of happiness and distress.     And what is the nature of the kingdom of God? It is described inthe Bhagavad-gita (15.6) as follows: "That abode of Mine is notillumined by the sun or moon, nor by electricity. One who reaches itnever returns to this material world."     Although every place in the creation is within the kingdom of Godbecause the Lord is the supreme proprietor of all planets, there isstill the Lord's personal abode, which is completely different from theuniverse in which we are now living. And this abode is called paramam,or the supreme abode. Even on this earth there are countries where thestandard of living is high and countries where the standard of living islow. Besides this earth, there are innumerable other planets distributedall over the universe, and some are considered superior places and someinferior places. In any case, all planets within the jurisdiction of theexternal energy, material nature, require the rays of a sun or the lightof fire for their existence, because the material universe is a regionof darkness. Beyond this region, however, is a spiritual realm, which isdescribed as functioning under the superior nature of God. That realm isdescribed in the Upanisads thus: "There is no need of sun, moon, orstars, nor is that abode illumined by electricity or any form of fire.All these material universes are illumined by a reflection of thatspiritual light, and because that superior nature is always self-luminous, we can experience a glow of light even in the densest darknessof night." In the Hari-vamsa the spiritual nature is explained by theSupreme Lord Himself as follows: "The glaring effulgence of theimpersonal Brahman [the impersonal Absolute] illuminates all existences,both material and spiritual. But, O Bharata, you must understand thatthis Brahman illumination is the effulgence of My body." In the Brahma-samhita this conclusion is also confirmed. We should not think that wecan attain that abode by any material means such as spaceships, but weshould know for certain that one who can attain that spiritual abode of
--- Page 11 ---
Krsna can enjoy eternal, spiritual bliss without interruption. As
fallible living entities, we have two phases of existence. One is calledmaterial existence, which is full of the miseries of birth, death, oldage, and disease, and the other is called spiritual existence, in whichthere is an incessant spiritual life of eternity, bliss, and knowledge.In material existence we are ruled by the material conception of thebody and the mind, but in spiritual existence we can always relish thehappy, transcendental contact of the Personality of Godhead. Inspiritual existence, the Lord is never lost to us.     The Krsna consciousness movement is trying to bring that spiritualexistence to humanity at large. In our present material consciousness,we are attached to the sensual material conception of life, but thisconception can be removed at once by devotional service to Krsna, orKrsna consciousness. If we adopt the principles of devotional service,we can become transcendental to the material conceptions of life and beliberated from the modes of goodness, passion, and ignorance, even inthe midst of various material engagements. Everyone who is engaged inmaterial affairs can derive the highest benefit from the pages of Backto Godhead and the other literatures of this Krsna consciousnessmovement. These literatures help all people sever the roots of theindefatigable banyan tree of material existence. These literatures areauthorized to train us to renounce everything related to the materialconception of life and to relish spiritual nectar in every object. Thisstage is obtainable only by devotional service and nothing else. Byrendering such service, one can at once get liberation (mukti) evenduring this present life. Most spiritual endeavors are tinged with thecolors of materialism, but pure devotional service is transcendental toall material pollution. Those who desire to go back to Godhead need onlyadopt the principles of this Krsna consciousness movement and simply aimtheir consciousness at the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, thePersonality of Godhead, Krsna.What Is Krsna Consciousness?The following interview with freelance reporter Sandy Nixon took placein July 1975, in Srila Prabhupada's quarters at the Krsna center inPhiladelphia. This discussion serves as a superb introduction to Krsnaconsciousness and covers such basic topics as the Hare Krsna mantra, therelationship between the spiritual master and God, the differencebetween genuine and fake gurus, the role of women in Krsnaconsciousness, the Indian caste system, and the relationship betweenChrist consciousness and Krsna consciousness.Ms. Nixon: My first question is very basic. What is Krsna consciousness?Srila Prabhupada: Krsna means God. We are all intimately connected withHim because He is our original father. But we have forgotten thisconnection. When we become interested in knowing, "What is my connectionwith God? What is the aim of life?" then we are called Krsna conscious.Ms. Nixon: How does Krsna consciousness develop in the practitioner?Srila Prabhupada: Krsna consciousness is already there in the core ofeveryone's heart. But because of our materially conditioned life, wehave forgotten it. The process of chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama,Rama Rama, Hare Hare--revives the Krsna consciousness we already have.For example, a few months ago these American and European boys and girlsdid not know about Krsna, but just yesterday we saw how they werechanting Hare Krsna and dancing in ecstasy throughout the whole Ratha-
--- Page 12 ---
yatra procession [an annual festival sponsored by the Krsna
consciousness movement in cities around the world]. Do you think thatwas artificial? No. Artificially, nobody can chant and dance for hourstogether. They have actually awakened their Krsna consciousness byfollowing a bona fide process. This is explained in the Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22. 107):
                 nitya-siddha krsna-prema `sadhya' kabhu naya
                     sravanadi-suddha-citte karaye udaya
     Krsna consciousness is dormant in everyone's heart, and when one
comes in contact with devotees, it is awakened. Krsna consciousness isnot artificial. Just as a young boy awakens his natural attraction for ayoung girl in her association, similarly, if one hears about Krsna inthe association of devotees, he awakens his dormant Krsna consciousness.Ms. Nixon: What is the difference between Krsna consciousness and Christconsciousness?Srila Prabhupada: Christ consciousness is also Krsna consciousness, butbecause at present people do not follow the rules and regulations ofChristianity--the commandments of Jesus Christ--they do not come to thestandard of God consciousness.Ms. Nixon: What is unique about Krsna consciousness among all religions?Srila Prabhupada: Primarily, religion means to know God and to love Him.That is religion. Nowadays, because of a lack of training, nobody knowsGod, what to speak of loving Him. People are satisfied simply going tochurch and praying, "O God, give us our daily bread." In the Srimad-Bhagavatam this is called a cheating religion, because the aim is not toknow and love God but to gain some personal profit. In other words, if Iprofess to follow some religion but I do not know who God is or how tolove Him, I am practicing a cheating religion. As far as the Christianreligion is concerned, ample opportunity is given to understand God, butno one is taking it. For example, the Bible contains the commandment"Thou shall not kill," but Christians have built the world's bestslaughterhouses. How can they become God conscious if they disobey thecommandments of Lord Jesus Christ? And this is going on not just in theChristian religion, but in every religion. The title "Hindu," "Muslim,"or "Christian" is simply a rubber stamp. None of them knows who God isand how to love Him.Ms. Nixon: How can one tell a bona fide spiritual master from a fake?Srila Prabhupada: Whoever teaches how to know God and how to love Him--he is a spiritual master. Sometimes bogus rascals mislead people. "1 amGod," they claim, and people who do not know what God is believe them.You must be a serious student to understand who God is and how to loveHim. Otherwise, you will simply waste your time. So the differencebetween others and us is that we are the only movement that can actuallyteach one how to know God and how to love Him. We are presenting thescience of how one can know Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,by practicing the teachings of the Bhagavad-gita and the Srimad-Bhagavatam. They teach us that our only business is to love God. Ourbusiness is not to ask God for our necessities. God gives necessities toeveryone--even to one who has no religion. For example, cats and dogshave no religion, yet Krsna supplies them with the necessities of life.So why should we bother Krsna for our daily bread? He is already
--- Page 13 ---
supplying it. Real religion means to learn how to love Him. The Srimad-
Bhagavatam (1.2.6) says,
                          sa vai pumsam paro dharmo
                            yato bhaktir adhoksaje                             ahaituky apratihata                             yayatma suprasidati
     First-class religion teaches one how to love God without any
motive. If I serve God for some profit, that is business--not love. Reallove of God is ahaituky apratihata: it cannot be checked by any materialcause. It is unconditional. If one actually wants to love God, there isno impediment. One can love Him whether one is poor or rich, young orold, black or white.Ms. Nixon: Do all paths lead to the same end?Srila Prabhupada: No. There are four classes of men--the karmis, thejnanis, the yogis, and the bhaktas--and each achieves a different goal.The karmis work for some material profit. For example, in the city, manypeople work hard day and night, and their purpose is to get some money.Thus, they are fruitive workers, or karmis. A jnani is a person whothinks, "Why am I working so hard? The birds, bees, elephants, and othercreatures have no profession, yet they are also eating. So why should Iunnecessarily work so hard? Rather, let me try to solve the problems oflife--birth, death, old age, and disease." Jnanis try to becomeimmortal. They think that if they merge into God's existence, then theywill become immune to birth, death, old age, and disease. And yogis tryto acquire some mystic power to exhibit a wonderful show. For instance,a yogi can become very small: if you put him into a locked room, he cancome out through any little space. By showing this kind of magic, theyogi is immediately accepted as a very wonderful man. Of course, modernyogis simply show some gymnastics--they have no real power. But a realyogi has some power, which is not spiritual but material. So the yogiwants mystic power, the jnani wants salvation from the miseries of life,and the karmiwants material profit. But the bhakta--the devotee--doesn'twant anything for himself. He simply wants to serve God out of love,just as a mother serves her child. There is no question of profit in amother's service to her child. Out of pure affection and love, she caresfor him.     When you come to this stage of loving God, that is perfection.Neither the karmi, the jnani, nor the yogi can know God--only thebhakta. As Krsna says in the Bhagavad-gita (18.55), bhaktya mamabhijanati: "Only through the process of bhakti can one understand God."Krsna never says one can understand Him by other processes. No. Onlythrough bhakti. If you are interested in knowing God and loving Him,then you must accept the devotional process. No other process will helpyou.Ms. Nixon: What transformation does one undergo on the path...Srila Prabhupada: No transformation--your original consciousness isKrsna consciousness. Now your consciousness is covered with so muchrubbish. You have to cleanse it, and then--Krsna consciousness. Ourconsciousness is like water. Water is by nature clear and transparent,but sometimes it becomes muddy. If you filter all the mud out of thewater, it again comes to its original clear, transparent state.
--- Page 14 ---
Ms. Nixon: Can one function better in society by becoming Krsna
conscious?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, you can see that my disciples are not drunkardsor meat-eaters, and from a physiological point of view they are veryclean--they'll never be attacked by serious diseases. Actually, givingup meat-eating is not a question of Krsna consciousness but of civilizedhuman life. God has given human society so many things to eat--nicefruits, vegetables, grain, and first-class milk. From milk one canprepare hundreds of nutritious foods, but no one knows the art. Instead,people maintain big slaughterhouses and eat meat. They are not evencivilized. When man is uncivilized, he kills poor animals and eats them.     Civilized men know the art of preparing nutritious foods from milk.For instance, on our New Vrndavana farm in West Virginia, we makehundreds of first-class preparations from milk. Whenever visitors come,they are astonished that from milk such nice foods can be prepared. Theblood of the cow is very nutritious, but civilized men utilize it in theform of milk. Milk is nothing but cow's blood transformed. You can makemilk into so many things--yogurt, curd, ghee (clarified butter), and soon--and by combining these milk products with grains, fruits, andvegetables, you can make hundreds of preparations. This is civilizedlife--not directly killing an animal and eating its flesh. The innocentcow is simply eating grass given by God and supplying milk, which youcan live on. Do you think cutting the cow's throat and eating its fleshis civilized?Ms. Nixon: No, I agree with you one hundred percent.... One thing I'mvery curious about: can the Vedas be taken symbolically as well asliterally?Srila Prabhupada: No. They must be taken as they are, not symbolically.That is why we are presenting the Bhagavad-gita As It Is.Ms. Nixon: Are you attempting to revive the ancient Indian caste systemin the West? The Gita mentions the caste system...Srila Prabhupada: Where does the Bhagavad-gita mention the caste system?Krsna says, catur-varnyam maya srstam guna-karma-vibhagasah: "I createdfour divisions of men according to their quality and work." (Bg. 4.13)For instance, you can understand that there are engineers as well asmedical practitioners in society. Do you say they belong to differentcastes--that one is in the engineer caste and the other is in themedical caste? No. If a man has qualified himself in medical school, youaccept him as a doctor; and if another man has a degree in engineering,you accept him as an engineer. Similarly, the Bhagavad-gita defines fourclasses of men in society: a class of highly intelligent men, a class ofadministrators, a class of productive men, and ordinary workers. Thesedivisions are natural. For example, one class of men is veryintelligent. But to actually meet the qualifications of first-class menas described in the Bhagavad-gita, they need to be trained, just as anintelligent boy requires training in a college to become a qualifieddoctor. So in the Krsna consciousness movement we are training theintelligent men how to control their minds, how to control their senses,how to become truthful, how to become clean internally and externally,how to become wise, how to apply their knowledge in practical life, andhow to become God conscious. All these boys [gestures toward seateddisciples] have first-class intelligence, and now we are training themto use it properly.
--- Page 15 ---
     We are not introducing the caste system, in which any rascal born
in a brahmana family is automatically a brahmana. He may have the habitsof a fifth-class man, but he is accepted as first class because of hisbirth in a brahmana family. We don't accept that. We recognize a man asfirst class who is trained as a brahmana. It doesn't matter whether heis Indian, European, or American; lowborn or highborn--it doesn'tmatter. Any intelligent man can be trained to adopt first-class habits.We want to stop the nonsensical idea that we are imposing the Indiancaste system on our disciples. We are simply picking out men with first-class intelligence and training them how to become first class in everyrespect.Ms. Nixon: How do you feel about women's liberation?Srila Prabhupada: So-called equal rights for women means that the mencheat the women. Suppose a woman and a man meet, they become lovers,they have sex, the woman becomes pregnant, and the man goes away. Thewoman has to take charge of the child and beg alms from the government,or else she kills the child by having an abortion. This is the woman'sindependence. In India, although a woman may be poverty-stricken, shestays under the care of her husband, and he takes responsibility forher. When she becomes pregnant, she is not forced to kill the child ormaintain him by begging. So, which is real independence--to remain underthe care of the husband or to be enjoyed by everyone?Ms. Nixon: How about in spiritual life--can women also succeed in Krsnaconsciousness?Srila Prabhupada: We make no distinction on the basis of sex. We giveKrsna consciousness to both men and women equally. We welcome women,men, the poor, the rich--everyone. Krsna says in the Bhagavad-gita(5.18):
                            vidya-vinaya-sampanne
                            brahmane ga vi hastini                            suni caiva svapake ca                            panditah sama-darsinah
     "The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal
vision a learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog, and adog-eater."Ms. Nixon: Could you explain the meaning of the Hare Krsna mantra?Srila Prabhupada: It is very simple. Hare means, "O energy of the Lord,"and Krsna means, "O Lord Krsna." Just as there are males and females inthe material world, similarly, God is the original male (purusa), andHis energy (prakrti) is the original female. So, when we chant HareKrsna, we are saying, "O Lord Krsna, O energy of Krsna, kindly engage mein Your service."Ms. Nixon: Could you please tell me a little bit about your life and howyou knew that you were the spiritual master of the Krsna consciousnessmovement?Srila Prabhupada: My life is simple. I was a householder with a wife andchildren--now I have grandsons--when my spiritual master ordered me togo to the Western countries and preach the cult of Krsna consciousness.So I left everything on the order of my spiritual master, and now I amtrying to execute his order and the orders of Krsna.Ms. Nixon: How old were you when he told you to go to the West?
--- Page 16 ---
Srila Prabhupada: At our first meeting, he ordered me to preach Krsna
consciousness in the West. I was then twenty-five years old, a marriedman with two children. I tried my best to carry out his orders andstarted managing Back to Godhead magazine in 1944, when I was still inhousehold life. I started writing books in 1959 after retiring fromfamily life, and in 1965 I came to the United States.Ms. Nixon: You have said that you are not God, and yet it appears to me,as an outsider, that your devotees treat you as if you were God.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that is their duty. Because the spiritual masteris executing God's order, he should be respected as much as God, just asa government officer should be respected as much as the governmentbecause he executes the government's order. Even if an ordinarypoliceman comes, you have to respect him because he is a government man.But that does not mean he is the government. Saksad-dhari-tvena samasta-sastrair/ uktas tatha bhavyata eva sadbhih: "The spiritual master is tobe honored as much as the Supreme Lord because he is the mostconfidential servitor of the Lord. This is acknowledged in all revealedscriptures and followed by all authorities."Ms. Nixon: I also wonder about the many beautiful material things thatthe devotees bring you. For instance, you left the airport in abeautiful, fancy car. I wonder about this because...Srila Prabhupada: That teaches the disciples how to regard the spiritualmaster as good as God. If you respect the government representative asmuch as you respect the government, then you must treat him opulently.If you respect the spiritual master as much as God, then you must offerhim the same facilities you would offer to God. God travels in a goldencar. If the disciples offer the spiritual master an ordinary motorcar,it would not be sufficient, because the spiritual master has to betreated like God. If God comes to your home, will you bring him anordinary motorcar--or will you arrange for a golden car?Ms. Nixon: One of the most difficult aspects of Krsna consciousness foran outsider to accept is the Deity in the temple--how it representsKrsna. Could you talk a little bit about that?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. At the present moment, because you have not beentrained to see Krsna, He kindly appears before you so you can see Him.You can see wood and stone, but you cannot see what is spiritual.Suppose your father is in the hospital, and he dies. You are crying byhis bedside, "Now my father is gone!" But why do you say he is gone?What is that thing which is gone?Ms. Nixon: Well, his spirit is gone.Srila Prabhupada: And have you seen that spirit?Ms. Nixon: No.Srila Prabhupada: So you cannot see spirit, and God is the SupremeSpirit. Actually, He is everything--spirit and matter--but you cannotsee Him in His spiritual identity. Therefore, to show kindness towardyou, He appears out of His unbounded mercy in the form of a wooden orstone Deity so that you can see Him.Ms. Nixon: Thank you very much.Srila Prabhupada: Hare Krsna!A Definition of GodModern man's concepts of God are many and varied. Children tend toimagine an old man with a white beard. Many adults regard God as aninvisible force or a mentul concept or as all humanity, the universe, or
--- Page 17 ---
even oneself. In this lecture, Srila Prabhupada describes in detail the
Krsna consciousness concept--a surprisingly intimate view of God.     Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you very much for kindlyparticipating in this Krsna consciousness movement. When this societywas registered in 1966 in New York, a friend suggested that it be namedthe Society for God Consciousness. He thought that the name Krsna wassectarian. The dictionary also says that Krsna is a Hindu god's name.But in actuality, if any name can be attributed to God, it is "Krsna."     Actually God has no particular name. By saying He has no name, wemean that no one knows how many names He has. Since God is unlimited,His names also must be unlimited. Therefore we cannot settle on onename. For instance, Krsna is sometimes called Yasoda-nandana, the son ofmother Yasoda; or Devaki-nandana, the son of Devaki; or Vasudeva-nandana, the son of Vasudeva; or Nandanandana, the son of Nanda.Sometimes He is called Parthasarathi, indicating that He acted as thecharioteer of Arjuna, who is sometimes called Partha, the son of Prtha.     God has many dealings with His many devotees, and according tothose dealings, He is called certain names. Since He has innumerabledevotees and innumerable relations with them, He also has innumerablenames. We cannot hit on any one name. But the name Krsna means "all-attractive." God attracts everyone; that is the definition of God. Wehave seen many pictures of Krsna, and we see that He attracts the cows,calves, birds, beasts, trees, plants, and even the water in Vrndavana.He is attractive to the cowherd boys, to the gopis, to Nanda Maharaja,to the Pandavas, and to all human society. Therefore if any particularname can be given to God, that name is "Krsna."     Parasara Muni, a great sage and the father of Vyasadeva, whocompiled all the Vedic literatures, gave the following definition ofGod:
                            aisvaryasya samagrasya
                           viryasya yasasah sriyah                           jnana-vairagyayos caiva                            sannam bhaga itingana                            (Visnu Purana 6.5.47)
     Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is thus defined by
Parasara Muni as one who is full in six opulences--who has fullstrength, fame, wealth, knowledge, beauty, and renunciation.     Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the proprietor ofall riches. There are many rich men in the world, but no one can claimthat he possesses all the wealth. Nor can anyone claim that no one isricher than he. We understand from the Srimad-Bhagavatam, however, thatwhen Krsna was present on this earth He had 16,108 wives, and each wifelived in a palace made of marble and bedecked with jewels. The roomswere filled with furniture made of ivory and gold, and there was greatopulence everywhere. These descriptions are all given vividly in theSrimad-Bhagavatam. In the history of human society we cannot find anyonewho had sixteen thousand wives or sixteen thousand palaces. Nor didKrsna go to one wife one day and another wife another day. No, He waspersonally present in every palace at the same time. This means that Heexpanded Himself in 16,108 forms. This is impossible for an ordinaryman, but it is not very difficult for God. If God is unlimited, He canexpand Himself in unlimited forms, otherwise there is no meaning to the
--- Page 18 ---
word unlimited. God is omnipotent; He can maintain not only sixteen
thousand wives but sixteen million and still encounter no difficulty,otherwise there is no meaning to the word omnipotent.     These are all attractive features. We experience in this materialworld that if a man is very rich, he is attractive. In America, forinstance, Rockefeller and Ford are very attractive because of theirriches. They are attractive even though they do not possess all thewealth of the world. How much more attractive, then, is God, who is thepossessor of all riches.     Similarly, Krsna has unlimited strength. His strength was presentfrom the moment of His birth. When Krsna was only three months old, thePutana demon attempted to kill Him, but instead she was killed by Krsna.That is God. God is God from the beginning. He does not become God bysome meditation or mystic power. Krsna is not that type of God. Krsnawas God from the very beginning of His appearance.     Krsna also has unlimited fame. Of course, we are devotees of Krsnaand know of Him and glorify Him, but apart from us, many millions in theworld are aware of the fame of the Bhagavad-gita. In all countries allover the world the Bhagavad-gita is read by philosophers, psychologists,and religionists. We are also finding very good sales with our Bhagavad-gita As It Is. This is because the commodity is pure gold. There aremany editions of the Bhagavad-gita, but they are not pure. Ours isselling more because we are presenting the Bhagavad-gita as it is. Thefame of the Bhagavad-gita is Krsna's fame.     Beauty, another opulence, is possessed unlimitedly by Krsna. KrsnaHimself is very beautiful, as are all His associates. Those who werepious in a previous life receive an opportunity in this material worldto take birth in good families and good nations. The American people arevery rich and beautiful, and these opulences are a result of piousactivities. All over the world people are attracted to the Americansbecause they are advanced in scientific knowledge, riches, beauty, andso on. This planet is an insignificant planet within the universe, yetwithin this planet, one country--America--has so many attractivefeatures. We can just imagine, then, how many attractive features mustbe possessed by God, who is the creator of the entire cosmicmanifestation. How beautiful He must be--He who has created all beauty.     A person is attractive not only because of his beauty, but alsobecause of his knowledge. A scientist or philosopher may be attractivebecause of his knowledge, but what knowledge is more sublime than thatgiven by Krsna in the Bhagavad-gita? There is no comparison in the worldto such knowledge. At the same time, Krsna possesses full renunciation(vairagya). So many things are working under Krsna's direction in thismaterial world, but actually Krsna is not present here. A big factorymay continue to work, although the owner may not be present. Similarly,Krsna's potencies are working under the direction of His assistants, thedemigods. Thus Krsna Himself is aloof from the material world. This isall described in the revealed scriptures.     God, therefore, has many names according to His activities, butbecause He possesses so many opulences, and because with these opulencesHe attracts everyone, He is called Krsna. The Vedic literature assertsthat God has many names, but "Krsna" is the principal name.     The purpose of this Krsna consciousness movement is to propagateGod's name, God's glories, God's activities, God's beauty, and God'slove. There are many things within this material world, and all of them
--- Page 19 ---
are within Krsna. The most prominent feature of this material world is
sex, and that also is present in Krsna. We are worshiping Radha andKrsna, and attraction exists between them, but material attraction andspiritual attraction are not the same. In Krsna, sex is real, but herein the material world it is unreal. Everything we deal with here ispresent in the spiritual world, but here it has no real value. It isonly a reflection. In store windows we see many mannequins, but no onecares about them, because everyone knows they are false. A mannequin maybe very beautiful, but still it is false. When people see a beautifulwoman, however, they are attracted because they think she is real. Inactuality, the so-called living are also dead, because this body issimply a lump of matter; as soon as the soul leaves the body, no onewould care to see the so-called beautiful body of the woman. The realfactor, the real attracting force, is the spiritual soul.     In the material world everything is made of dead matter; thereforeit is simply an imitation. The reality of things exists in the spiritualworld. Those who have read the Bhagavad-gita can understand what thespiritual world is like, for there it is described:
                          paras tasmat tu bhavo 'nyo
                          'vyakto 'vyaktat sanatunah                            yah sa sarvesu bhutesu                            nasyatsu na vinasyati
     "Yet there is another nature, which is eternal and is
transcendental to this manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supremeand is never annihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, thatpart remains as it is." (Bhagavad-gita 8.20)     Scientists are attempting to calculate the length and breadth ofthis material world, but they cannot begin. It will take them thousandsof years simply to travel to the nearest star. And what to speak of thespiritual world? Since we cannot know the material world, how can weknow what is beyond it? The point is that we must know fromauthoritative sources.     The most authoritative source is Krsna, for He is the reservoir ofall knowledge. No one is wiser or more knowledgeable than Krsna. Krsnainforms us that beyond this material world is a spiritual sky, which isfilled with innumerable planets. That sky is far, far greater thanmaterial space, which constitutes only one fourth of the entirecreation. Similarly, the living entities within the material world arebut a small portion of the living entities throughout the creation. Thismaterial world is compared to a prison, and just as prisoners representonly a small percentage of the total population, so the living entitieswithin the material world constitute but a fragmental portion of allliving entities.     Those who have revolted against God--who are criminal--are placedin this material world. Sometimes criminals say that they don't care forthe government, but nonetheless they are arrested and punished.Similarly, living entities who declare their defiance of God are placedin the material world.     Originally the living entities are all part and parcel of God andare related to Him just as sons are related to their father. Christiansalso consider God the supreme father. Christians go to church and pray,
--- Page 20 ---
"Our Father, who art in heaven.', The conception of God as father is
also in the Bhagavad-gita (14.4):
                            sarva-yonisu kaunteya
                          murtayah sambha vanti yah                           tasam brahma mahad yonir                            aham bija-pradah pita
     "It should be understood that all the species of life, O son of
Kunti, are made possible by birth in this material nature, and that I amthe seed-giving father."     There are 8,400,000 species of life--including aquatics, plants,birds, beasts, insects, and human beings. Of the human species, most areuncivilized, and out of the few civilized species only a small number ofhuman beings take to religious life. Out of many so-called religionists,most identify themselves by designations, claiming, "I am Hindu," "I amMuslim," "I am Christian," and so on. Some engage in philanthropic work,some give to the poor, and open schools and hospitals. This altruisticprocess is called karma-kanda. Out of millions of these karma-kandis,there may be one jnani ("one who knows"). Out of millions of jnanis, onemay be liberated, and out of billions of liberated souls, one may beable to understand Krsna. This, then, is the position of Krsna. As KrsnaHimself says in the Bhaga vad-gita (7.3):
                             manusyanam sahasresu
                            kascid yatati siddhaye                            yatutam api siddhanam                          kascin mam vetti tattvatah
     "Out of many thousands among men, one may endeavor for perfection,
and of those who have achieved perfection, hardly one knows Me intruth."     Understanding Krsna, then, is very difficult. But although theunderstanding of God is a difficult subject, God explains Himself in theBhagavad-gita. He says, "I am like this, and I am like this. Thematerial nature is like this, and the spiritual nature is like that. Theliving entities are like this, and the Supreme Soul is like that." Thuseverything is completely described in the Bhagavad-gita. Althoughunderstanding God is very difficult, it is not difficult when GodHimself gives us His own knowledge. Actually that is the only process bywhich we can understand God. To understand God by our own speculation isnot possible, for God is unlimited and we are limited. Our knowledge andperception are both very limited, so how can we understand theunlimited? If we simply accept the version of the unlimited, we can cometo understand Him. That understanding is our perfection.     Speculative knowledge of God will lead us nowhere. If a boy wantsto know who his father is, the simple process is to ask his mother. Themother will then say, "This is your father." This is the way of perfectknowledge. Of course, one may speculate about one's father, wondering ifthis is the man or if that is the man, and one may wander over the wholecity, asking, "Are you my father? Are you my father?" The knowledgederived from such a process, however, will always remain imperfect. Onewill never find his father in this way. The simple process is to takethe knowledge from an authority--in this case, the mother. She simply
--- Page 21 ---
says, "My dear boy, here is your father." In this way our knowledge is
perfect. Transcendental knowledge is similar. I was just previouslyspeaking of a spiritual world. This spiritual world is not subject toour speculation. God says, "There is a spiritual world, and that is Myheadquarters." In this way we receive knowledge from Krsna, the bestauthority. We may not be perfect, but our knowledge is perfect becauseit is received from the perfect source.     The Krsna consciousness movement is meant to give perfect knowledgeto human society. By such knowledge one can understand who he is, whoGod is, what the material world is, why we have come here, why we mustundergo so much tribulation and misery, and why we have to die. Ofcourse, no one wants to die, but death will come. No one wants to becomean old man, but still old age comes. No one wants to suffer fromdisease, but surely enough, disease comes. These are the real problemsof human life, and they are yet to be solved. Civilization attempts toimprove eating, sleeping, mating, and defense, but these are not thereal problems. A man sleeps, and a dog sleeps. A man is not moreadvanced simply because he has a nice apartment. In both cases, thebusiness is the same--sleeping. Man has discovered atomic weapons fordefense, but the dog also has teeth and claws and can also defendhimself. In both cases, defense is there. Man cannot say that because hehas the atomic bomb he can conquer the entire world or the entireuniverse. That is not possible. Man may possess an elaborate method fordefense, or a gorgeous method for eating, sleeping, or mating, but thatdoes not make him advanced. We may call his advancement polishedanimalism, and that is all.     Real advancement means knowing God. If we are lacking knowledge ofGod, we are not actually advanced. Many rascals deny the existence ofGod because if there is no God they can continue their sinfulactivities. It may be very nice for them to think that there is no God,but God will not die simply because we deny Him. God is there, and Hisadministration is there. By His orders the sun is rising, the moon isrising, the water flows, and the ocean abides by the tide. Thuseverything functions under His order. Since everything is going on verynicely, how can one realistically think that God is dead? If there ismismanagement, we may say that there is no government, but if there isgood management, how can we say that there is no government? Justbecause people do not know God, they say that God is dead, that there isno God, or that God has no form. But we are firmly convinced that thereis God and that Krsna is God. Therefore we are worshiping Him. That isthe process of Krsna consciousness. Try to understand it. Thank you verymuch.Reincarnation and BeyondIn August of 1976, Srila Prabhupada spent a few weeks at BhaktivedantuManor, fifteen miles north of London. During that time Mike Robinson ofLondon Broadcasting Company interviewed him in his quarters. In theirconversation, which was broadcast shortly afterward, Srila Prabhupadarevealed that Krsna consciousness is "not some ritualistic ceremony of`I believe, you believe,' " but a profound philosophical system in whichthe science of reincarnation is explained clearly and concisely.Mike Robinson: Can you tell me what you believe--what the philosophy ofthe Hare Krsna movement is?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Krsna consciousness is not a question of belief;it is a science. The first step is to know the difference between a
--- Page 22 ---
living body and a dead body. What is the difference? The difference is
that when someone dies, the spirit soul, or the living force, leaves thebody. And therefore the body is called "dead." So, there are two things:one, this body; and the other, the living force within the body. Wespeak of the living force within the body. That is the differencebetween the science of Krsna consciousness, which is spiritual, andordinary material science. As such, in the beginning it is very, verydifficult for an ordinary man to appreciate our movement. One must firstunderstand that he is a soul, or something other than his body.Mike Robinson: And when will we understand that?Srila Prabhupada: You can understand at any moment, but it requires alittle intelligence. For example, as a child grows, he becomes a boy,the boy becomes a young man, the young man becomes an adult, and theadult becomes an old man. Throughout all this time, although his body ischanging from a child to an old man, he still feels himself to be thesame person, with the same identity. Just see: the body is changing, butthe occupier of the body, the soul, is remaining the same. So we shouldlogically conclude that when our present body dies, we get another body.This is called transmigration of the soul.Mike Robinson: So when people die it is just the physical body thatdies?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. That is explained very elaborately in theBhagavad-gita (2.20): na jayate mriyate va kadacin... na hanyatehanyamane sarire.Mike Robinson: Do you often quote references?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, we quote many references. Krsna consciousness isa serious education, not an ordinary religion. [To a devotee:] Find thatverse in the Bhagavad-gita.Disciple:
                         na jayate mriyate va kadacin
                      nayam bhutva bhavita va na bhuyah                        ajo nityah sasvato 'yam purano                         na hanyate hanyamane sarire
     "For the soul, there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once
been, does he ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing,undying, and primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain."Mike Robinson: Thank you very much for reading that. So can you explainto me just a bit more? If the soul is undying, does everybody's soul goto be with God when they die?Srila Prabhupada: Not necessarily. If one is qualified--if he qualifieshimself in this life to go back home, back to Godhead--then he can go.If he does not qualify himself, then he gets another material body. Andthere are 8,400,000 different bodily forms. According to his desires andkarma, the laws of nature give him a suitable body. It is just like whena man contracts some disease and then develops that disease. Is thatdifficult to understand?Mike Robinson: It's very difficult to understand all of it.Srila Prabhupada: Suppose somebody has contracted smallpox. So, afterseven days he develops the symptoms. What is that period called?Mike Robinson: Incubation?Srila Prabhupada: Incubation. So you cannot avoid it. If you havecontracted some disease it will develop, by nature's law. Similarly,
--- Page 23 ---
during this life you associate with various modes of material nature,
and that association will decide what kind of body you are going to getin the next life. That is strictly under the laws of nature. Everyone iscontrolled by the laws of nature--they're completely dependent--but outof ignorance people think that they are free. They're not free; they'reimagining that they're free, but they are completely under the laws ofnature. So, your next birth will be decided according to youractivities--sinful or pious, as the case may be.Mike Robinson: Your Grace, could you go back over that just for aminute? You said that nobody is free. Are you saying that if we live agood life, we in some way determine a good future for ourselves?Srila Prabhupada: Yes.Mike Robinson: So we are free to choose what we believe to be important?Religion is important, because if we believe in God and lead a goodlife...Srila Prabhupada: It is not a question of belief. Do not bring in thisquestion of belief. It is law. For instance, there is a government. Youmay believe or not believe, but if you break the law, you'll be punishedby the government. Similarly, whether you believe or don't believe,there is a God. If you don't believe in God and you independently dowhatever you like, then you'll be punished by the laws of nature.Mike Robinson: I see. Does it matter what religion you believe? Would itmatter if one was a devotee of Krsna?Srila Prabhupada: It is not a question of religion. It is a question ofscience. You are a spiritual being, but because you are materiallyconditioned, you are under the laws of material nature. So you maybelieve in the Christian religion, and I may believe in the Hindureligion, but that does not mean that you are going to become an old manand I am not. We're talking of the science of growing old. This isnatural law. It is not that because you are Christian you are becomingold or because I am Hindu I am not becoming old. Everyone is becomingold. So, similarly, all the laws of nature are applicable to everyone.Whether you believe this religion or that religion, it doesn't matter.Mike Robinson: So, you're saying that there's only one God controllingall of us?Srila Prabhupada: There's one God, and one nature's law, and we are allunder that nature's law. We are controlled by the Supreme. So if wethink that we are free or that we can do anything we like, that is ourfoolishness.Mike Robinson: I see. Can you explain to me what difference it makes,being a member of the Hare Krsna movement?Srila Prabhupada: The Hare Krsna movement is meant for those who areserious about understanding this science. There's no question of ourbeing some sectarian group. No. Anyone can join. Students in college canbe admitted. You may be a Christian, you may be a Hindu, you may be aMuhammadan--it doesn't matter. The Krsna consciousness movement admitsanyone who wants to understand the science of God.Mike Robinson: And what difference would it make to someone--beingtaught how to be a Hare Krsna person?Srila Prabhupada: His real education would begin. The first thing is tounderstand that you are a spirit soul. And because you are a spiritsoul, you are changing your body. This is the ABC of spiritualunderstanding. So, when your body is finished, annihilated, you are notfinished. You get another body, just as you may change your coat and
--- Page 24 ---
shirt. If you come to see me tomorrow wearing a different shirt and a
different coat, does that mean you are a different person? No.Similarly, each time you die you change bodies, but you, the spirit soulwithin the body, remain the same. This point has to be understood; thenone can make further progress in the science of Krsna consciousness.Mike Robinson: I am beginning to understand, but what I'm findingdifficult is how this ties in with the large numbers of your people wesee handing out Hare Krsna literature on Oxford Street.Srila Prabhupada: This literature is meant to convince people about theneed for spiritual life.Mike Robinson: And you're really not concerned whether or not they jointhe Hare Krsna movement?Srila Prabhupada: it doesn't matter. Our mission is to educate them.People are in ignorance; they are living in a fool's paradise, thinkingthat when their body is finished, everything is finished. That isfoolishness.Mike Robinson: And you are basically just concerned to tell them thatthere is a spiritual dimension to life?Srila Prabhupada: Our first concern is to tell you that you are not thisbody, that the body is your covering (your shirt and coat) and thatwithin the body you are living.Mike Robinson: Yes, I think I've got that now. If we could go on fromthere--you said that how you lived made a difference in your life afterdeath, that there are natural laws that determine your next life. Howdoes the process of transmigration work?Srila Prabhupada: The process is very subtle. The spirit soul isinvisible to our material eyes. It is atomic in size. After thedestruction of the gross body, which is made up of the senses, blood,bone, fat, and so forth, the subtle body of mind, intelligence, and egogoes on working. So at the time of death this subtle body carries thesmall spirit soul to another gross body. The process is just like aircarrying a fragrance. Nobody can see where this rose fragrance is comingfrom, but we know that it is being carried by the air. You cannot seehow, but it is being done. Similarly, the process of transmigration ofthe soul is very subtle. According to the condition of the mind at thetime of death, the minute spirit soul enters into the womb of aparticular mother through the semen of a father, and then the souldevelops a particular type of body given by the mother. It may be ahuman being, it may be a cat, a dog, or anything.Mike Robinson: Are you saying that we were something else before thislife?Srila Prabhupada: Yes.Mike Robinson: And we keep corning back as something else the next time?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, because you are eternal. According to your work,you are simply changing bodies. Therefore, you should want to know howto stop this business, how you can remain in your original, spiritualbody. That is Krsna consciousness.Mike Robinson: I see. So if I become Krsna conscious, I wouldn't riskcoming back as a dog?Srila Prabhupada: No. [To a devotee:] Find this verse: janma karma ca medivyam...Disciple:
                           janma karma ca me divyam
--- Page 25 ---
                           evam yo vetti tattvatah
                          tyaktva deham punar janma                           naiti mam eti so 'rjuna
     "One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and
activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in thismaterial world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." (Bg. 4.9)Srila Prabhupada: God is saying, "Anyone who understands Me is free frombirth and death." But one cannot understand God by materialisticspeculation. That is not possible. One must first come to the spiritualplatform. Then he gets the intelligence required to understand God. Andwhen he understands God, he does not get any more material bodies. Hegoes back home, back to Godhead. He lives eternally; no more change ofbody.Mike Robinson: I see. Now, you've read twice from your scriptures. Wheredo these scriptures come from? Can you briefly explain that?Srila Prabhupada: Our scriptures are coming from Vedic literature, whichhas existed from the beginning of creation. Whenever there is some newmaterial creation--like this microphone, for instance--there is alsosome literature explaining how to deal with it. Isn't that so?Mike Robinson: Yes, that's right, there is.Srila Prabhupada: And that literature comes along with the creation ofthe microphone.Mike Robinson: That's right, yes.Srila Prabhupada: So, similarly, the Vedic literature comes along withthe cosmic creation, to explain how to deal with it.Mike Robinson: I see. So, these scriptures have been in existence sincethe beginning of creation. Now, if we could move on to something Ibelieve you feel very strongly about. What is the main differencebetween Krsna consciousness and the other Eastern disciplines beingtaught in the West?Srila Prabhupada: The difference is that we are following the originalliterature, and they are manufacturing their own literature. That is thedifference. When there is some question on spiritual matters, you mustconsult the original literature, not some literature issued by a bogusman.Mike Robinson: What about the chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna...Srila Prabhupada: Chanting Hare Krsna is the easiest process by which tobecome purified, especially in this age, when people are so dull thatthey cannot very easily understand spiritual knowledge. If one chantsHare Krsna, then his intelligence becomes purified, and he canunderstand spiritual things.Mike Robinson: Can you tell me how you are guided in what you do?Srila Prabhupada: We take guidance from the Vedic literature.Mike Robinson: From the scriptures you quoted?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, it's all in the literatures. We're explainingthem in English. But we're not manufacturing anything. If we were tomanufacture knowledge, then everything would be spoiled. The Vedicliterature is something like the literature that explains how to set upthis microphone. It says, "Do it like this: some of the screws should beon this side, around the metal." You cannot make any change; theneverything would be spoiled. Similarly, because we are not manufacturinganything, one simply has to read one of our books, and he receives realspiritual knowledge.
--- Page 26 ---
Mike Robinson: How can the philosophy of Krsna consciousness affect the
way people live?Srila Prabhupada: It can relieve people's suffering. People aresuffering because they are misunderstanding themselves to be the body.If you think that you are your coat and shirt, and you very carefullywash the coat and shirt but you forget to eat, will you be happy?Mike Robinson: No, I wouldn't.Srila Prabhupada: Similarly, everyone is simply washing the "coat andshirt" of the body, but forgetting about the soul within the body. Theyhave no information about what is within the "coat and shirt" of thebody. Ask anybody what he is, and he will say, "Yes, I am anEnglishman," or "I am an Indian." And if we say, "I can see you have anEnglish or an Indian body, but what are you?"--that he cannot say.Mike Robinson: I see.Srila Prabhupada: The whole modern civilization is operating on themisunderstanding that the body is the self (dehatma-buddhi). This is thementality of the cats and dogs. Suppose I try to enter England, and youstop me at the border: "I am an Englishman," you say, "but you areIndian. Why have you come here?" And the dog barks, "Rau, rau, why areyou coming?" So what is the difference in mentality? The dog is thinkinghe's a dog and I'm a stranger, and you are thinking you are anEnglishman and I am an Indian. There's no difference in mentality. So ifyou keep people in the darkness of a dog's mentality and declare thatyou are advancing in civilization, you are most misguided.Mike Robinson: Now, moving on to another point, I gather the Hare Krsnamovement has some concern for areas of the world where there issuffering.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, we have the only concern. Others are simplyavoiding the main problems: birth, old age, disease, and death. Othershave no solutions to these problems; they are simply talking all kindsof nonsense. People are being misguided. They are being kept indarkness. Let us start to give them some light.Mike Robinson: Yes, but apart from giving spiritual enlightenment, areyou also concerned for people's physical well-being?Srila Prabhupada: Physical well-being automatically follows spiritualwell-being.Mike Robinson: And how does that work?Srila Prabhupada: Suppose you have a car. So, naturally, you take careof the car as well as yourself. But you don't identify yourself as thecar. You don't say, "I am this car." That is nonsense. But this is whatpeople are doing. They are taking too much care of the bodily "car,"thinking that the car is the self. They forget that they are differentfrom the car, that they are a spirit soul and have a different business.Just as no one can drink petrol and be satisfied, no one can besatisfied with bodily activities. One must find out the proper food forthe soul. If a man thinks, "I am a car, and I must drink this petrol,"he is considered insane. Similarly, one who thinks that he is this body,and who tries to become happy with bodily pleasures, is also insane.Mike Robinson: There's a quote here that I'd like you to comment on. Iwas given this literature by your people before I came, and one of thethings you say here is that "Religion without a rational basis is justsentiment." Can you explain that?Srila Prabhupada: Most religious people say, "We believe..." But what isthe value of this belief? You may believe something which is not
--- Page 27 ---
actually correct. For instance, some of the Christian people say, "We
believe that animals have no soul." That is not correct. They believeanimals have no soul because they want to eat the animals, but actuallyanimals do have a soul.Mike Robinson: How do you know that the animal has a soul?Srila Prabhupada: You can know, also. Here is the scientific proof: theanimal eats, you eat; the animal sleeps, you sleep; the animal has sex,you have sex; the animal also defends, you also defend. Then what is thedifference between you and the animal? How can you say that you have asoul but the animal doesn't?Mike Robinson: I can see that completely. But the Christian scripturessay...Srila Prabhupada: Don't bring in any scriptures; this is a commonsensetopic. Try to understand. The animal is eating, you are eating; theanimal is sleeping, you are sleeping; the animal is defending, you aredefending; the animal is having sex, you are having sex; the animalshave children, you have children; they have a living place, you have aliving place. If the animal's body is cut, there is blood; if your bodyis cut, there is blood. So, all these similarities are there. Now, whydo you deny this one similarity, the presence of the soul? This is notlogical. You have studied logic? In logic there is something calledanalogy. Analogy means drawing a conclusion by finding many points ofsimilarity. If there are so many points of similarity between humanbeings and animals, why deny one similarity? That is not logic. That isnot science.Mike Robinson: But if you take that argument and use it the other way...Srila Prabhupada: There is no other way. If you are not arguing on thebasis of logic, then you are not rational.Mike Robinson: Yes, OK, but let's start from another hypothesis. Supposewe assume that a human being has no soul...Srila Prabhupada: Then you must explain the difference between a livingbody and a dead body. I have already explained this at the beginning. Assoon as the living force, the soul, is gone from the body, even the mostbeautiful body has no value. No one cares for it; it's thrown away. Butnow, if I touch your hair, there will be a fight. That is thedistinction between a living body and a dead body. In a living body thesoul is there, and in a dead body the soul is not there. As soon as thesoul leaves the body, the body has no value. It is useless. This is verysimple to understand, but even the biggest so-called scientists andphilosophers are too dullheaded to understand it. Modern society is in avery abominable condition. There is no man with a real brain.Mike Robinson: Are you referring to all the scientists who fail tounderstand the spiritual dimension in life?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Real science means full knowledge of everything,material and spiritual.Mike Robinson: But you were a chemist in secular life, were you not?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, I was a chemist in my earlier life. But itdoesn't require any great intelligence to become a chemist. Anycommonsense man can do it.Mike Robinson: But presumably you think that material science is alsoimportant, even if today's scientists are dullheaded.Srila Prabhupada: Material science is important just so far. It is notall-important.
--- Page 28 ---
Mike Robinson: I see. Can I come back to a question I had from before?
When we were differing a few minutes ago you were saying, "Don't bringthe scriptures in; just use common sense." But what part do thescriptures play in your religion? How important are they?Srila Prabhupada: Our religion is a science. When we say that a childgrows into a boy, it is science. It is not religion. Every child growsinto a boy. What is the question of religion? Every man dies. What isthe question of religion? And when a man dies, the body becomes useless.What is the question of religion? It is science. Whether you'reChristian or Hindu or Muslim, when you die your body becomes useless.This is science. When your relative dies, you cannot say, "We areChristian; we believe he has not died." No, he has died. Whether you areChristian or Hindu or Muslim, he has died. So when we speak, we speak onthis basis: that the body is important only as long as the soul is inthe body. When the soul is not there, it is useless. This science isapplicable to everyone, and we are trying to educate people on thisbasis.Mike Robinson: But if I understand you correctly, you seem to beeducating people on a purely scientific basis. Where does religion comeinto it at all?Srila Prabhupada: Religion also means science. People have wrongly takenreligion to mean faith--"I believe." [To a devotee:] Look up the wordreligion in the dictionary.Disciple: Under religion the dictionary says, "recognition of superhumancontrol or power, and especially of a personal God entitled toobedience, and effecting such recognition with the proper mentalattitude."Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Religion means learning how to obey the supremecontroller. So, you may be Christian and I may be Hindu; it doesn'tmatter. We must both accept that there is a supreme controller. Everyonehas to accept that; that is real religion. Not this "We believe animalshave no soul." That is not religion. That is most unscientific. Religionmeans scientific understanding of the supreme controller: to understandthe supreme controller and obey Him--that's all. In the state, the goodcitizen is he who understands the government and obeys the laws of thegovernment, and the bad citizen is the one who doesn't care for thegovernment. So, if you become a bad citizen by ignoring God'sgovernment, then you are irreligious. And if you are a good citizen,then you are religious.Mike Robinson: I see. Can you tell me what you believe to be the meaningof life? Why do we exist in the first place?Srila Prabhupada: The meaning of life is to enjoy. But now you are on afalse platform of life, and therefore you are suffering instead ofenjoying. Everywhere we see the struggle for existence. Everyone isstruggling, but what is their enjoyment in the end? They are simplysuffering and dying. Therefore, although life means enjoyment, at thepresent moment your life is not enjoyment. But if you come to the real,spiritual platform of life, then you'll enjoy.Mike Robinson: Can you explain to me, finally, some of the stages you gothrough in spiritual life? What are the spiritual stages a new devoteeof Krsna goes through?Srila Prabhupada: The first stage is that you are inquisitive. "So," yousay, "what is this Krsna consciousness movement? Let me study it." Thisis called sraddha, or faith. This is the beginning. Then, if you are
--- Page 29 ---
serious, you mix with those who are cultivating this knowledge. You try
to understand how they are feeling. Then you'll feel, "Why not becomeone of them?" And when you become one of them, then all your misgivingssoon go away. You become more faithful, and then you get a real tastefor Krsna consciousness. Why aren't these boys going to see the cinema?Why don't they eat meat or go to the nightclub? Because their taste haschanged. They hate all these things now. In this way, you make progress.First faith, then association with devotees, then removal of allmisgivings, then firm faith, then taste, then God realization, and thenlove of God, the perfection. That is first-class religion. Not someritualistic ceremony of "I believe, you believe." That is not religion.That is cheating. Real religion means to develop your love for God. Thatis the perfection of religion.Mike Robinson: Thank you very much for talking with me. It's been apleasure talking to you.Srila Prabhupada: Hare Krsna.Truth and BeautySrila Prabhupada first published this essay in India, in the old tubloidversion of his then-fortnightly magazine Back to Godhead (November 20,1958). It contains the unforgettuble story of "liquid beauty," in whichSrila Prabhupada dramatically exposes the underlying principle of humansexuality. This illuminating exposition on the nature of truth andbeauty is timeless and sturtlingly relevant for those in search of the"inner self."     There may sometimes be arguments about whether "truth" and "beauty"are compatible terms. One would willingly agree to express the truth,one might say, but since truth is not always beautiful--indeed, it isfrequently rather startling and unpleasant--how is one to express truthand beauty at the same time?     In reply, we may inform all concerned that "truth" and "beauty" arecompatible terms. Indeed, we may emphatically assert that the actualtruth, which is absolute, is always beautiful. The truth is so beautifulthat it attracts everyone, including the truth itself. Truth is sobeautiful that many sages, saints, and devotees have left everything forthe sake of truth. Mahatma Gandhi, an idol of the modern world,dedicated his life to experimenting with truth, and all his activitieswere aimed toward truth only.     Why only Mahatma Gandhi? Every one of us has the urge to search fortruth alone, for the truth is not only beautiful but also all-powerful,all-resourceful, all-famous, all-renounced, and all-knowledgeable.     Unfortunately, people have no information of the actual truth.Indeed, 99.9 percent of men in all walks of life are pursuing untruthonly, in the name of truth. We are actually attracted by the beauty oftruth, but since time immemorial we have been habituated to love ofuntruth appearing like truth. Therefore, to the mundaner "truth" and"beauty" are incompatible terms. The mundane truth and beauty may beexplained as follows.     Once a man who was very powerful and strongly built but whosecharacter was very doubtful fell in love with a beautiful girl. The girlwas not only beautiful in appearance but also saintly in character, andas such she did not like the man's advances. The man, however, wasinsistent because of his lustful desires, and therefore the girlrequested him to wait only seven days, and she set a time after that
--- Page 30 ---
when he could meet her. The man agreed, and with high expectations he
began waiting for the appointed time.     The saintly girl, however, in order to manifest the real beauty ofabsolute truth, adopted a method very instructive. She took very strongdoses of laxatives and purgatives, and for seven days she continuallypassed loose stool and vomited all that she ate. Moreover, she storedall the loose stool and vomit in suitable pots. As a result of thepurgatives, the so-called beautiful girl became lean and thin like askeleton, her complexion turned blackish, and her beautiful eyes sankinto the sockets of her skull. Thus at the appointed hour she waitedanxiously to receive the eager man.     The man appeared on the scene well dressed and well behaved andasked the ugly girl he found waiting there about the beautiful girl hewas to meet. The man could not recognize the girl he saw as the samebeautiful girl for whom he was asking; indeed, although she repeatedlyasserted her identity, because of her pitiable condition he was unableto recognize her.     At last the girl told the powerful man that she had separated theingredients of her beauty and stored them in pots. She also told himthat he could enjoy those juices of beauty. When the mundane poetic manasked to see these juices of beauty, he was directed to the store ofloose stool and liquid vomit, which were emanating an unbearably badsmell. Thus the whole story of the beauty-liquid was disclosed to him.Finally, by the grace of the saintly girl, this man of low character wasable to distinguish between the shadow and the substance, and thus hecame to his senses.     This man's position was similar to the position of every one of uswho is attracted by false, material beauty. The girl mentioned above hada beautifully developed material body in accordance with the desires ofher mind, but in fact she was apart from that temporary material bodyand mind. She was in fact a spiritual spark, and so also was the loverwho was attracted by her false skin.     Mundane intellectuals and aesthetics, however, are deluded by theoutward beauty and attraction of the relative truth and are unaware ofthe spiritual spark, which is both truth and beauty at the same time.The spiritual spark is so beautiful that when it leaves the so-calledbeautiful body, which in fact is full of stool and vomit, no one wantsto touch that body, even if it is decorated with a costly costume.     We are all pursuing a false, relative truth, which is incompatiblewith real beauty. The actual truth, however, is permanently beautiful,retaining the same standard of beauty for innumerable years. Thatspiritual spark is indestructible. The beauty of the outer skin can bedestroyed in only a few hours merely by a dose of a strong purgative,but the beauty of truth is indestructible and always the same.Unfortunately, mundane artists and intellectuals are ignorant of thisbeautiful spark of spirit. They are also ignorant of the whole firewhich is the source of these spiritual sparks, and they are ignorant ofthe relationships between the sparks and the fire, which take the formof transcendental pastimes. When those pastimes are displayed here bythe grace of the Almighty, foolish people who cannot see beyond theirsenses confuse those pastimes of truth and beauty with themanifestations of loose stool and vomit described above. Thus in despairthey ask how truth and beauty can be accommodated at the same time.
--- Page 31 ---
     Mundaners do not know that the whole spiritual entity is the
beautiful person who attracts everything. They are unaware that He isthe prime substance, the prime source and fountainhead of everythingthat be. The infinitesimal spiritual sparks, being parts and parcels ofthat whole spirit, are qualitatively the same in beauty and eternity.The only difference is that the whole is eternally the whole and theparts are eternally the parts. Both of them, however, are the ultimatetruth, ultimate beauty, ultimate knowledge, ultimate energy, ultimaterenunciation, and ultimate opulence.     Although written by the greatest mundane poet or intellectual, anyliterature which does not describe the ultimate truth and beauty is buta store of loose stool and vomit of the relative truth. Real literatureis that which describes the ultimate truth and beauty of the Absolute.The Art of DyingAlthough the media are generally obsessed with violence and death, ourperception of death and dying is superficial. Srila Prabhupada observes,"As long as a man is in the full vigor of life, he forgets the nakedtruth of death, which he has to meet." How can we effectively deal withour own death? In this essay (which first appeared in the old tabloidBack to Godhead, April 20, 1960) Srila Prabhupada explains how theancient teachings of Srimad-Bhagavatam provide a practical answer.     A small child walking with his father goes on inquiring constantly.He asks his father so many odd things, and the father has to satisfy himwith proper answers. When I was a young father in my householder life, Iwas overflooded with hundreds of questions from my second son, who wasmy constant companion. One day it so happened that a bridegroom's partywas passing our tramcar, and the four-year-old boy, as usual, inquiredwhat the big procession was. He was given all possible answers to histhousand and one questions regarding the marriage party, and finally heasked whether his own father was married! This question gave rise toloud laughter from all the elderly gentlemen present, although the boywas perplexed as to why we were laughing. Anyway, the boy was somehowsatisfied by his married father.     The lesson from this incident is that since a human being is arational animal, he is born to make inquiries. The greater the number ofquestions, the greater the advancement of knowledge and science. Thewhole of material civilization is based on this originally large volumeof questions put by young men to their elders. When elderly persons givethe proper answers to the questions of the youngsters, civilizationmakes progress, one step after another. The most intelligent man,however, inquires about what happens after death. The less intelligentmake lesser inquiries, but the questions of those who are moreintelligent go higher and still higher.     Among the most intelligent of men was Maharaja Pariksit, the greatking of the entire world, who was accidentally cursed by a brahmana tomeet death from the bite of a serpent within seven days. The brahmanawho cursed him was only a boy, yet he was very powerful, and because hedid not know the importance of the great king, the boy foolishly cursedhim to meet death within seven days. This was later lamented by theboy's father, whom the king had offended. When the king was informed ofthe unfortunate curse, he at once left his palatial home and went to thebank of the Ganges, which was near his capital, to prepare for hisimpending death. Because he was a great king, almost all the great sagesand learned scholars assembled at the place where the king was fasting
--- Page 32 ---
prior to leaving his mortal body. At last, Sukadeva Gosvami, the
youngest contemporary saint, also arrived there, and he was unanimouslyaccepted to preside at that meeting, although his great father was alsopresent. The king respectfully offered Sukadeva Gosvami the principalseat of esteem and asked him relevant questions regarding his passingfrom the mortal world, which was to take place on the seventh daythenceforward. The great king, as a worthy descendant of the Pandavas,who were all great devotees, placed the following relevant inquiriesbefore the great sage Sukadeva. "My dear sir, you are the greatest ofthe great transcendentalists, and therefore I submissively beg to askyou about my duties at this moment. I am just on the verge of my death.Therefore, what should I do at this critical hour? Please tell me, mylord--what should I hear, what should I worship, or whom should Iremember now? A great sage like you does not stay at the home of ahouseholder more than necessary, and therefore it is my good fortunethat you have kindly come here at the time of my death. Please,therefore, give me your directions at this critical hour."     The great sage, having thus been pleasingly requested by the king,answered his questions authoritatively, for the sage was a greattranscendental scholar and was also well equipped with godly qualities,since he was the worthy son of Badarayana, or Vyasadeva, the originalcompiler of the Vedic literature.     Sukadeva Gosvami said, "My dear king, your inquiry is very muchrelevant, and it is also beneficial for all people of all times. Suchinquiries, which are the highest of all, are relevant because they areconfirmed by the teachings of the vedanta-darsana, the conclusion of theVedic knowledge, and are atmavit-sammatuh; in other words, liberatedsouls, who have full knowledge of their spiritual identity, put forwardsuch relevant inquiries in order to elucidate further information aboutthe Transcendence."     The Srimad-Bhaga vatam is the natural commentary upon the greatVedanta (or Sariraka) sutras, which were compiled by Srila Vyasadeva.The Vedantu-sutras are the topmost Vedic literature, and they containthe nucleus of basic inquiries about the transcendental subject ofspiritual knowledge. Yet although Srila Vyasadeva compiled this greattreatise, his mind was not satisfied. Then he happened to meet SriNarada, his spiritual master, who advised him to describe the identityof the Personality of Godhead. Upon receiving this advice, Vyasadevameditated on the principle of bhakti-yoga, which showed him distinctlywhat is the Absolute and what is the relativity, or maya. Havingachieved perfect realization of these facts, he compiled the greatnarration of the Srimad-Bhagavatum, or beautiful Bhagavatum, whichbegins with actual historical facts concerning the life of MaharajaPariksit.     The Vedantu-sutra begins with the key inquiry about theTranscendence, athato brahma-jijnasa: "One should now inquire aboutBrahman, or the Transcendence."     As long as a man is in the full vigor of life, he forgets the nakedtruth of death, which he has to meet. Thus a foolish man makes norelevant inquiry about the real problems of life. Everyone thinks thathe will never die, although he sees evidence of death before his eyes atevery second. Here is the distinction between animalism and humanity. Ananimal like a goat has no sense of its impending death. Although itsbrother goat is being slaughtered, the goat, being allured by the green
--- Page 33 ---
grass offered to it, will stand peacefully waiting to be slaughtered
next. On the other hand, if a human being sees his fellow man beingkilled by an enemy, he either fights to save his brother or leaves, ifpossible, to save his own life. That is the difference between a man anda goat.     An intelligent man knows that death is born along with his ownbirth. He knows that he is dying at every second and that the finaltouch will be given as soon as his term of life is finished. Hetherefore prepares himself for the next life or for liberation from thedisease of repeated birth and death.     A foolish man, however, does not know that this human form of lifeis obtained after a series of births and deaths imposed in the past bythe laws of nature. He does not know that a living entity is an eternalbeing, who has no birth and death. Birth, death, old age, and diseaseare external impositions on a living entity and are due to his contactwith material nature and to his forgetfulness of his eternal, godlynature and qualitative oneness with the Absolute Whole.     Human life provides the opportunity to know this eternal fact, ortruth. Thus the very beginning of the Vedantu-sutra advises that becausewe have this valuable form of human life, it is our duty--now--toinquire, What is Brahman, the Absolute Truth?     A man who is not intelligent enough does not inquire about thistranscendental life; instead, he inquires about many irrelevant matterswhich do not concern his eternal existence. From the very beginning ofhis life, he inquires from his mother, father, teachers, professors,books, and so many other sources, but he does not have the right type ofinformation about his real life.     As mentioned before, Pariksit Maharaja was given a warning noticethat he would meet death within seven days, and he at once left hispalace to prepare himself for the next stage. The king had at leastseven days at his disposal in which to prepare for death, but as far aswe are concerned, although at least we know that our death is sure, wehave no information of the date fixed for the occurrence. I do not knowwhether I am going to meet death at the next moment. Even such a greatman as Mahatma Gandhi could not calculate that he was going to meet withdeath in the next five minutes, nor could his great associates guess hisimpending death. Nonetheless, all such gentlemen present themselves asgreat leaders of the people.     It is ignorance of death and life that distinguishes an animal froma man. A man, in the real sense of the term, inquires about himself andwhat he is. Wherefrom has he come into this life, and where is he goingafter death? Why is he put under the troubles of threefold miseriesalthough he does not want them? Beginning from one's childhood, one goeson inquiring about so many things in his life, but he never inquiresabout the real essence of life. This is animalism. There is nodifference between a man and an animal as far as the four principles ofanimal life are concerned, for every living being exists by eating,sleeping, fearing, and mating. But only the human life is meant forrelevant inquiries into the facts about eternal life and theTranscendence. Human life is therefore meant for research into eternallife, and the Vedanta-sutra advises one to conduct this research now ornever. If one fails to inquire now into these relevant matters aboutlife, one is sure to go back again to the animal kingdom by the laws ofnature. Therefore, even if a foolish man appears advanced in material
--- Page 34 ---
science--that is, in eating, sleeping, fearing, mating, and so on--he
cannot get free from the cruel hands of death by the law of nature. Thelaw of nature works under three modes--goodness, passion, and ignorance.Those who live under conditions of goodness are promoted to the higher,spiritual status of life, and those who live under conditions of passionremain stationed in the same place in the material world where they arenow, but those who live under conditions of ignorance are sure to bedegraded to the lower species.     The modern setup of human civilization is a risky one because itoffers no education about relevant inquiries into the essentialprinciples of life. Like animals, people do not know that they are goingto be slaughtered by the laws of nature. They are satisfied with a bunchof green grass, or a so-called jolly life, like the waiting goat in aslaughterhouse. Considering such a condition of human life, we are justtrying to make a humble attempt to save the human being by the messageof Back to Godhead. This method is not fictitious. If there is at all tobe an era of reality, this message of Back to Godhead is the beginningof that era.     According to Sri Sukadeva Gosvami, the real fact is that agrhamedhi, or a person who has tied himself, like the goat meant forslaughter, in the business of family, society, community, nation, orhumanity at large in regard to the problems and necessities of animallife--namely eating, sleeping, fearing, and mating--and who has noknowledge of the Transcendence is no better than an animal. He may haveinquired about physical, political, economic, cultural, educational, orsimilar other matters of temporary, material concern, but if he has notinquired about the principles of transcendental life, he should beregarded as a blind man driven ahead by uncontrolled senses and about tofall into a ditch. That is the description of the grhamedhi.     The opposite of the grha-medhi, however, is the grha-stha. Thegrhastha asrama, or the shelter of spiritual family life, is as good asthe life of a sannyasi, a member of the renounced order. Regardless ofwhether one is a householder or a renunciate, the important point isthat of relevant inquiries. A sannyasi is bogus if not interested inrelevant inquiries, and a grhastha, or householder, is bona fide if heis inclined to put forward such inquiries. The grhamedhi, however, issimply interested in the animal necessities of life. By the laws ofnature, the grhamedhi's life is full of calamities, whereas the life ofthe grhastha is full of happiness. But in the modern human civilization,the grhamedhis are posing as the grhasthas. We should therefore know whois what. A grhamedhi's life is full of vices, because he does not knowhow to live a family life. He does not know that beyond his control is apower who supervises and controls his activities, and he has noconception of his future life. The grhamedhi is blind to his future andhas no aptitude for making relevant inquiries. His only qualification isthat he is bound by the shackles of attachment to the false things hehas contacted in his temporary existence.     At night such grhamedhis waste their valuable time by sleeping orby satisfying their different varieties of sexual urges by visitingcinema shows and attending clubs and gambling houses, where women andliquor are indulged in lavishly. And during the day, they waste theirvaluable life in accumulating money or, if they have sufficient money tospend, by adjusting the comforts of their family members. Their standardof living and their personal needs increase with their increase in
--- Page 35 ---
monetary income. Thus there is no limit to their expenses, and they are
never satiated. Consequently there is unlimited competition in the fieldof economic development, and therefore there is no peace in any societyof the human world.     Everyone is perplexed by the same questions about earning andspending, but ultimately one must depend on the mercy of mother nature.When there is a scarcity in production or there are disturbances causedby providence, the poor planmaking politician blames it on cruel naturebut carefully avoids studying how and by whom the laws of nature arecontrolled. The Bhagavad-gita, however, explains that the laws of natureare controlled by the Absolute Personality of Godhead. God alone is thecontroller of nature and the natural laws. Ambitious materialistssometimes examine a fragment of the law of nature, but they never careto know the maker of these laws. Most of them do not believe in theexistence of an absolute person or God who controls the laws of nature.Rather, they simply concern themselves with the principles by whichdifferent elements interact, but they make no reference to the ultimatedirection which makes such interactions possible. They have no relevantquestions or answers in this regard. The second of the Vedanta-sutras,however, answers the essential question about Brahman by asserting thatthe Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Transcendence, is He from whomeverything is generated. Ultimately, He is the Supreme Person.     Not only is the foolish grhamedhi ignorant of the temporary natureof the particular type of body he has obtained, but he is also blind tothe actual nature of what is happening before him in the daily affairsof his life. He may see his father die, his mother die, or a relative orneighbor die, yet he does not make the relevant inquiries about whetheror not the other existing members of his family will die. Sometimes hethinks and knows that all the members of his family will die today ortomorrow and that he also will die. He may know that the whole familyshow--or, for that matter, the whole show of community, society, nation,and all such things--is but a temporary bubble in the air, having nopermanent value. Yet he is mad after such temporary arrangements anddoes not concern himself with any relevant inquiries. He has noknowledge as to where he has to go after his death. He works very hardfor the temporary arrangements of his family, society, or nation, but henever makes any future arrangement either for himself or for others whowill pass away from this present phase of life.     In a public vehicle like a railway carriage, we meet and sit downtogether with some unknown friends and become members of the samevehicle for a short time, but in due course we separate, never to meetagain. Similarly, in a long sojourn of life, we get a temporary sittingaccommodation in a so-called family, country, or society, but when thetime is up, we are unwillingly separated from one another, never to meetagain. There are so many questions relevant to our temporaryarrangements in life and our friends in these temporary arrangements,but a man who is a grhamedhi never inquires about things of a permanentnature. We are all busy making permanent plans in various degrees ofleadership, without knowing the permanent nature of things as they are.Sripada Sankaracarya, who especially strove to remove this ignorance insociety and who advocated the cult of spiritual knowledge in regard tothe all-pervading impersonal Brahman, said in despair, "Children areengaged in playing, young boys are engaged in so-called love affairswith young girls, and the old are seriously thoughtful about adjusting a
--- Page 36 ---
baffled life of struggle. But, alas, no one is prepared to inquire
relevantly into the science of Brahman, the Absolute Truth."     Sri Sukadeva Gosvami, who was asked for direction by MaharajaPariksit, responded to the king's relevant inquiries by advising him asfollows:
                           tasmad bharata sarvatma
                            bhagavan isvaro harih                           srotavyah kirtituvyas ca                          smarta vyas cecchatabhayam
     "O descendant of Bharata, it is the duty of mortal men to inquire
about, hear about, glorify, and meditate upon the Personality ofGodhead, who is the most attractive person because of His fullness inopulence. He is called Hari because He alone can undo the conditionalexistence of a living being. If we at all want to be freed fromconditional existence, we must make relevant inquiries about theAbsolute Truth so that He may be pleased to bestow upon us perfectfreedom in life." (Srimad-Bhagavatam 2.1.5)     Sri Sukadeva Gosvami has particularly used four words in regard tothe Absolute Personality of Godhead. These words distinguish theAbsolute Person, or Parabrahman, from other persons, who arequalitatively one with Him. The Absolute Personality of Godhead isaddressed as sarvatma, or all-pervading, because no one is aloof fromHim, although not everyone has this realization. The Personality ofGodhead, by His plenary representation, resides in everyone's heart asParamatma, the Supersoul, along with each individual soul. Thereforeevery individual soul has an intimate relationship with Him.Forgetfulness of this eternally existing intimate relationship with Himis the cause of conditional life since time immemorial. But because Heis Bhagavan, or the supreme personality, He can at once reciprocate theresponsive call of a devotee. Moreover, because He is the perfectperson, His beauty, opulence, fame, strength, knowledge, andrenunciation are all unlimited sources of transcendental bliss for theindividual soul. The individual soul becomes attracted by all thesedifferent opulences when they are imperfectly represented by otherconditioned souls, but the individual soul is not satisfied by suchimperfect representations, and therefore he perpetually seeks theperfect one. The Personality of Godhead's beauty has no comparison, nordo His knowledge and renunciation. But above all, He is isvara, or thesupreme controller. We are at present being controlled by the policeaction of this great king. This police control is imposed upon usbecause of our disobedience of law. But because the Lord is Hari, He isable to cause the disappearance of our conditional life by giving usfull freedom in spiritual existence. It is therefore the duty of everyman to make relevant inquiries about Him and thus go back to Godhead.Soul ResearchIn 1972, a distinguished panel met in Windsor, Ontario, and discussed"problems associated with attempts to defne the exact moment of death."Panel members included world-famous heart surgeon Dr. Wilfred G.Bigelow, Mr. Justice Edson L. Haines of the Ontario Supreme Court, andJ. francis Leddy, president of the University of Windsor. Dr. Bigelowupheld the existence of the soul and urged systematic research todetermine what the soul is and where it comes from. Dr. Bigelow's and
--- Page 37 ---
other panelists' comments were later published in the Montreal Gazette.
When the article came to the attention of Srila Prabhupada, he wrote aletter to Dr. Bigelow offering substantial Vedic knowledge of thescience of the soul and suggested a practical method for scientificallyunderstanding it. The Gazette article and Srila Prabhupada's responsefollow.Gazette Headline:Heart surgeon Wants to Know What a Soul Is     WINDSOR--A world-famous Canadian heart surgeon says he believes thebody has a soul which departs at death and theologians ought to try tofind out more about it.     Dr. Wilfred G. Bigelow, head of the cardiovascular surgery unit atToronto General Hospital, said that "as a person who believes there is asoul," he thought the time had come "to take the mystery out of this andfind out what it is."     Bigelow was a member of a panel which appeared before the EssexCounty Medical-Legal Society to discuss problems associated withattempts to define the exact moment of death.     The question has become vital in the age of transplants of heartsand other organs in cases when the donors are inevitably dying.     The Canadian Medical Association has produced a widely accepteddefinition of death as the moment when the patient is in coma, respondsto no stimulus of any kind, and brain waves recorded on a machine areflat.     The other members of the panel were Mr. Justice Edson L. Haines ofthe Ontario Supreme Court and J. Francis Leddy, president of theUniversity of Windsor.     Bigelow, elaborating on points he had raised during the discussion,said in an interview later that his thirty-two years as a surgeon hadleft him no doubts that there is a soul.     "There are certain cases where you happen to be present at themoment when people pass from a living state to death, and somemysterious changes take place.     "One of the most noticeable is the sudden lack of life or luster tothe eyes. They become opaque and literally lifeless.     "It's difficult to document what you observe. In fact, I don'tthink it can be documented very well."     Bigelow, who became world renowned for his pioneering work in the"deep freeze" surgical technique known as hypothermia and for his heartvalve surgery, said "soul research" should be undertaken by theology andallied disciplines within the university.     During this discussion Leddy said that "if there is a soul, you arenot going to see it. You are not going to find it."     "If there is a principle of vitality or life, what is it?" Theproblem was that "the soul doesn't exist anywhere specifically,geographically. It's everywhere and yet it's nowhere in the body."     It would "be nice to start experimenting, but I don't know how youare going to get on any of these things," Leddy said. He said thediscussion reminded him of the Soviet cosmonaut who returned from spaceto report there was no God, because he didn't see Him up there.     Maybe so, said Bigelow, but in modern medicine when something wasencountered that could not be explained, "the watchword is discover theanswer, take it into the laboratory, take it somewhere where you candiscover the truth."
--- Page 38 ---
     The central question, said Bigelow, was "where is the soul and
where does it come from?"Srila Prabhupada Gives the Vedic EvidenceMy dear Dr. Bigelow:     Please accept my greetings. Recently I have read an article in theGazette by Rae Corelli entitled "Heart Surgeon Wants to Know What a SoulIs," and it was very interesting. Your comments show great insight, andso I thought to write you on this matter. Perhaps you may know that I amthe founder-acarya of the International Society for KrishnaConsciousness. I have several temples in Canada--Montreal, Toronto,Vancouver, and Hamilton. This Krsna consciousness movement isspecifically meant to teach every soul his original, spiritual position.     Undoubtedly the soul is present in the heart of the living entity,and it is the source of all the energies for maintaining the body. Theenergy of the soul is spread all over the body, and this is known asconsciousness. Since this consciousness spreads the energy of the soulall over the body, one can feel pains and pleasures in any part of thebody. The soul is individual, and he is transmigrating from one body toanother, just as a person transmigrates from babyhood to childhood, fromchildhood to boyhood, from boyhood to youth, and then to advanced oldage. Then the change called death takes place when we change to a newbody, just as we change our old dress to a new dress. This is calledtransmigration of the soul.     When a soul wants to enjoy this material world, forgetting his realhome in the spiritual world, he takes this life of hard struggle forexistence. This unnatural life of repeated birth, death, disease, andold age can be stopped when his consciousness is dovetailed with thesupreme consciousness of God. That is the basic principle of our Krsnamovement.     As far as heart transplant is concerned, there is no question ofsuccess unless the soul is there in the heart. So the presence of thesoul has to be accepted. In sexual intercourse, if there is no soul,there is no conception, no pregnancy. Contraception deteriorates thewomb so that it no longer is a good place for the soul. That is againstthe order of God. By the order of God, a soul is sent to a particularwomb, but by this contraceptive he is denied that womb and has to beplaced in another. That is disobedience to the Supreme. For example,take a man who is supposed to live in a particular apartment. If thesituation there is so disturbed that he cannot enter the apartment, thenhe is put at a great disadvantage. That is illegal interference and ispunishable.     The undertaking of "soul research" would certainly mark theadvancement of science. But advancement of science will not be able tofind the soul. The soul's presence can simply be accepted oncircumstantial understanding. You will find in the Vedic literature thatthe dimension of the soul is one ten-thousandth the size of a point. Thematerial scientist cannot measure the length and breadth of a point.Therefore it is not possible for the material scientist to capture thesoul. You can simply accept the soul's existence by taking it fromauthority. What the greatest scientists are finding, we've explainedlong ago.     As soon as one understands the existence of the soul, he canimmediately understand the existence of God. The difference between Godand the soul is that God is a very great soul, and the living entity is
--- Page 39 ---
a very small soul; but qualitatively they are equal. Therefore God is
all-pervading, and the living entity is localized. But the nature andquality are the same.     The central question, you say, is "Where is the soul, and wheredoes it come from?" That is not difficult to understand. We have alreadydiscussed that the soul is residing in the heart of the living entityand that it takes shelter in another body after death. Originally thesoul comes from God. Just as a spark comes from fire, and when the sparkfalls down it appears to be extinguished, the spark of soul originallycomes from the spiritual world to the material world. In the materialworld he falls down into three different conditions, which are calledthe modes of nature. When a spark of fire falls on dry grass, the fieryquality continues; when the spark falls on the ground, it cannot displayits fiery manifestation unless the ground is favorably situated; andwhen the spark falls on water, it becomes extinguished. As such, we findthree kinds of living conditions. One living entity is completelyforgetful of his spiritual nature; another is almost forgetful but stillhas an instinct of spiritual nature; and another is completely in searchof spiritual perfection. There is a bona fide method for the attainmentof spiritual perfection by the spiritual spark of soul, and if he isproperly guided then he is very easily sent back home, back to Godhead,wherefrom he originally fell.     It will be a great contribution to human society if this authorizedinformation from the Vedic literature is presented to the modern worldon the basis of modern scientific understanding. The fact is alreadythere. It simply has to be presented for modern understanding.     Yours sincerely,     A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami