
                                Chapter Three
                            Discovering the RootsThe Immortal Nectar of the Bhagavad-gita
Through the centuries, India's greatest philosophers and spiritualistshave praised the Bhagavad-gita as the distilled essence of the eternalVedic wisdom. In his Meditations on the Bhagavad-gita, versified here,the renowned sixth-century philosopher Sankara glorifies the Gita andits divine author, Sri Krsna. Although universally celebrated as animpersonalist, here Sankara reveals his devotion to the originalpersonalform of God, Lord Sri Krsna. And Srila Prabhupada elucidates.                                    --1--
     O Bhagavad-gita,
     Through Thy eighteen chapters     Thou showerest upon man     The immortal nectar     Of the wisdom of the Absolute.
--- Page 59 ---
     O blessed Gita,
     By Thee, Lord Krsna Himself     Enlightened Arjuna.     Afterward, the ancient sage Vyasa     Included Thee in the Mahabharata.     O loving mother,     Destroyer of man's rebirth     Into the darkness of this mortal world,     Upon Thee I meditate.                                    --2--
     Salutations to thee, O Vyasa.
     Thou art of mighty intellect,     And thine eyes     Are large as the petals     Of the full-blown lotus.     It was thou     Who brightened this lamp of wisdom,     Filling it with the oil     Of the Mahabharata.
                                   Purport
     Sripada Sankaracarya was an impersonalist from the materialisticpoint of view. But he never denied the spiritual form known as sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, or the eternal, all-blissful form of knowledge thatexisted before the material creation. When he spoke of Supreme Brahmanas impersonal, he meant that the Lord's sac-cid-ananda form was not tobe confused with a material conception of personality. In the verybeginning of his commentary on the Gita, he maintains that Narayana, theSupreme Lord, is transcendental to the material creation. The Lordexisted before the creation as the transcendental personality, and Hehas nothing to do with material personality. Lord Krsna is the sameSupreme Personality, and He has no connection with a material body. Hedescends in His spiritual, eternal form, but foolish people mistake Hisbody to be like ours. Sankara's preaching of impersonalism is especiallymeant for teaching foolish persons who consider Krsna to be an ordinaryman composed of matter.     No one would care to read the Gita if it had been spoken by amaterial man, and certainly Vyasadeva would not have bothered toincorporate it into the history of the Mahabharata. According to theabove verses, Mahabharata is the history of the ancient world, andVyasadeva is the writer of this great epic. The Bhagavad-gita isidentical with Krsna; and because Krsna is the Absolute SupremePersonality of Godhead, there is no difference between Krsna and Hiswords. Therefore the Bhagavad-gita is as worshipable as Lord KrsnaHimself, both being absolute. One who hears the Bhagavad-gita "as is"actually hears the words directly from the lotus lips of the Lord. Butunfortunate persons say that the Gita is too antiquated for the modernman, who wants to find out God by speculation or meditation.                                    --3--
     I salute Thee, O Krsna,
     O Thou who art the refuge     Of ocean-born Laksmi
--- Page 60 ---
     And all who take refuge
     At Thy lotus feet.     Thou art indeed     The wish-fulfilling tree     For Thy devotee.     Thy one hand holds a staff     For driving cows,     And Thy other hand is raised--     The thumb touching the tip     Of Thy forefinger,     Indicating divine knowledge.     Salutations to Thee, O Supreme Lord,     For Thou art the milker     Of the ambrosia of the Gita.
                                   Purport     Sripada Sankaracarya explicitly says, "You fools, just worship
Govinda and that Bhagavad-gita spoken by Narayana Himself," yet foolishpeople still conduct their research work to find out Narayana;consequently they are wretched, and they waste their time for nothing.Narayana is never wretched nor daridra; rather, He is worshiped by thegoddess of fortune, Laksmi, as well as by all living entities. Sankaradeclared himself to be "Brahman," but he admits Narayana, or Krsna, tobe the Supreme Personality who is beyond the material creation. Heoffers his respects to Krsna as the Supreme Brahman, or Parabrahman,because He (Krsna) is worshipable by everyone. Only the fools andenemies of Krsna, who cannot understand what the Bhagavad-gita is(though they make commentaries on it), say, "It is not the personalKrsna to whom we have to surrender ourselves utterly, but the unborn,beginningless Eternal who speaks through Krsna." Fools rush in whereangels fear to tread. Whereas Sankara, the greatest of theimpersonalists, offers his due respects to Krsna and His book theBhagavad-gita, the foolish say that "we need not surrender to thepersonal Krsna." Such unenlightened people do not know that Krsna isabsolute and that there is no difference between His inside and outside.The difference of inside and outside is experienced in the dual,material world. In the absolute world there is no such difference,because in the absolute everything is spiritual (sac-cid-ananda), andNarayana, or Krsna, belongs to the absolute world. In the absolute worldthere is only the factual personality, and there is no distinctionbetween body and soul.                                    --4--
     The Upanisads
     Are as a herd of cows,     Lord Krsna, son of a cowherd,     Is their milker,     Arjuna is the calf,     The supreme nectar of the Gita     Is the milk,     And the wise man     Of purified intellect     Is the drinker.
--- Page 61 ---
                                   Purport
     Unless one understands spiritual variegatedness, one cannot
understand the transcendental pastimes of the Lord. In the Brahma-samhita it is said that Krsna's name, form, quality, pastimes,entourage, and paraphernalia are all ananda-cinmaya-rasa--in short,everything of His transcendental association is of the same compositionof spiritual bliss, knowledge, and eternity. There is no end to Hisname, form, etc., unlike in the material world, where all things havetheir end. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita, only fools deride Him;whereas it is Sankara, the greatest impersonalist, who worships Him, Hiscows, and His pastimes as the son of Vasudeva and pleasure of Devaki.                                    --5--
     Thou son of Vasudeva,
     Destroyer of the demons Kamsa and Canura,     Thou supreme bliss of Mother Devaki,     O Thou, guru of the universe,     Teacher of the worlds,     Thee, O Krsna, I salute.                                   Purport
     Sankara describes Him as the son of Vasudeva and Devaki. Does he
mean thereby that he is worshiping an ordinary, material man? Heworships Krsna because he knows that Krsna's birth and activities areall supernatural. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita (4.9), Krsna's birthand activities are mysterious and transcendental, and therefore only thedevotees of Krsna can know them perfectly. Sankara was not such a foolthat he would accept Krsna as an ordinary man and at the same time offerHim all devotional obeisances, knowing Him as the son of Devaki andVasudeva. According to the Bhagavad-gita, only by knowing thetranscendental birth and activities of Krsna can one attain liberationby acquiring a spiritual form like Krsna's. There are five differentkinds of liberation. One who merges into the spiritual auras of Krsna,known as the impersonal Brahman effulgence, does not fully develop hisspiritual body. But one who fully develops his spiritual existencebecomes an associate of Narayana or Krsna in different spiritual abodes.One who enters into the abode of Narayana develops a spiritual formexactly like Narayana's (four-handed), and one who enters into thehighest spiritual abode of Krsna, known as Goloka Vrndavana, develops aspiritual form of two hands like Krsna's. Sankara, as an incarnation ofLord Siva, knows all these spiritual existences, but he did not disclosethem to his then Buddhist followers because it was impossible for themto know about the spiritual world. Lord Buddha preached that void is theultimate goal, so how could his followers understand spiritualvariegatedness? Therefore Sankara said, brahma satyam jagan mithya, or,material variegatedness is false but spiritual variegatedness is fact.In the Padma Purana Lord Siva has admitted that he had to preach thephilosophy of maya, or illusion, in the Kali-yuga as another edition ofthe "void" philosophy of Buddha. He had to do this by the order of theLord for specific reasons. He disclosed his real mind, however, byrecommending that people worship Krsna, for no one can be saved simply
--- Page 62 ---
by mental speculations composed of word jugglery and grammatical
maneuvers. Sankara further instructs:
                        bhaja govindam bhaja govindam
                          bhaja govindam mudha-mate                           samprapte sannihite kale                       na hi na hi raksati dukrn-karane
     "You intellectual fools, just worship Govinda, just worship
Govinda, just worship Govinda. Your grammatical knowledge and wordjugglery will not save you at the time of death."                                    --6--
     Of that terrifying river
     Of the battlefield of Kuruksetra     Over which the Pandavas victoriously crossed,     Bhisma and Drona were as the high banks,     Jayadratha as the river's water,     The King of Gandhara the blue water-lily,     Salya the shark, Krpa the current,     Karna the mighty waves,     Asvatthama and Vikarna the dread alligators,     And Duryodhana the very whirlpool--     But Thou, O Krsna, wast the ferryman!
                                    --7--     May the spotless lotus of the Mahabharata
     That grows on the waters     Of the words of Vyasa     And of which the Bhagavad-gita     Is the irresistibly sweet fragrance     And its tales of heroes     The full-blown petals     Fully opened by the talk of Lord Hari,     Who destroys the sins     Of Kali-yuga,     And on which daily light     The nectar-seeking souls,     As so many bees     Swarming joyously--     May this lotus of the Mahabharata     Bestow on us the highest good.
                                    --8--     Salutations to Lord Krsna
     The embodiment of supreme bliss,     By whose grace and compassion     The dumb become eloquent     And the lame scale mountains--     Him I salute!
                                   Purport
--- Page 63 ---
     Foolish followers of foolish speculators cannot understand the
meaning of offering salutations to Lord Krsna, the embodiment of bliss.Sankara himself offered his salutations to Lord Krsna so that some ofhis intelligent followers might understand the real fact by the exampleset by their great master, Sankara, the incarnation of Lord Siva. Butthere are many obstinate followers of Sankara who refuse to offer theirsalutations to Lord Krsna and instead mislead innocent persons byinjecting materialism into the Bhagavad-gita and confusing innocentreaders by their commentaries, and consequently the readers never havethe opportunity to become blessed by offering salutations to Lord Krsna,the cause of all causes. The greatest disservice to humanity is to keepmankind in darkness about the science of Krsna, or Krsna consciousness,by distorting the sense of the Gita.
                                    --9--     Salutations to that supreme shining one
     Whom the creator Brahma, Varuna,     Indra, Rudra, Marut, and all divine beings     Praise with hymns,     Whose glories are sung     By the verses of the Vedas,     Of whom the singers of Sama sing     And of whose glories the Upanisads     Proclaim in full choir,     Whom the yogis see     With their minds absorbed     In perfect meditation,     And of whom all the hosts     Of gods and demons     Know not the limitations.     To Him, the Supreme God, Krsna, be all salutations--     Him we salute! Him we salute! Him we salute!
                                   Purport     By recitation of the ninth verse of his meditation, quoted from the
Srimad-Bhagavatam, Sankara has indicated that Lord Krsna is worshipableby one and all, including himself. He gives hints to materialists,impersonalists, mental speculators, "void" philosophers, and all othercandidates subjected to the punishment of material miseries--just offersalutations to Lord Krsna, who is worshiped by Brahma, Siva, Varuna,Indra, and all other demigods. He has not mentioned, however, the nameof Visnu, because Visnu is identical with Krsna. The Vedas and theUpanisads are meant for understanding the process by which one cansurrender unto Krsna. The yogis try to see Him (Krsna) within themselvesby meditation. In other words, it is for all the demigods and demons whodo not know where the ultimate end is that Sankara teaches, and heespecially instructs the demons and the fools to offer salutations toKrsna and His words, the Bhagavad-gita, by following in his footsteps.Only by such acts will the demons be benefited, not by misleading theirinnocent followers by so-called mental speculations or show-bottlemeditations. Sankara directly offers salutations to Krsna, as if to show
--- Page 64 ---
the fools, who are searching after light, that here ls light like the
sun. But the fallen demons are like owls that will not open their eyeson account of their fear of the sunlight itself. These owls will neveropen their eyes to see the sublime light of Krsna and His words theBhagavad-gita. They will, however, comment on the Gita with their closedowl-eyes to mislead their unfortunate readers and followers. Sankara,however, discloses the light to his less intelligent followers and showsthat the Bhagavad-gita and Krsna are the only source of light. This isall to teach the sincere seekers of truth to offer salutation to LordKrsna and thus surrender unto Him without misgivings. That is thehighest perfection of life, and that is the highest teaching of Sankara,the great learned scholar whose teachings drove the voidist philosophyof Buddha out of India, the land of knowledge. Om tat sat.The Scriptural Basis of Krsna Consciousness
On January 11, 1970, an article in the Los Angeles Times reported that
faculty members at the University of California at Berkeley, includingDr. J. F. Staal, professor of philosophy and South Asian languages, hadturned down a request to grant credit for an experimental course inKrsna consciousness to have been taught by Hans Kary, president of theHare Krsna movement's Berkeley center. In rejecting the proposed course,Dr. Staal suggested that the devotees "spend too much time chanting todevelop a philosophy." When the article came to the attention of SrilaPrabhupada, the founder and spiritual master ofthe Hare Krsna movement,he initiated an unusual correspondence with the renowned professor.
Excerpt from the Los Angeles Times Article
     "Dr. J. F. Staal, Professor of Philosophy and Near Eastern [sic]Languages at UC Berkeley and an instructor in Indian philosophy,believes that the Krsna sect is an authentic Indian religion and thatits adherents are sincere. He attributes the Society's rapid increase inmembers to the tendency of today's younger generation to rejectorganized churchgoing while at the same time searching for fulfillmentof a belief in mysticism.     "He points out, however, that persons who turn away fromChristianity, Muhammadanism, and Judaism have usually lost faith withthe personal god of those religions and are looking for a mysticalreligion without absolutes.     " `These people in the Krsna movement have turned to Hinduism, but,curiously, it is a cult that is highly personalistic,' Staal said. `Theyaccept a personal god, Krsna, and Christianity has that. I feel thatthey have transferred some of their Christian background to a Hindusect.'     "He also feels that they spend too much time chanting to develop aphilosophy. On these grounds he and others on the faculty turned downthe request to grant credit for an experimental course in Krsnaconsciousness that will be taught during the winter quarter by HansKary, president of the sect's Berkeley temple."
Srila Prabhupada's Letter to the Los Angeles TimesEditor Los Angeles TimesDear Sir:
--- Page 65 ---
     With reference to your article in the Los Angeles Times dated
Sunday, January 11, 1970, under the heading "Krsna Chant," I beg topoint out that the Hindu religion is perfectly based on the personalconception of God, or Visnu. The impersonal conception of God is a sideissue, or one of the three features of God. The Absolute Truth isultimately the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Paramatma conceptionis the localized aspect of His omnipresence, and the impersonalconception is the aspect of His greatness and eternity. But all thesecombined together make the Complete Whole.     Dr. J. F. Staal's statement that the Krsna cult is a combination ofChristian and Hindu religion, as if something manufactured byconcoction, is not correct. If Christian, Muhammadan, or Buddhistreligions are personal, that is quite welcome. But the Krsna religionhas been personal from a time long, long ago when Christian, Muhammadan,and Buddhist religions had not yet come into existence. According to theVedic conception, religion is basically made by the personal God as Hislaws. Religion cannot be manufactured by man or anyone except Godsuperior to man. Religion is the law of God only.     Unfortunately, all the svamis who came before me in this countrystressed the impersonal aspect of God, without sufficient knowledge ofGod's personal aspect. In the Bhagavad-gita, therefore, it is said thatonly less intelligent persons consider that God is originally impersonalbut assumes a form when He incarnates. The Krsna philosophy, however,based on the authority of the Vedas, is that originally the AbsoluteTruth is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His plenary expansion ispresent in everyone's heart in His localized aspect, and the impersonalBrahman effulgence is the transcendental light and heat distributedeverywhere.     In the Bhagavad-gita it is clearly said that the aim of the Vedicway of searching out the Absolute Truth is to find the personal God. Onewho is satisfied only with the other aspects of the Absolute Truth,namely the Paramatma feature or the Brahman feature, is to be consideredpossessed of a poor fund of knowledge. Recently we have published ourSri Isopanisad, a Vedic literature, and in this small booklet we havethoroughly discussed this point.     As far as the Hindu religion is concerned, there are millions ofKrsna temples in India, and there is not a single Hindu who does notworship Krsna. Therefore, this Krsna consciousness movement is not aconcocted idea. We invite all scholars, philosophers, religionists, andmembers of the general public to understand this movement by criticalstudy. And if one does so seriously, one will understand the sublimeposition of this great movement.     The chanting process is also authorized. Professor Staal's feelingof disgust in the matter of constant chanting of the holy name of Krsnais a definite proof of his lack of knowledge in this authorized movementof Krsna consciousness. Instead of turning down the request to giveKary's course credit, he and all other learned professors of theUniversity of California at Berkeley should patiently hear about thetruth of this authorized movement so much needed at present in godlesssociety. [Credit for the course was later established.] This is the onlymovement which can save the confused younger generation. I shall inviteall responsible guardians of this country to understand thistranscendental movement and then give us all honest facilities to spreadit for everyone's benefit.
--- Page 66 ---
     A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
     Spiritual Master of the Hare Krsna Movement
The Exchange Between Srila Prabhupada and Dr. StaalSwami A. C. BhaktivedantaDear Swamiji:
     Thank you very much for sending me a copy of your letter to the LosAngeles Times, now also published in the Daily Californian. I think youwill agree with me that apart from publicity, little is gained bydiscussing religious or philosophic issues through interviews andletters in the press; but allow me to make two brief observations.     First, I know that devotion to Krsna is old (though definitely notas old as the Vedas) and has never been influenced by Christianity,Islam, or Judaism (I never referred to Buddhism in this connection). Thedifferences between the personal and impersonal are relatively vague,but adopting this distinction for simplicity, I expressed surprise atseeing people who have grown up in a Western culture which stresses thepersonal take to an Indian cult which does the same. I am less surprisedwhen people who are dissatisfied with Western monotheism take to anIndian philosophy which stresses an impersonal absolute.     Second, I never expressed nor felt disgust at the chanting of thename of Krsna. I am not only not irritated at it (like some people), butI rather like it. But it is an indisputable fact that the Bhagavad-gita(not to mention the Vedas) does not require such constant chanting. TheGita deals with quite different subjects, which I treat at some lengthin my courses on the philosophies of India.     Thanking you,     Yours sincerely,     J. F. Staal     Professor of Philosophy and of South Asian LanguagesJ. F. StaalProfessor of Philosophy and of South Asian LanguagesUniversity of CaliforniaBerkeley, California
My dear Professor Staal:
     I thank you very much for your kind letter dated January 23, 1970.In the last paragraph of your letter you have mentioned that you are notirritated at the chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra (like some people),but rather like it. This has given me much satisfaction, and I amsending herewith a copy of our magazine, Back to Godhead, issue number28, in which you will find how the students [at a program at Ohio StateUniversity] liked this chanting of the Hare Krsna mantra, although allof them were neophytes to this cult of chanting. Actually this chantingis very pleasing to the heart and is the best means of infusingspiritual consciousness, or Krsna consciousness, into the hearts ofpeople in general.     This is the easiest process of spiritual realization and isrecommended in the Vedas. In the Brhan-naradiya Purana it is clearlystated that it is only chanting of the holy name of Hari [Krsna] thatcan save people from the problems of materialistic existence, and there
--- Page 67 ---
is no other alternative, no other alternative, no other alternative in
this age of Kali.     Western culture is monotheistic, but Westerners are being misled byimpersonal Indian speculation. The young people of the West arefrustrated because they are not diligently taught about monotheism. Theyare not satisfied with this process of teaching and understanding. TheKrsna consciousness movement is a boon to them, because they are beingreally trained to understand Western monotheism under the authoritativeVedic system. We do not simply theoretically discuss; rather, we learnby the prescribed method of Vedic regulations.     But I am surprised to see that in the last paragraph of your letteryou say, "It is an indisputable fact that the Bhagavad-gita (not tomention the Vedas) does not require such constant chanting." I thinkthat you have missed the following verse in the Bhagavad-gita, apartfrom many other similar verses:
                            satatam kirtayanto mam
                           yatantas ca drdha-vratah                          namasyantas ca mam bhaktya                             nitya-yukta upasate                                  (Bg. 9.14)
     The engagement of the great souls, freed from delusion and perfect
in their realization of God, is described here: satatam kirtayanto mam--they are always (satatam) chanting (kirtayantah) My glories and--nitya-yukta upasate--always worshiping Me (Krsna).     So I do not know how you can say "indisputable." And, if you wantreferences from the Vedas, I can give you many. In the Vedas, the chieftranscendental vibration omkara is also Krsna. Pranava omkara is thedivine substance of the Vedas. Following the Vedas means chanting theVedic mantras, and no Vedic mantra is complete without omkara. In theMandukya Upanisad, omkara is stated to be the most auspicious soundrepresentation of the Supreme Lord. This is also confirmed again in theAtharva Veda. Omkara is the sound representation of the Supreme Lord andis therefore the principal word in the Vedas. In this connection, theSupreme Lord, Krsna, says, pranavah sarva-vedesu: "I am the syllable omin all the Vedic mantras." (Bg. 7.8)     Furthermore, in Bhagavad-gita, Chapter Fifteen, verse 15, Krsnasays, "I am seated in everyone's heart. By all the Vedas, I am to beknown; I am the compiler of Vedanta, and I know Veda as it is." TheSupreme Lord, seated in everyone's heart, is described in both theMundaka and Svetasvatara Upanisads: dva suparna sayuja sakhaya... TheSupreme Lord and the individual soul are sitting in the body like twofriendly birds in a tree. One bird is eating the fruits of the tree, orreactions of material activities, and the other bird, the Supersoul, iswitnessing.     The goal of Vedantic study, therefore, is to know the Supreme Lord,Krsna. This point is stressed in the Bhagavad-gita, Chapter Eight, verse13, where it is stated that by the mystic yoga process, ultimatelyvibrating the sacred syllable om, one attains to His supreme spiritualplanet. In the Vedanta-sutras, which you have certainly read, the FourthChapter, adhikarana 4, sutra 22, states positively, anavrttih sabdat:"By sound vibration one becomes liberated." By devotional service, byunderstanding well the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can go to His
--- Page 68 ---
abode and never come back again to this material condition. How is it
possible? The answer is, simply by chanting His name constantly.     This is accepted by the exemplary disciple, Arjuna, who hasperfectly learned the conclusion of spiritual science from theyogesvara, the master of mystic knowledge, Krsna. Recognizing Krsna tobe the Supreme Brahman, Arjuna addresses Him, sthane hrsikesa...: "Theworld becomes joyful hearing Your name, and thus do all become attachedto You." (Bg. 11.36) The process of chanting is herein authorized as thedirect means of contacting the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personalityof Godhead. Simply by chanting the holy name Krsna, the soul isattracted by the Supreme Person, Krsna, to go home, back to Godhead.     In the Narada-pancaratra it is stated that all the Vedic rituals,mantras, and understanding are compressed into the eight words HareKrsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare. Similarly, in the Kali-santarana Upanisad it is stated that these sixteen words, Hare Krsna,Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,Hare Hare, are especially meant for counteracting the degrading andcontaminating influence of this materialistic age of Kali.     All these points are elaborately presented in my book Teachings ofLord Caitanya.     The process of chanting is, therefore, not only the sublime methodfor practical perfection of life but the authorized Vedic principleinaugurated by the greatest Vedic scholar and devotee, Lord Caitanya(whom we consider an incarnation of Krsna). We are simply following inHis authorized footsteps.     The scope of the Krsna consciousness movement is universal. Theprocess for regaining one's original spiritual status of eternal life,full with bliss and knowledge, is not abstract, dry theorizing.Spiritual life is not described in the Vedas as theoretical, dry, orimpersonal. The Vedas aim at the inculcation of pure love of God only,and this harmonious conclusion is practically realized by the Krsnaconsciousness movement, or by chanting the Hare Krsna mantra.     As the goal of spiritual realization is only one, love of God, sothe Vedas stand as a single comprehensive whole in the matter oftranscendental understanding. Only the incomplete views of variousparties apart from the bona fide Vedic lines of teaching give arapturous appearance to the Bhagavad-gita. The reconciliative factoradjusting all apparently diverse propositions of the Vedas is theessence of the Veda, or Krsna consciousness (love of God).
     Thanking you once again,
     Yours sincerely,     A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Swami A. C. Bhaktivedanta
Dear Swamiji:     Thank you very much for your kindness in sending me your long andinteresting letter of January 30, together with the last issue of Backto Godhead. So far I have had a few discussions with members of yoursociety here, but they were not entirely satisfactory from my point ofview. But now I have your much more authoritative letter, whereby thediscussion moves to a higher level.
--- Page 69 ---
     And yet, I am afraid, you have not convinced me that all the
scriptures you quote prescribe only chanting of the name of Krsna. Letme refer only to the most important ones.     In the Bhagavad-gita (9.14), kirtayantah need not mean chanting ofthe name of Krsna. It may mean glorifying, chanting, reciting, talking,and refer to songs, hymns, descriptions, or conversations. Thecommentators take it that way. Sankara in his commentary merely repeatsthe word, but Anandagiri in his vyakhya classes kirtana as vedanta-sravanam pranava-japas ca, "listening to the Vedanta and muttering om"(that the Vedic om is Krsna is said in the Bhagavad-gita, where Krsna isalso identified with many other things, and which is smrti, but not inthe Vedas, which are sruti). Another commentator, Hanuman, in hisPaisaca-bhasya, says that kirtayantah merely means bhasamanah--"talking[about]."     More important, I think, than the precise meaning of this word, isthat the entire verse does not require that everyone always engage inkirtana, but merely states that some great souls do so. This is obviousfrom the next verse, which states that anye, "others," engage in jnana:yajnena... yajanto mam, "worshiping me... with the worship ofknowledge." The Bhagavad-gita is broad-minded and tolerant of a varietyof religious approaches, although it also stresses one aspect above allothers (i.e., sarva-phala-tyaga).     Finally, in the last sutra of the Vedanta-sutra, anavrttihsabdat..., sabda refers to the scripture or to the revelation of theVedas, as is clear from the context and from the commentators. Sankaraquotes a number of texts (ending with ity adi-sabdebhyah, "according tothese sabdas") to support this, i.e., to support the statement that"according to the scripture there is no return." He also refers to sabdain this sutra by saying mantrartha-vadadi..., "mantras, descriptions,etc." Vacaspati Misra in the Bhamati supports this and clarifies itfurther by adding that a contrary view is sruti-smrti-virodhah, "inconflict with the smrti and the sruti."     Thanking you once again for your kind attention.     Yours very sincerely,     J. F. Staal
J. F. Staal
Professor of Philosophy and of South Asian Languages
My dear Dr. Staal:
     I am very glad to receive your letter dated Sunday, February 8,1970. I am very much pleased also to note the contents.     Regarding convincing you that all scriptures prescribe chanting ofthe name of Krsna, I can simply present the authority of Lord Caitanya.Lord Caitanya recommended, kirtanlyah sada harih ["Hari, Krsna, isconstantly to be praised" (Siksastaka 3)]. Similarly, Madhvacaryaquotes, vede ramayane caiva harih sarvatra glyate ["Hari is sung abouteverywhere in the Vedas and Ramayana"]. Similarly, in the Bhagavad-gita(15.15) the Lord says, vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah ["By all theVedas, I am to be known"].     In this way we find all the scriptures aiming at the SupremePerson. In the Rg Veda (1.22.20) the mantra is om tad visnoh paramampadam sada pasyanti surayah ["The demigods are always looking to thatsupreme abode of Visnu"]. The whole Vedic process, therefore, is to
--- Page 70 ---
understand Lord Visnu, and any scripture is directly or indirectly
chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord, Visnu.     Regarding the Bhagavad-gita, verse 9.14, kirtayantah certainlymeans glorifying, chanting, reciting, and talking, as you have said; butglorifying, chanting, or reciting about whom? It is certainly Krsna. Theword used in this connection is mam ["Me"]. Therefore, we do notdisagree when a person glorifies Krsna, as Sukadeva did in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. This is also kirtana. The highest among all Vedicliteratures is the proper place for such glorification of the SupremeLord, Krsna, and this is to be well understood from the verse:
                      nigama -kalpataror galitam phalam
                      suka-mukhad amrta-dra va-samyutam                       pibata bhaga vatam rasam alayam                       muhur aho rasika bhuvi bhavukah
     "O expert and thoughtful men, relish Srimad-Bhagavatam, the mature
fruit of the desire tree of Vedic literatures. It emanated from the lipsof Sri Sukadeva Gosvami. Therefore this fruit has become even moretasteful, although its nectarean juice was already relishable for all,including liberated souls." (Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.1.3)     It is said that Maharaja Pariksit attained salvation simply byhearing, and similarly Sukadeva Gosvami attained salvation simply bychanting. In our devotional service there are nine different methods forachieving the same goal, love of Godhead, and the first process ishearing. This hearing process is called sruti. The next process ischanting. The chanting process is smrti. We accept both sruti and smrtisimultaneously. We consider sruti the mother and smrti the sister,because a child hears from the mother and then again learns from thesister by description.     Sruti and smrti are two parallel lines. Srila Rupa Gosvamitherefore says:
                            sruti-smrti-puranadi-
                            pancaratra-vidhim vina                           aikantiki harer bhaktir                             utpatayaiva kaipate(Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.101)
     That is, without references to sruti, smrti, Puranas, and
Pancaratras, unadulterated devotional service is never achieved.Therefore, anyone who shows a devotional ecstasy without reference tothe sastras [Vedic scriptures] simply creates disturbances. On the otherhand, if we simply stick to the srutis, then we become veda-vada-ratah,who are not very much appreciated in the Bhagavad-gita.     Therefore Bhagavad-gita, although smrti, is the essence of allVedic scripture, sarvopanisado gavah. It is just like a cow which isdelivering the milk, or the essence of all the Vedas and Upanisads, andall the acaryas, including Sankaracarya, accept the Bhagavad-gita assuch. Therefore you cannot deny the authority of the Bhagavad-gitabecause it is smrti; that view is sruti-smrti-virodhah, "in conflictwith the smrti and the sruti," as you have correctly said.     Regarding Anandagiri's quotation that kirtana means vedanta-sravanam prana va japas ca ["listening to the Vedanta and muttering om"],
--- Page 71 ---
the knower of Vedanta is Krsna, and He is the compiler of Vedanta. He is
veda-vit and vedanta-krt. So where is there a greater opportunity forvedanta-sravana than to hear it from Krsna?     Regarding the next verse, in which it is mentioned that jnana-yajnena... yajanto mam, the object of worship is Krsna, as indicated bymam ["Me"]. The process is described in the Isopanisad, mantra 11:
                            vidyam cavidyam ca yas
                             tad vedobhayam saha                            avidyaya mrtyum tirtva                             vidyayamrtam asnute
     "Only one who can learn the process of nescience and that of
transcendental knowledge side by side can transcend the influence ofrepeated birth and death and enjoy the full blessings of immortality."     The culture of vidya, or transcendental knowledge, is essential forthe human being, otherwise the culture of avidya, or nescience, bindshim to conditional existence on the material platform. Materialisticexistence means the pursuit or culture of sense gratification, and thiskind of knowledge of sense gratification (avdiya) means advancement ofrepeated birth and death. Those who are absorbed in such knowledgecannot learn any lesson from the laws of nature, and they do the samethings over repeatedly, being enamored of the beauty of illusory things.Vidya, or factual knowledge, on the other hand, means to know thoroughlythe process of nescient activities while at the same time culturingtranscendental science and thereby undeviatingly following the path ofliberation.     Liberation is the enjoyment of the full blessings of immortality.This immortality is enjoyed in the eternal kingdom of God (sambhuty-amrtam asnute), the region of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and isthe result obtained by worshiping the Supreme Lord, the cause of allcauses, sambhavat. So in this way real knowledge, vidya, means toworship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna; that is jnana-yajnena, the worship of knowledge.     This jnana-yajnena... yajanto mam is the perfection of knowledge,as stated in the Bhagavad-gita (7.19):
                            bahunam janmanam ante
                           jnanavan mam prapadyate                             vasudevah sarvam iti                            sa mahatma sudurlabhah
     "After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge
surrenders unto Me [Krsna], knowing Me to be the cause of all causes,and all that is. Such a great soul is very rare."     If one has not yet come to this conclusion of knowledge and simplyindulges in dry speculation without Krsna, then his hard speculativelabor is something like beating empty husks of grain. The unhulled riceand the empty husks of rice look very much the same. One who knows howto get the grain out of the unhulled rice is wise, but one who beats onthe empty husk, thinking to get some result, is simply wasting his laboruselessly. Similarly, if one studies the Vedas without finding the goalof the Vedas, Krsna, he simply wastes his valuable time.
--- Page 72 ---
     So to cultivate knowledge for worshiping Krsna culminates after
many, many births and deaths when one actually becomes wise. When onebecomes wise in this way, he surrenders to Krsna, recognizing Him atlast to be the cause of all causes and all that is. That sort of greatsoul is very rare. So those who have surrendered to Krsna life and soulare rare sudurlabha mahatmas. They are not ordinary mahatmas.     By the grace of Lord Caitanya that highest perfectional status oflife is being distributed very freely. The effect is also veryencouraging; otherwise, how are boys and girls without any background ofVedic culture quickly occupying the posts of rare mahatmas simply byvibrating this transcendental sound, Hare Krsna? And simply on the basisof this chanting, the majority of them (those who are very sincere) aresteady in devotional service and are not falling down to the fourprinciples of material sinful life, namely (1) meat-eating, (2) illicitsexual connection, (3) taking of intoxicants, including coffee, tea, andtobacco, and (4) gambling. And that is the last sutra of the Vedanta-sutra, i.e., anavrttih sabdat ["By sound vibration one becomesliberated"].     One has to learn by the result (phalena pariclyate). Our studentsare ordered to act like this, and they are not falling down. That theyare remaining on the platform of pure spiritual life without hankeringto culture the above principles of avidya, or sense gratification, isthe test of their proper understanding of the Vedas. They do not comeback to the material platform, because they are relishing the nectareanfruit of love of God.     Sarva-phala-tyaga ["renunciation of all the fruits of one's work"]is explained in the Bhagavad-gita by the Lord Himself in the wordssarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam saranam vraja: "Give up everything andsimply surrender unto Me [Krsna]." The Hare Krsna mantra means "OSupreme Energy of Krsna and O Lord Krsna, please engage me in Youreternal service." So we have given up everything and are simply engagedin the service of the Lord. What Krsna orders us to do is our onlyengagement. We have given up all resultant actions of karma, jnana, andyoga; and that is the stage of pure devotional service, bhaktir uttama.     Yours sincerely,     A. C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiSwami A. C. BhaktivedantaFounder-AcaryaInternational Society for Krishna ConsciousnessDear Swamiji:     Thank you very much for your very interesting letter of February15, 1970, with enclosure.     I am afraid that whenever you quote a passage purporting to showthat only the chanting of the name Krsna is required, I can quoteanother one which requires something else, adding, yadi sloko 'pipramanam, ayam api slokah pramanam bha vitum arhati: "If mere verses areauthoritative, this verse also ought to be regarded as authoritative."And there may be no end to this in the foreseeable future, as Patanjalialso says, mahan hi sabdasya prayoga-visayah: "For vast is the domainfor the use of words."    Yours very sincerely,    J. F. Staal
Dear Dr. Staal:
--- Page 73 ---
     I beg to thank you very much for your kind letter dated February
25, 1970. I am sorry that I could not reply to your letter earlierbecause I was a little busy in the matter of purchasing a new churchestate at the above address. We have secured a very nice place for aseparate temple, lecture room, my quarters, and the devotees'residential quarters, all together in a nice place with all the modernamenities.     I beg to request you to visit this place at your convenience, andif you kindly let me know a day before, my students will be very glad toreceive you properly.     Regarding our correspondence, actually this quotation and counter-quotation cannot solve the problem. In a court both the learned lawyersquote from law books, but that is not the solution to the case. Thedetermination of the case is the judgment of the presiding judge. Soargument cannot bring us to a conclusion.     The scriptural quotations are sometimes contradictory, and everyphilosopher has a different opinion, because without putting forward adifferent thesis, no one can become a famous philosopher. It istherefore difficult to arrive at the right conclusion. The conclusionis, as above mentioned, to accept the judgment of authority. We followthe authority of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is nondifferent fromKrsna, and His version according to Vedic scripture is that in this agethis chanting is the only solution for all problems of life. And that isactually being shown by practical experience.     Recently there was a big procession of our students in Berkeley onthe Advent Day of Lord Caitanya, and the public has remarked as follows:"This crowd of men is not like others, who assemble to break windows andcreate havoc." This is also confirmed by the police in the followingwords: "Members of the Krsna consciousness movement cooperated fullywith the police, and their efforts to maintain peaceful order throughoutthe parade were so successful that only minimal police involvement wasrequired."     Similarly, in Detroit there was a big peace march, and our men wereappreciated as "angels" in the crowd. So this Krsna consciousnessmovement is actually needed at the present moment as the panacea for allkinds of problems in human society.     Other quotations will not act very appreciably at this time. In adrugstore there may be many medicines, and all may be genuine, but whatis required is that an experienced physician prescribe medicine for aparticular patient. We cannot say in this case, "This is also medicine,and this is also medicine." No. The medicine which is effective for aparticular person is the medicine for him--phalena pariciate.     Yours very sincerely,     A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Final Note by Srila Prabhupada
     In a court of justice two lawyers put forward their respectiverelevant arguments taken from the authorized law books to decide apoint, but it is up to the judge to decide the case in favor of one ofthe litigants. When the opposing lawyers put forward their arguments,both of them are legal and bona fide, but the judgment is given as towhich argument is applicable to the particular case.     Lord Caitanya gives His judgment on the authority of sastras thatthe chanting of the holy names of the Lord is the only means to elevate
--- Page 74 ---
one to the transcendental platform, and actually we can see it is
effective. Each and every one of our students who has seriously taken tothis process may be examined individually, and any impartial judge willfind it easy to see that they have advanced in their transcendentalrealization further than any philosophers, religionists, yogis, karmis,etc.     We have to accept everything favorable to the circumstances.Rejection of other methods in a particular circumstance does not meanthat the rejected ones are not bona fide. But for the time being, takinginto consideration the age, time, and object, methods are sometimesrejected even though bona fide. We have to test everything by itspractical result. By such a test, in this age the constant chanting ofthe Hare Krsna maha-mantra undoubtedly proves very effective.     A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Krsna Consciousness:
Hindu Cult or Divine Culture?When attempting to place the Krsna consciousness movement within aconvenient historical-cultural context, many people identify themovement with Hinduism. But this is misleading. Srila Prabhupadadisavows connection with the pantheism, polytheism, and casteconsciousness that pervades modern Hinduism. Although Krsnaconsciousness and modern Hinduism share a common historical root--India's ancient Vedic culture--Hindulsm has become, along with the other"great religions," a sectarian establishment, whereas Krsnaconsciousness is universal and transcends relative, sectariandesignations.     There is a misconception that the Krsna consciousness movementrepresents the Hindu religion. In fact, however, Krsna consciousness isin no way a faith or religion that seeks to defeat other faiths orreligions. Rather, it is an essential cultural movement for the entirehuman society and does not consider any particular sectarian faith. Thiscultural movement is especially meant to educate people in how they canlove God.     Sometimes Indians both inside and outside of India think that weare preaching the Hindu religion, but actually we are not. One will notfind the word Hindu in the Bhagavad-gita. Indeed, there is no such wordas Hindu in the entire Vedic literature. This word has been introducedby the Muslims from provinces next to India, such as Afghanistan,Baluchistan, and Persia. There is a river called Sindhu bordering thenorth western provinces of India, and since the Muslims there could notpronounce Sindhu properly, they instead called the river Hindu, and theinhabitants of this tract of land they called Hindus. In India,according to the Vedic language, the Europeans are called mlecchas oryavanas. Similarly, Hindu is a name given by the Muslims.     India's actual culture is described in the Bhagavad-gita, where itis stated that according to the different qualities or modes of naturethere are different types of men, who are generally classified into foursocial orders and four spiritual orders. This system of social andspiritual division is known as varnasrama-dharma. The four varnas, orsocial orders, are brahmana, ksatria, vaisya. and sudra. The fourasramas, or spiritual orders, are brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprastha,and sannyasa. The varnasrama system is described in the Vedic scripturesknown as the Puranas. The goal of this institution of Vedic culture is
--- Page 75 ---
to educate every man for advancement in knowledge of Krsna, or God. That
is the entire Vedic program.     When Lord Caitanya talked with the great devotee Ramananda Raya,the Lord asked him, "What is the basic principle of human life?"Ramananda Raya answered that human civilization begins when varnasrama-dharma is accepted. Before coming to the standard of varnasrama-dharmathere is no question of human civilization. Therefore, the Krsnaconsciousness movement is trying to establish this right system of humancivilization, which is known as Krsna consciousness, or daiva-varnasrama--divine culture.     In India, the varnasrama system has now been taken in a pervertedway, and thus a man born in the family of a brahmana (the highest socialorder) claims that he should be accepted as a brahmana. But this claimis not accepted by the sastra (scripture). One's forefather may havebeen a brahmana according to gotra, or the family hereditary order, butreal varnasrama-dharma is based on the factual quality one has attained,regardless of birth or heredity. Therefore, we are not preaching thepresent-day system of the Hindus, especially those who are under theinfluence of Sankaracarya, for Sankaracarya taught that the AbsoluteTruth is impersonal, and thus he indirectly denied the existence of God.     Sankaracarya's mission was special; he appeared to reestablish theVedic influence after the influence of Buddhism. Because Buddhism waspatronized by Emperor Asoka, twenty-six hundred years ago the Buddhistreligion practically pervaded all of India. According to the Vedicliterature, Buddha was an incarnation of Krsna who had a special powerand who appeared for a special purpose. His system of thought, or faith,was accepted widely, but Buddha rejected the authority of the Vedas.While Buddhism was spreading, the Vedic culture was stopped both inIndis and in other places. Therefore, since Sankaracarya's only aim wasto drive away Buddha's system of philosophy, he introduced a systemcalled Mayavada.     Strictly speaking, Mayavada philosophy is atheism, for it is aprocess in which one imagines that there is God. This Mayavada system ofphilosophy has been existing since time immemorial. The present Indiansystem of religion or culture is based on the Mayavada philosophy ofSankaracarya, which is a compromise with Buddhist philosophy. Accordingto Mayavada philosophy there actually is no God, or if God exists, He isimpersonal and all-pervading and can therefore be imagined in any form.This conclusion is not in accord with the Vedic literature. Thatliterature names many demigods, who are worshiped for differentpurposes, but in every case the Supreme Lord, the Personality ofGodhead, Visnu, is accepted as the supreme controller. That is realVedic culture.     The philosophy of Krsna consciousness does not deny the existenceof God and the demigods, but Mayavada philosophy denies both; itmaintains that neither the demigods nor God exists. For the Mayavadis,ultimately all is zero. They say that one may imagine any authority--whether Visnu, Durga, Lord Siva, or the sun-god--because these are thedemigods generally worshiped in society. But the Mayavada philosophydoes not in fact accept the existence of any of them. The Mayavadis saythat because one cannot concentrate one's mind on the impersonalBrahman, one may imagine any of these forms. This is a new system,called pancopasana. It was introduced by Sankaracarya, but the Bhagavad-
--- Page 76 ---
gita does not teach any such doctrines, and therefore they are not
authoritative.     The Bhagavad-gita accepts the existence of the demigods. Thedemigods are described in the Vedas, and one cannot deny theirexistence, but they are not to be understood or worshiped according tothe way of Sankaracarya. The worship of demigods is rejected in theBhagavad-gita. The Gita (7.20) clearly states:
                         kamals tais tair hrta jnanah
                           prapadyante 'nya-devatah                            tam tam niamam asthaya                            prakrtya niatah svaya
     "Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrender unto
demigods and follow the particular rules and regulations of worshipaccording to their own natures." Furthermore, in the Bhagavad-gita(2.44), Lord Krsna states:
                           bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam
                              tayapahrta-cetasam                            vyavasayatmika buddhih                            samadhau na vidhiyate
     "In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and
material opulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolutedetermination for devotional service does not take place." Those who arepursuing the various demigods have been described as hrta jnanah, whichmeans "those who have lost their sense." That is also further explainedin the Bhagavad-gita (7.23):
                           antavat tu phalam tesam
                          tad bha vaty aipa-medhasam                            devan deva-yajo yanti                           mad-bhakta yanti mam api
     "Men of small intelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits
are limited and temporary. Those who worship the demigods go to theplanets of the demigods, but My devotees reach My supreme abode." Therewards given by the demigods are temporary, because any materialfacility must act in connection with the temporary body. Whatevermaterial facilities one gets, whether by modern scientific methods or byderiving benedictions from the demigods, will be finished with the body.But spiritual advancement will never be finished.     People should not think that we are preaching a sectarian religion.No. We are simply preaching how to love God. There are many theoriesabout the existence of God. The atheist, for example, will never believein God. Atheists like Professor Jacques Monod, who won the Nobel prize,declare that everything is chance (a theory already put forward long agoby atheistic philosophers of India such as Carvaka). Then otherphilosophies, such as the karma-mimamsa philosophy, accept that if onegoes on doing his work nicely and honestly, automatically the resultwill come, without need for one to refer to God. For evidence, theproponents of such theories cite the argument that if one is diseasedwith an infection and takes medicine to counteract it, the disease will
--- Page 77 ---
be neutralized. But our argument in this connection is that even if one
gives a man the best medicine, he still may die. The results are notalways predictable. Therefore, there is a higher authority, daiva-netrena, a supreme director. Otherwise, how is it that the son of a richand pious man becomes a hippie in the street or that a man who worksvery hard and becomes rich is told by his doctor, "Now you may not eatany food, but only barley water"?     The karma-mimamsa theory holds that the world is going on withoutthe supreme direction of God. Such philosophies say that everythingtakes place by lust (kama-haitukam). By lust a man becomes attracted toa woman, and by chance there is sex, and the woman becomes pregnant.There is actually no plan to make the woman pregnant, but by a naturalsequence when a man and a woman unite, a result is produced. Theatheistic theory, which is described in the Sixteenth Chapter of theBhagavad-gita as asuric, or demoniac, is that actually everything isgoing on in this way, because of chance and resulting from naturalattraction. This demoniac theory supports the idea that if one wants toavoid children, he may use a contraceptive method.     Actually, however, there is a great plan for everything--the Vedicplan. The Vedic literature gives directions regarding how men and womenshould unite, how they should beget children, and what the purpose ofsex life is. Krsna says in the Bhagavad-gita that sex life sanctioned bythe Vedic order, or sex life under the direction of the Vedic rules andregulations, is bona fide and is acceptable to Him. But chance sex lifeis not acceptable. If by chance one is sexually attracted and there arechildren, they are called varna-sankara, unwanted population. That isthe way of the lower animals; it is not acceptable for humans. Forhumans, there is a plan. We cannot accept the theory that there is noplan for human life or that everything is born of chance and materialnecessity.     Sankaracarya's theory that there is no God and that one can go onwith his work and imagine God in any form just to keep peace andtranquillity in society is also more or less based on this idea ofchance and necessity. Our way, however, which is completely different,is based on authority. It is this divine varnasrama-dharma that Krsnarecommends, not the caste system as it is understood today. This moderncaste system is now condemned in India also, and it should be condemned,for the classification of different types of men according to birth isnot the Vedic or divine caste system.     There are many classes of men in society--some men are engineers,some are medical practitioners, some are chemists, tradesmen,businessmen, and so on. These varieties of classes are not to bedetermined by birth, however, but by quality. No such thing as thecaste-by-birth system is sanctioned by the Vedic literature, nor do weaccept it. We have nothing to do with the caste system, which is also atpresent being rejected by the public in India. Rather, we give everyonethe chance to become a brahmana and thus attain the highest status oflife.     Because at the present moment there is a scarcity of brahmanas,spiritual guides, and ksatrias, administrative men, and because theentire world is being ruled by sudras, or men of the manual laborerclass, there are many discrepancies in society. It is to mitigate allthese discrepancies that we have taken to this Krsna consciousnessmovement. If the brahmana class is actually reestablished, the other
--- Page 78 ---
orders of social well-being will automatically follow, just as when the
brain is perfectly in order, the other parts of the body, such as thearms, the belly, and the legs, all act very nicely.     The ultimate goal of this movement is to educate people in how tolove God. Caitanya Mahaprabhu approves the conclusion that the highestperfection of human life is to learn how to love God. The Krsnaconsciousness movement has nothing to do with the Hindu religion or anysystem of religion. No Christian gentleman will be interested inchanging his faith from Christian to Hindu. Similarly, no Hindugentleman of culture will be ready to change to the Christian faith.Such changing is for men who have no particular social status. Buteveryone will be interested in understanding the philosophy and scienceof God and taking it seriously. One should clearly understand that theKrsna consciousness movement is not preaching the so-called Hindureligion. We are giving a spiritual culture that can solve all theproblems of life, and therefore it is being accepted all over the world.