
                                Chapter Eight
                             Attaining Perfection
--- Page 183 ---
Knowing the Purpose of Life
Every thoughtful human being asks the fundamental question, "What is thepurpose of life?" Unfortunately, our difficulty in finding ultimatemeaning is compounded by the fact that thousands of conflictingphilosophies, religions, and ideologies and their proponents compete forour loyalty. Here Srila Prabhupada provides some simple and enlighteningguidance.     Today's subject matter is our relationship with God. That is self-realization. The sankirtana movement is the easiest process for self-realization because it cleanses the heart. Our misunderstanding of ouridentity is due to the dust covering the mirror of the mind. In a mirrorthat is covered with dust one cannot see himself. But if it is veryclear, then one can see himself. So meditation is a process forcleansing the heart. Meditation means to try to understand one'srelationship with the Supreme.     With everything with which we come in contact there is arelationship. Because I am now sitting on this cushion, the relationshipis that I shall sit and the cushion will hold me. You haverelationships. You are Englishmen or Indians, so there is a relationshipwith your society, with your family, with your friends. So what is ourrelationship with God?     If you ask everyone, very few people will be able to explain theirrelationship with God. They say, "What is God? God is dead. I don'tbelieve in God, not to speak of a relationship." Because these dirtythings are covering their hearts, they cannot see. We have arelationship with everything--why do we not try to understand ourrelationship with God? Is that very intelligent? No. That is ignorance.All the creatures in this material world are covered by the three modesof material nature. Therefore they cannot see God. They cannotunderstand God, nor do they try to understand Him. But God is there. InEngland in the morning there is mist, so you cannot see the sun behindthe fog. But does this mean that there is no sun? You cannot see itbecause your eyes are covered. But if you send a telegram to anotherpart of the world, they will say, "Yes, the sun is here. We can see it.It is very dazzling, full of light." So when you deny the existence ofGod or you cannot ascertain your relationship with God, that means thatyou are lacking in knowledge. It is not that there is no God. We arelacking. The sun is not covered. The sun cannot be covered. The fog orthe cloud or the mist does not have the power to cover the sun. How bigthe sun is! It is so many times bigger than this earth. And the cloudscan cover at most ten or twenty or a hundred miles. So how can theclouds cover the sun? No. The clouds cannot cover the sun. They coveryour eyes. When an enemy comes and a rabbit cannot defend himself, therabbit closes his eyes and thinks, "My enemy is now gone." Similarly, weare covered by the external energy of God and are thinking, "God isdead."     The Lord has three kinds of energies. In the Visnu Purana there aredescriptions of the energy of the Supreme Lord. And in the Vedas also,in the Upanisads, there are descriptions of the energies of the SupremeLord. Parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8).Sakti means "energy." The Lord has multienergies. The Vedas say, "Godhas nothing to do." We have to work because we have no other means toexist--we have to eat, we wish to enjoy this, that--but why should Godwork? God does not have to work. Then how can we say that God created
--- Page 184 ---
this universe? Is that not work? No. Then how did it happen? His
multifarious energies are so strong that they are acting naturally andare full of knowledge. We can see how a flower blooms and grows andsystematically displays multicolors: one side a little spot, anotherside a little spot, white on one side, more white on the other side. Thebutterfly also exhibits such artistic symmetry. So this is all beingpainted, but in such a perfect way and so swiftly that we cannot seehow. We cannot understand how it is being done, but it is being done bythe energy of the Lord.     It is due to a lack of knowledge that people say that God is dead,that there is no God, and that we have no relationship with God. Thesethoughts have been compared to the thoughts of a man haunted by a ghost.Just as a haunted man speaks all nonsense, when we become covered by theillusory energy of God we say that God is dead. But this is not a fact.Therefore, we need this chanting process to cleanse our heart. Take tothis simple process of chanting the Hare Krsna mantra. In that way, inyour family life, in your club, in your home, on the road--everywhere--chant Hare Krsna, and this darkness covering your heart, covering yourreal position, will be removed. Then you'll understand your realconstitutional position.     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu recommended: ceto-darpana-marjanam.Marjanam means "cleanse," and darpanam means "mirror." The heart is amirror. It is like a camera. Just as a camera takes all kinds ofpictures of days and nights, so also our heart takes pictures and keepsthem in an unconscious state. Psychologists know this. The heart takesso many pictures, and therefore it becomes covered. We do not know whenit has begun, but it is a fact that because there is material contact,our real identity is covered. Therefore ceto-darpana-marjanam: one hasto cleanse his heart. There are different processes to cleanse theheart--the jnana process, the yoga process, the meditation process,pious activities. Karma also cleanses the heart. If one acts verypiously, his heart will gradually be cleansed. But although theseprocesses are recommended for cleansing the heart, in this age they areall difficult. To follow the path of philosophical knowledge one mustbecome a very learned scholar, one must read so many books, one must goto learned professors and scholars and speculate. One must search out aperson who has seen the light. So these are all philosophical processes.Meditation is also a recommended process. One should question, "What amI?" Just consider: Am I this body? No. Am I this finger? No, this is myfinger. If you contemplate your leg, you will see, "Oh, this is my leg."Similarly, you will find everything to be "mine." And where is that "I"?Everything is mine, but where is that "I"? When one is searching forthat "I," that is meditation. Real meditation means concentrating allthe senses in that way. But that meditation process is very difficult.One must control the senses. The senses are dragging one outward, andone has to bring them inward for introspection. Therefore there areeight processes in the yoga system. The first is controlling the sensesby regulative principles. Then sitting postures--that will help toconcentrate the mind. If one sits leaning over, that will not help; ifone sits up straight, that will help. Then controlling the breathing,then meditation, then samadhi. But today these are very, very difficultprocesses. No one can immediately perform them. The so-called yogaprocesses are fragmental--only the sitting postures and a few breathingexercises are practiced. But that cannot bring one to the perfectional
--- Page 185 ---
stage. The actual yoga process, although a recommended Vedic process, is
very difficult in this age. Similarly one can try to get knowledge bythe speculative philosophical process: ` `This is Brahman, this is notBrahman, so what is Brahman? What is spirit soul?" Such empiricphilosophical discussion is also recommended, but it is useless in thisage.     Therefore Caitanya Mahaprabhu--not only Caitanya Mahaprabhu butalso the Vedic literature--says:
                            harer nama harer nama
                            harer namaiva kevalam                          kalau nasty eva nasty eva                           nasty eva gatir anyatha
     Kalau means "in this age." Nasty eva, nasty eva, nasty eva--three
times nasty eva. Eva means "certainly," and nasti means "not.""Certainly not, certainly not, certainly not." What is that "certainlynot"? One cannot realize oneself by karma. That is the first "certainlynot." One cannot realize oneself by jnana. That is the second "certainlynot." One cannot realize oneself by yoga. Certainly not. Kalau. Kalaumeans "in this age." Kalau nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva gatir anyatha.In this age one certainly cannot achieve success by any of these threemethods. Then what is the recommended process? Harer nama harer namaharer namaiva kevalam. Simply chant the Hare Krsna mantra. Kevalam means"only." Simply chant Hare Krsna. It is the easiest and most sublimeprocess. This is recommended, practical, and authorized. So take it.Accept it in any condition of life. Chant. There is no expenditure,there is no loss. We are not chanting a secret. No. It is open. And bychanting you will cleanse your heart.     In this material world no one wants misery, but it comes.Unexpectedly, like a forest fire that starts without anyone's striking amatch, it comes. No one wants a war, but war is fought. No one wantsfamine, but famine comes. No one wants pestilence, but it comes. No onewants fighting, but there is fighting. No one wants misunderstanding,but there is. Why? This is like a blazing fire in the forest. And itcannot be extinguished by fire engines. This blazing fire of problemscannot be extinguished by our so-called advancement of knowledge. No.That is not possible, Just as one cannot extinguish a forest fire bysending a fire engine or by bringing some water, the problems of ourlife cannot be solved by material processes.     There are many examples. Prahlada Maharaja says, "My dear Lord, thefather and mother are not actually the protectors of the children." Thefather and mother take care of their children; that is their duty. Butthey are not the ultimate protectors. When nature's law calls the child,the father and mother cannot protect him. Therefore although generallyit is considered a fact that the father and mother are the protectors ofthe child, actually it is not a fact. If someone is sailing the oceanand he thinks he has a very nice seat, will that protect him? No. Stillhe may drown. A nice airplane is flying in the sky, everyone is safe,but all of a sudden it crashes. Nothing material can protect us. Supposesomeone is diseased. He may engage a good physician who gives goodmedicine, but that will not guarantee that he will live. Then what isthe ultimate guarantee? Prahlada Maharaja says, "My dear Lord, if Youneglect someone, nothing can protect him."
--- Page 186 ---
     This is our practical experience. We can invent so many methods to
solve the problems presented by the laws of material nature, but theyare not sufficient. They will never solve all the problems, nor willthey give actual relief. This is the fact. Therefore Krsna says in theBhagavad-gita, "Maya, this external energy, is very, very strong. No onecan surpass it. It is almost impossible." Then how can one get free fromthis material nature? Krsna says, "Simply by surrendering unto Me onecan get relief from the onslaught of material nature." That is a fact.So we have to cleanse the heart to learn what is our relationship withGod.     In the Katha Upanisad it is stated, nityo nityanam cetanascetananam. The Supreme Absolute Personality of Godhead, or the AbsoluteTruth, is eternal. God is eternal, and we are also eternal. But theVedas indicate that He is the supreme living creature. He is not dead.If He is not living, how is this world working? In the Bhagavad-gitaKrsna says, "Under My supervision things are going on." In the Biblealso it is said, "God created." That is a fact. Not that at one timethere was a chunk and then this happened and then that. No. The Vedastell us the actual facts, but we have to open our eyes to see. Ceto-darpana-marjanam. That is the process of cleansing our hearts. When wecleanse our hearts, then we will be able to understand what Krsna andthe Vedas say. We need to be purified. If a man is suffering fromjaundice and you give him a piece of sugar candy, he will say that it isvery bitter. But is sugar candy bitter? No, it is very sweet. And themedicine for jaundice is that sugar. Modern science prescribes this, andit is prescribed in the Vedic literature also. So if we take a greatquantity of this sugar candy, then we will be relieved from jaundice.And when there is relief, then one says, "Oh, this is very sweet." Sothe modern jaundice of a godless civilization can be cured by thischanting of Hare Krsna. In the beginning it may appear bitter, but whenone advances, then he will see how pleasing it is.     As soon as one understands his identity, his relationship with God,then immediately he becomes happy. We are so full of miseries because wehave identified ourselves with the material world. Therefore we areunhappy. Anxieties and fearfulness are due to our misidentifying withthe material world. The other day I was explaining that one whoidentifies with this bag of bones and skin is like an animal. So bychanting Hare Krsna this misunderstanding will be cleansed. Cleansing ofthe heart means that one will understand that he does not belong to thismaterial world. Aham brahmasmi: I am spirit soul. As long as oneidentifies oneself with England, with India, or with America, this isignorance. Today you are an Englishman because you were born in England,but in your next life you may not take your birth in England; it may bein China or Russia or some other country. Or you may not get this humanform of body. Today you are a nationalist, you are a very great followerof your country, but tomorrow if you stay in your country you may be acow being taken to the slaughterhouse.     So we have to thoroughly know our identity. Caitanya Mahaprabhusays that the actual identity of every living creature is that he is theeternal servant of God. If one thinks like that--"I am no one else'sservant; my business is to serve God"--then he is liberated. His heartis immediately cleansed, and he is liberated. And after one has reachedthat, then all one's cares and anxieties in this world are over becauseone knows, "I am a servant of God. God will give me protection. Why
--- Page 187 ---
should I worry about anything?" It is just like a child. A child knows
that his mother and father will take care of him. He is free. If heshould go to touch fire, his mother will take care of him: "Oh, my dearchild, don't touch." The mother is always looking after him. So whydon't you put your trust in God? Actually, you are under the protectionof God.     People go to church and say, "God, give us our daily bread."Actually, if He did not give it to us, we would not be able to live.That is a fact. The Vedas also say that the one Supreme Personalitysupplies all the necessities of every other living creature. God issupplying food for everyone. We human beings have our economic problem,but what economic problem is there in societies other than humansociety? The bird society has no economic problem. The species of life,and out of that, human society is very, very small. So they have createdproblems--what to eat, where to sleep, how to mate, how to defend. Theseare a problem to us, but the majority of creatures--the aquatics, thefish, the plants, the insects, the birds, the beasts, and the manymillions upon millions of other living creatures--do not have such aproblem. They are also living creatures. Don't think that they aredifferent from us. It is not true that we human beings are the onlyliving creatures and that all others are dead. No. And who is providingtheir food and shelter? It is God. The plants and animals are not goingto the office. They are not going to the university to get technologicaleducation to earn money. So how are they eating? God is supplying. Theelephant eats hundreds of pounds of food. Who is supplying? Are youmaking arrangements for the elephant? There are millions of elephants.Who is supplying?     So the process of acknowledging that God is supplying is betterthan thinking, "God is dead. Why should we go to church and pray to Godfor bread?" In the Bhagavad-gita it is said, "Four kinds of people cometo Krsna: the distressed, those who are in need of money, the wise, andthe inquisitive." One who is inquisitive, one who is wise, one who isdistressed, and one who is in need of money--these four classes of menapproach God. "My dear God, I am very hungry. Give me my daily bread."That's nice. Those who approach God in this way are recommended assukrtinah. Sukrti means "pious." They are pious. Although they areasking for money, for food, they are considered pious because they areapproaching God. And others are just the opposite. They are duskrtinah,impious. Krti means "very meritorious," but the word duskrti indicatesthat their energy is being misused to create havoc. Just like the manwho invented atomic weapons. He has a brain, but it has been misused. Hehas created something that is dreadful. Create something that willinsure that man will no longer have to die. What is the use of creatingsomething so that millions of people will immediately die? They will dietoday or tomorrow or after a hundred years. So what have the scientistsdone? Create something so that man will not die immediately, so thatthere will be no more disease, so that there will be no more old age.Then you will have done something. But the duskrtinas never go to God.They never try to understand God. Therefore their energy is misdirected.     The gross materialists who ignore their relationship with God aredescribed in the Bhagavad-gita as mudhas. Mudha means "ass," "donkey."Those who are working very, very hard to earn money are compared to thedonkey. They will eat the same four capatis [whole-wheat bread-patties]daily, but they are unnecessarily working to earn thousands of dollars.
--- Page 188 ---
And others are described as naradhama. Naradhama means "the lowest of
mankind." The human form of life is meant for God realization. It is theright of man to try to realize God. One who understands Brahman, God, isa brahmana, not others. So that is the duty of this human form of life.In every human society there is some system that is called "religion"and by which one may try to understand God. It doesn't matter whether itis the Christian religion, the Muhammadan religion, or the Hindureligion. It doesn't matter. The system is to understand God and ourrelationship with Him. That's all. This is the duty of the human beings,and if this duty is ignored in human society, then it is animal society.Animals have no power to understand what is God and their relationshipwith God. Their only interests are eating, sleeping, mating, anddefending. If we are only concerned with these things, then what are we?We are animals. Therefore the Bhagavad-gita says that those who ignorethis opportunity are the "lowest of mankind." They got births and yetdid not utilize it for God realization but simply for the animalpropensities. Therefore they are naradhama, the lowest of mankind. Andthere are other persons who are very proud of their knowledge. But whatis that knowledge? "There is no God. I am God." Their actual knowledgehas been taken away by maya. If they are God, then how have they becomedog? There are so many arguments against them, but they simply defy God.Atheism. Because they have taken to the process of atheism, their actualknowledge is stolen away. Actual knowledge means to know what is God andour relationship with God. If one does not know this, then it is to beunderstood that his knowledge has been taken away by maya.     So in this way, if we try to understand our relationship with God,there are ways and means. There are books, and there is knowledge, sowhy not take advantage of them? Everyone should take advantage of thisknowledge. Try to understand that in the Bhagavad-gita and other Vedicliteratures, everywhere, it is said that God is great and that althoughwe are qualitatively one with God, we are minute. The ocean and theminute particle of water have the same quality, but the quantity of saltin the drop of water and the quantity of salt in the ocean aredifferent. They are qualitatively one but quantitatively different.Similarly, God is all-powerful, and we have some power. God createseverything, and we can create a small machine to fly, just like thesmall machines with which children play. But God can create millions ofplanets flying in the air. That is the qualification of God. You cannotcreate any planets. Even if you can create a planet, what is the benefitof that? There are millions of planets created by God. But you also havethe creative power. God has power, and you have power. But His is sogreat that yours cannot compare to it. If you say, "I am God," that isfoolishness. You can claim that you are God, but what acts have youperformed so extraordinary that you can claim that you are God? This isignorance. The knowledge of one who thinks himself God has been takenaway by the spell of maya. So our relationship is that God is great andwe are minute. In the Bhagavad-gita Krsna clearly says, "All livingentities are My parts and parcels. Qualitatively they are one with Me,but quantitatively they are different." So we are simultaneously onewith and different from God. That is our relationship. We are onebecause we have the same qualities as God. But if we study ourselvesminutely, we will find that although we have some great qualities, Godhas them all in greater quantities.
--- Page 189 ---
     We cannot have anything that is not in God. That is not possible.
Therefore in the Vedanta-sutra it is said that everything that we haveis also found in God. It is emanating from God. So our relationship isthat because we are small, because we are minute, we are the eternalservitors of God. In this material world also, in ordinary behavior, wesee that a man goes to serve another man because the other man isgreater than he and can pay him a nice salary. So naturally theconclusion is that if we are small, our duty is to serve God. We have noother business. We are all different parts and parcels of the originalentity.     A screw that is connected with a machine is valuable because it isworking with the whole machine. And if the screw is taken away from themachine, or if it is faulty, it is worthless. My finger is worthmillions of dollars as long as it is attached to this body and isserving the body. And if it is cut off from this body, then what is itworth? Nothing. Similarly, our relationship is that we are very smallparticles of God; therefore our duty is to dovetail our energies withHim and cooperate with Him. That is our relationship. Otherwise we areworthless. We are cut off. When the finger becomes useless the doctorsays, "Oh, amputate this finger. Otherwise the body will be poisoned."Similarly, when we become godless we are cut off from our relationshipwith God and suffer in this material world. If we try to join again withthe Supreme Lord, then our relationship is revived.The Highest Love"LOVE." Singers croon about it, poets exult in it, novelists weavecomplex tales about it. Movies and television are saturated with it. Butis it real? In this lucid essay, Srila Prabhupada argues that the lovewe experience in this material world is based upon an illusion and is,like everything else here, temporary. Yet there is a "higher love"--onethat is never imagined by mundane romanticists.     If one protects the tender creeper of devotional service nicely,then gradually it will produce the fruit of unalloyed love for God.Unalloyed love for God means love that is not tinged by desire formaterial benefit, for mere philosophical understanding, nor for fruitiveresults. Unalloyed love is to know, "God is great, I am His part andparcel, and therefore He is my supreme lovable object." Thisconsciousness is the highest perfection of human life and the ultimateaim of all methods of self-realization. If one reaches this point--Godis my only beloved, Krsna is the only lovable object--then one's life isperfect. And when one tastes that transcendental relationship withKrsna, then one feels real happiness. The devotional creeper will thenbe so strongly protected that just by catching hold of it, one will beable to reach the supreme destination. If one climbs steadily up a tree,one eventually comes to the very top. Similarly, if one can achieve loveof Godhead by catching that devotional creeper, there is no doubt thatone will reach the transcendental abode of Krsna and will associate withHim personally, just as we are associating here, face to face.     God is not fictional or imaginary. He is as real as we are.(Actually, we are under illusion; we are living as if this body were ourfactual self, although this body is not at all reality, but only atemporary manifestation.) We dare to presume that there is no God orthat He has no form. This mental speculation is due to a poor fund ofknowledge. Lord Krsna and His abode exist, and one can go there, reachHim, and associate with Him. That is a fact. Spiritual life means to be
--- Page 190 ---
in association with the Supreme Lord and to exist in bliss and knowledge
eternally. Such eternal association means to play with Krsna, to dancewith and love Krsna. Or Krsna can become your child--whatever you like.     There are five primary relationships with Krsna: as a passivedevotee, as a servant, as a friend, as a parent, and as a lover. Thecows in Krsna's abode are also liberated souls. They are called surabhicows. There are many popular pictures showing how Krsna loves the cows,how He embraces and kisses them. That passive relationship with Krsna iscalled santa. Their perfect happiness is achieved when Krsna comes andsimply touches them.     Other devotees are inclined to actually give service. They think,"Krsna wants to sit down. I will arrange a place for Him. Krsna wants toeat. I will get Him some nice food." And they actually make thesearrangements. Other devotees play with Krsna as friends on equal terms.They do not know that Krsna is God; to them, Krsna is their lovablefriend, and they cannot forget Him for a moment. All day and all night,they think of Krsna. At night, when they are sleeping they think, "Oh,in the morning I shall go and play with Krsna." And in the morning theygo to Krsna's house and stand by while Krsna is decorated by His motherbefore going out to play with His friends in the fields. There is noother activity in Krsnaloka (Krsna's abode). There is no industry, norushing to the office, or any such nonsense. There is sufficient milkand butter, and everyone eats plentifully. Krsna is very fond of Hisfriends, and sometimes He enjoys stealing butter for them. One canactually live this way, and that is the perfection of existence. Weshould hanker for that perfectional stage of life. Krsna consciousnessis the process to attain it.     But as long as one has even a slight attachment for this materialworld, one has to remain here. Krsna is very strict. He does not allowanyone to enter into His association who has any tinge of the materialconception of life. Bhakti must be free from material contamination. Donot think, "I am a very learned scholar. I shall find out what is theAbsolute Truth by mental speculation." That is nonsense; one can go onand on speculating and will never find the source of all sources. It issaid in the Brahma-samhita, "One can go on speculating about theAbsolute Truth for millions and millions of years, and still it will notbe revealed." One can rot in this material world as he is and can go onspeculating, but that is not the right process. Here is the process--bhakti-yoga.     Lord Caitanya says that to render devotional service to Krsna isthe highest perfectional stage of life, and compared to this, otherthings for which people are hankering in this material world are likebubbles in the ocean. Generally, people are after rewards, and thereforethey become religious. They say, "I am a Hindu," "I am a Christian," "Iam a Jew," "I am Muhammadan," "I am this, I am that, and therefore Icannot change my religion. I cannot accept Krsna." This is calledreligiosity, dharma. With such a materialistic, sectarian idea ofreligion, they will rot in this material world, stuck to rituals andfaith. They are under the impression that if they follow their religiousprinciples, they will get material prosperity. Of course, if one sticksto any kind of religious faith, he will get facilities for materiallife.     Why do people want this material prosperity? For sensegratification. They are thinking, "I shall have a very nice wife. I
--- Page 191 ---
shall have very good children. I shall have a very good post. I shall
become president. I shall become prime minister." This is sensegratification. And when one is frustrated and has seen that to be richor to attain the presidency cannot give him happiness, after squeezingout all the taste of sex life, when he is completely frustrated, thenperhaps he takes to LSD and tries to become one with the void. But thisnonsense cannot give happiness. Here is happiness: one must approachKrsna. Otherwise, it will end in LSD confusion and roaming in impersonalvoid concepts. People are frustrated. They must be frustrated if they donot have genuine spiritual life, because a person is spiritual bynature.     How can anyone be happy without Krsna? Suppose one is thrown intothe ocean. How can he be happy there? That is not for us. One may be avery good swimmer, but how long will he be able to swim? He eventuallybecomes tired and drowns. Similarly, we are spiritual by nature. How canwe be happy in this material world? It is not possible. But men aretrying to remain here, making so many temporary adjustments forsurvival. This patchwork is not happiness. If one really wantshappiness, here is the process: one must attain love of Godhead. Unlessone can love Krsna, unless one finishes with love for cats, dogs,country, nation, and society and instead concentrates his love on Krsna,there is no question of happiness. Rupa Gosvami has given a very niceexample in this regard: there are many drugs that saturate one withideas or hallucinations. But Rupa Gosvami says that unless one tastesthat final drug of love of Godhead, krsna-prema, he will have to becaptivated by meditation, impersonal monism, and so many otherdistractions.     Caitanya Mahaprabhu describes that to attain unalloyed love ofKrsna one has to execute devotional service, or Krsna consciousness. Onehas to engage oneself exclusively in serving Krsna. The highestperfectional stage of unalloyed devotion is to be free from all materialdesires, all mental speculation, and all fruitive activities. The basicprinciple of unalloyed devotion is that one cannot maintain any desireother than to become fully Krsna conscious. Even if one knows that allother forms of God are also Krsna, one should not worship any otherform, but should concentrate on the Krsna form. Krsna has many forms,but one only has to worship Krsna in His form with the flute, as in theRadha-Krsna Deity. Simply concentrate on that form, and all mentalspeculation and fruitive activities will fall away. One has to cultivateKrsna consciousness favorably, and that means to execute service bywhich Krsna becomes satisfied. Krsna consciousness is not attained bymanufacturing one's own way. I may think that I am doing something inKrsna consciousness, but who has sanctioned it? For instance, in theBhagavad-gita, Arjuna hesitated to fight, for certain moral reasons, buthe was viewing the situation from the platform of fruitive activities,on which one has to enjoy or suffer the results. He was considering thatif he killed his family members, he would then be subjected to manyreactions. This conclusion, however, was not sanctioned by Krsna. Thelaw of action and reaction in the material world is called karma, butdevotional service transcends karma.     Unalloyed love must be free of all tinges of fruitive activities(karma) and all tinges of mental speculation and material desire. Thatunalloyed devotional service should be favorably fixed on Krsna."Favorably" means in accordance with what He desires. Krsna desired that
--- Page 192 ---
the Battle of Kuruksetra take place; it was all arranged by Him. Arjuna
was told, "You are thinking in your own way, but even if you do notfight, rest assured that because it has been arranged by Me, none ofthese warriors who are assembled here are going back to their homes.They will be killed here. It has already been arranged." God's desire issuch that one cannot change it. Krsna has two qualities: He can protect,and He can also kill. If He wants to kill someone, there is no power inthe world that can protect him, and if He protects someone, there is nopower in the world that can kill him. Krsna's desire is supreme.Therefore, we have to dovetail our desires with Krsna's. Whatever Krsnadesires, no one can make null and void because He is the Supreme Lord.Therefore, our duty is to dovetail our acts with Krsna's desire, not tomanufacture an action and then declare: "I am doing this action in Krsnaconsciousness." We have to be very careful to ascertain whether Krsnaactually wants it. Such authorized knowledge is instructed by therepresentative of Krsna. In our prayers of praise to the spiritualmaster we are singing daily, "If the spiritual master is satisfied, thenGod will be satisfied. And if one dissatisfies his spiritual master,then there is no way for him to please God."     Therefore, as far as possible, one has to execute the order ofone's spiritual master. That will enable one to progress. That is theessence of the favorable execution of Krsna consciousness. In my oldage, I have come to America, and I am trying to teach Krsnaconsciousness, because my spiritual master gave me an order that I mustdo it. It is my duty. I do not know whether I shall be a success orfailure. It doesn't matter; my duty is completed if I can present beforeyou whatever I have heard from my spiritual master. This is called thefavorable execution of Krsna consciousness. Those who are actuallyserious should take the order of Krsna through the representative ofKrsna as their entire life and soul. One who sticks to this principle issure to progress. Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke in that way, and myspiritual master used to say, "The spiritual master is the transparentvia medium." For example, I can see the letters of this book very nicelythrough these transparent eyeglasses, without which I cannot see becausemy eyes are defective. Similarly, our senses are all defective. Wecannot see God with these eyes, we cannot hear Hare Krsna with theseears, we cannot do anything without the via medium of the spiritualmaster. Just as a defective eye cannot see without the via medium ofspectacles, so one cannot approach the Supreme Lord without thetransparent via medium of the spiritual master. "Transparent" means thatthe via medium must be free of contamination. If it is transparent, onecan see through it.     In unalloyed love of Godhead we have to engage our senses--sarvendriya, all the senses. This means that sex is also to be engagedin Krsna consciousness. The conception of God as a father or mother doesnot allow the engagement of one's sex in the service of the Lord becausethere is no sexual relationship with the father and mother. But in theconception of God as a lover, there is sexual engagement also.Therefore, Caitanya Mahaprabhu gave the most perfect information of ourengagement with the Supreme Lord. In other religious conceptions oflife, God is at the utmost taken as the father or mother. Manyworshipers in India take goddess Kali to be the representation of God.Of course, that is not sanctioned, but the belief is there, and also inthe Christian religion the conception of God is as a father. But
--- Page 193 ---
Caitanya Mahaprabhu informs us that one can even have sexual engagement
with the Lord. This information is Caitanya Mahaprabhu's uniquecontribution. In this material world, sexual engagement is considered tobe the highest engagement, the greatest pleasure, although it existsonly in a perverted form. No one, however, has conceived that there canbe sexual engagement in the spiritual world. There is not a singleinstance of such theology anywhere in the entire world. This informationis given for the first time by Caitanya Mahaprabhu: one can have theSupreme Personality of Godhead as one's husband, as one's lover. This ispossible in the worship of Radha and Krsna, but no one, especially theimpersonalists, can understand Radha-Krsna. The impersonalists have noidea; they cannot even conceive that God has form. But CaitanyaMahaprabhu says that not only does God have form, but He has sex lifealso. This is the highest contribution of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.     One can serve the Supreme Lord in various relationships, but in thematerial world those relationships exist only as perverted reflections.What is our engagement in relationship to this material world? What areour ideas of society, friendship, and love? They are all based on thematerial conception of life. In our society, someone is engaged as afather or mother to a son, and others are engaged as husband and wife,lover and beloved. There are other rasas (relationships) also, such asto be engaged with another as an enemy. There are twelve differentrelationships, out of which five are predominant. The other seven areindirect relationships, such as, for example, to be someone's enemy.There is usually a relationship between enemies, even between a murdererand the one he murders. As far as our relationship with Krsna isconcerned, however, even if one establishes a relationship as His enemy,then his life is successful. Therefore, when one engages his senses withKrsna, a relationship can be established in one of twelve differentvarieties, of which five varieties are direct and seven are indirect.     When Krsna appeared in the arena of Kamsa, there were many bigwrestlers prepared to kill Him. In fact, He was invited there to bekilled. His enemy Kamsa thought, "Soon the boys will come. We have triedfor sixteen years to kill them, but that boy Krsna could not be killed.But now I have invited Him as a guest, and when He arrives He will fightwith these wrestlers, and they will kill Him." The demoniac or atheisticpeople are always thinking of Krsna, or God, in terms of killing Him.Therefore they present their theories that God is dead. They think thatif God becomes dead, then they will be free to act however they please.But as far as their actual activities are concerned, God may be dead oralive, but God's agent, the material energy, is so strong that no onecan freely do any wrong. As soon as anyone does something wrong, thereis immediate punishment. It does not require the presence of God. Godmay be dead or alive, but the material energy is sufficient to punishanyone who violates the material laws, even to the slightest degree. Godhas set these conditions, but foolish people do not understand.     Lord Caitanya, however, speaks of favorably engaging all the sensesin the service of Krsna in pure devotional life. One should favorablyengage one's senses and should do whatever Krsna wants. Yet even if oneengages one's senses against the will of Krsna but still thinks ofKrsna, that is also advantageous. The demon Putana, for example, thoughtof killing Krsna. Just as the occupation of godly persons is to serveGod, so the demons and atheists are always prepared to kill God. Putanathought, "I shall kill Krsna. He is only a child." This is another
--- Page 194 ---
mistake of the demoniac. They think Krsna, or God, to be an ordinary
child or man. So in this way Putana was thinking: "Let me smear mybreast with poison, and when the child goes to suck my milk, He willdie." As we study this, we see that she approached Krsna as His enemy,and yet He accepted her as a friend because He is so merciful. He didnot take the demoniac portion of her mentality, but He accepted her.Every living entity is conditioned, but Krsna is not. A doctor orpsychiatrist treats madmen, but he does not become mad. Sometimes apatient may become angry with him or call him ill names, but the doctoris sober and simply treats him. Similarly, if someone regards Krsna ashis enemy, Krsna does not become his enemy.     Putana came to poison Krsna, but He took it otherwise. He thought,"I have sucked her breast milk. Therefore she has become My mother."Krsna treated her as His mother, and therefore she became liberated tothe same position as Krsna's real mother, Yasoda. The conclusion is thatthe highest perfection is to establish a favorable relationship withKrsna, but even if one engages himself unfavorably, Krsna is so mercifulthat He at least gives one salvation. All the enemies killed by Krsnawere immediately liberated.     Two classes of men may merge into the impersonal brahmajyoti: thosewho are intentionally aspiring to merge into the impersonal brahmajyotimay enter, and those who are enemies of Krsna and are killed by Him mayalso do so. Therefore, the devotee concludes, Why should I accept acondition that is offered even to God's enemies?     Caitanya Mahaprabhu recommends pure devotional service. Thereshould be no desire to fulfill one's own material desires, there shouldbe no attempt to understand Krsna by experimental philosophy, and thereshould be no fruitive activities to derive material benefits from Krsna.The only desire should be to serve Him favorably, as He desires. IfKrsna wants something, then we should do it. Suppose I were to ask adisciple, "My dear student, please give me a glass of water." It is thenhis duty to give me a glass of water. If he thinks, "Prabhupada wants aglass of water, but why not give him something better? Why not a glassof hot milk?" that is not service. In his consideration, hot milk isvery palatable and is better than water, yet because I have asked forwater, he has to give me water, not milk. That is favorable service. Onehas to understand what Krsna wants. When there is that intimaterelationship, then one can serve Krsna most favorably. And as long asthere is not that intimate relationship, one must take information ofwhat Krsna wants through the transparent medium of the spiritual master.     A Vaisnava never thinks that he has a direct relationship withKrsna. Lord Caitanya says, "I am the servant of the servant of theservant of the servant--a hundred times the servant of the servant--ofKrsna." We have to agree to be. come the servant of the servant of theservant. This is the process of disciplic succession, and if one wantsreal, transcendental love of God, then he has to adopt this process.Because people do not accept this process, they do not develop real loveof God. They speak of God, but actually they do not love God; becausethere is no cultivation of pure devotional service, they love dog.     We may say, "love of God," but unless we adopt this principle, thenwe will have to love dog, not God. That is the mistake. CaitanyaMahaprabhu says that if one really wants love of God, then one has tofollow the process of pure devotional service. It is not that CaitanyaMahaprabhu is speaking out of His own mental concoction; His statements
--- Page 195 ---
are confirmed in Vedic scriptures such as the Narada-pancaratra and the
Srimad-Bhagavatam. These two books, and the Bhagavad-gita, are veryauthentic scriptures meant for devotees. Caitanya Mahaprabhu quotes froma verse in the Narada-pancaratra: hrsikena hrsikesa-sevanam bhaktirucyate. This is the definition of pure devotional service. Hrsikenahrsikesa-sevanam. Hrsikena means "by one's senses." We have to engageour senses; it is not that we engage only our minds. If someone says, "Iam always thinking of Krsna," that is not pure devotional service.Meditation is thinking, but no one thinks of Krsna; they think of voidor something impersonal. If someone is thinking of Krsna or Narayana orVisnu, as prescribed in the Vedic scriptures, that is real yoga; yogameditation means to focus one's mind upon the Supersoul. The Supersoulis the representation of Krsna in the form of four-handed Narayana. EvenPatanjali, an authority on the yoga system, prescribes meditation onVisnu. But just as people are manufacturing bogus religious processes,the so-called yogis of today have manufactured their own way of thinkingof something void.     But the Narada-pancaratra says, hrsikena hrsikesa-seva-nam: onemust engage not only one's mind but one's senses. Engage the senses inthe service of the master of the senses. These three Sanskrit words arevery significant. Hrsikesa means "the Lord of the senses." So bhakti-yoga means to serve with the senses the Lord of the senses. The Lord ofthe senses is Krsna. We should always remember that we have our sensesbecause we wanted to enjoy this material world, and therefore the Lordhas given us a particular set of senses for our enjoyment. The hog has aparticular type of body and senses because he wanted to enjoy eatingstool. Similarly, a man has a particular type of body and senses becausehe wanted to enjoy something else. We have a particular set ofconditioned senses with which to enjoy this material world, and this iswhat we have to purify. Our senses are original, but now they arecovered by material desires. We have to cure ourselves and become freefrom such desires. When one's senses are no longer inclined towardmaterial sense gratification, one's status is called pure devotion.     From this verse of the Narada-pancaratra, we can understand thatthe spirit soul has original senses. However small a body it may haveentered, the spirit soul is not impersonal; it has senses. Perhaps onemay find a bug on one's book. It is so small, smaller than a pinpoint,but still it moves; it has all the senses. The small bacteria also move,and they have their senses. Originally, all living entities have senses.It is not that the senses have developed under certain materialconditions. The atheistic theory is that under material conditions wehave developed senses, that in the spiritual condition there are nosenses, and that we are impersonal. By logic and reason, however, thatcannot be so. A minute particle of spiritual force, even if it issmaller in size than an atom, has its senses. These senses, beingcovered by material elements, manifest themselves in a perverted way. Wehave to purify the senses, and when the senses are purified, we canengage them for the pleasure of the master of the senses. Krsna is themaster and proprietor of the senses. Therefore, because we are part andparcel of the Supreme Lord, our senses are borrowed from Him; they areon rental. The best thing is to use the senses for His sensesatisfaction, and not for our own. This is the process of pure Krsnaconsciousness.
--- Page 196 ---
     From the Srimnad-Bhagavatam, Lord Caitanya gives an example of pure
devotion: it is said in the Bhagavatam that Krsna is situated ineveryone's heart. Therefore, just as rivers flow and their naturaltendency is to reach the sea, so as soon as one hears the glories of theLord, his soul is at once attracted toward the Supreme Lord. This is thebeginning of pure devotional service. As soon as there is the chantingvibration, Hare Krsna, immediately Krsna's paraphernalia, Krsna's name,Krsna's fame, Krsna's abode, Krsna's associates--everything--all of asudden become manifested within because He is present. This is thebeginning of one's Krsna consciousness. To remember by reference to acontext means that as soon as one hears a code word, one at onceremembers all the information behind that code. Similarly, when ourminds are attracted to Krsna and everything about Krsna simply byhearing a little glorification of His qualities, that is the beginningof pure Krsna consciousness. Then there is no more gati, or movement ofthe mind.     It was just that way with the gopis: as soon as they heard thesound of Krsna's flute, they gave up everything. Some of them were lyingdown, some were working in their family affairs, some were taking careof their children, but as soon as they heard Krsna's flute, they forgoteverything and rushed to Him. Their husbands, their brothers, and theirfathers said, "Why are you going and leaving your duty?" But they didnot care--they simply left. There is no impediment and no stumblingblock in that merge of the mind with Krsna. This is the beginning ofpure devotion.     Purusottama means Krsna. The word purusa means "enjoyer." Theconditioned living entities are false enjoyers, imitation enjoyers. Herein this material world, all living entities are acting as purusas. Themore exact meaning of purusa is "male." The male is considered to be theenjoyer, and the female is considered to be the enjoyed. In the materialworld, whether one has a male or a female body, everyone has thepropensity to enjoy, and therefore everyone is called purusa. Butactually the only purusa is the Supreme Lord. We living entities are Hisenergy, and He is the supreme enjoyer. We are not purusa. Energies areemployed for enjoyment, and we are energies, instruments of the SupremePerson. Therefore Purusottama is the supreme transcendental person,Krsna. When our pure devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead isemployed and there are no impediments or stumbling blocks, that is thesymptom of pure Krsna consciousness.     There is no ambition or motive in pure Krsna consciousness. Everyother transcendental function or mode of worship is backed by a motive:someone wants salvation, someone wants material prosperity, someonewants to go to a higher planet, someone wants to go to Krsnaloka. Theseambitions should not be there. A pure devotee has no such ambitions. Apure devotee does not even desire to go to the supreme abode of Krsna.Of course, he goes, but he has no desire. He simply wants to engagehimself fully in Krsna's service.     There are different kinds of salvation. There is salokyaliberation, to live on the same planet as the Supreme Lord. Theresidents of the Vaikuntha planets live on the same planet as theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Sarsti liberation means to have almostthe same opulence as Narayana. The liberated individual soul can appearjust like Narayana, with four hands, the four emblems, almost the samebodily features, the same opulence, the same ornaments, the same
--- Page 197 ---
buildings, everything. Sarupya means to have the same form or features.
Samipya means never to be far away but always to be associated with theSupreme Lord. For example, just as we are sitting together, so one canassociate with the Lord. This is called samipya-mukti, the liberation ofbeing nearer. Pure devotees, however, do not accept these various formsof liberation. They only want to be engaged in Krsna's service. They arenot concerned with any kind of liberation. Those who are actually Krsnaconscious achieve the association of the Supreme Lord, but they do notdesire it; their only ambition is to be engaged in the transcendentalloving service of the Lord. The highest perfection of devotionalservice, or Krsna consciousness, is exhibited when a devotee refuses toaccept any benediction or profit from the Supreme Lord. PrahladaMaharaja was offered whatever he liked, he had only to ask for it, buthe said, "My Lord, I am Your eternal servant. It is my duty to serveYou, so how can I accept any benefit from it? Then I would not be Yourservant; I would be a merchant." He replied in that way, and that is thesign of a pure person. Krsna is so kind that He fulfills all the desiresof a devotee, even if he wants material benedictions. If at the bottomof the devotee's heart there is some desire, He also fulfills that. Heis so kind. But the sublime position of bhakti-yoga, or devotionalservice, is that a pure devotee refuses to accept the various kinds ofliberation, even if offered by the Supreme Lord.     If one has material desires or motives within himself, and forfulfillment of such desires he engages himself in devotional service,the result will be that he will never get pure love of God. If one isthinking, "I am engaged in Krsna consciousness, in Krsna's devotionalservice, because I want such and such an opulence," that desire may befulfilled, but he will never get such unalloyed love of Krsna as thegopis had. If one has a motive, even though he discharges his devotionalduty, he still will not be able to reach the stage of pure love ofGodhead. In a verse from the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, Rupa Gosvami says,"As long as one desires some material benefit [bhukti], or even if hewants salvation [mukti], then he must take those ghostlyrepresentations." As long as that maya exists within one's heart, howcan one enjoy the spiritual bliss derived from pure love of Godhead? Inother words, if one has material desires, or even a desire forsalvation, he cannot attain pure love of Godhead. Pure devotion isdevoid of all desires--it is simply to render loving service for its ownsake.     There is a nice example in the life of Rupa Gosvami. Rupa Gosvamiand his brother Sanatana Gosvami were living separately in Vrndavana andgoing on with their bhajana, devotional service. Rupa was living in theforest, and there was no facility for cooking nice food or begging fromthe village for a capati to eat. Rupa Gosvami was the younger brother,and he thought, "If I could get some foodstuffs, then I could preparenice dishes and offer them to Krsna and invite my elder brother." He hadthat desire. The next moment, a nice girl about twelve years old cameand delivered an abundance of foodstuffs--milk, flour, ghee, etc. Thatis the Vedic system; sometimes householders present foodstuffs tomendicants and sages in the renounced order of life. Rupa Gosvami wasvery glad that Krsna had sent so many things and that he could nowprepare a feast. He prepared a feast and then invited his elder brother.
--- Page 198 ---
     When Sanatana Gosvami came, he was astonished. "How have you
secured such things? You have prepared such a nice feast in this forest.How is it possible?"     So Rupa Gosvami explained, "In the morning I desired for it, and bychance Krsna sent me all these things. A nice girl came, and she offeredit to me." He was describing the girl: "A very nice girl."     Then Sanatana said, "This nice girl is Radharani. You have takenservice from Radharani, the Lord's eternal consort. It is a greatblunder." That is their philosophy. They would not accept service fromthe Lord. They simply wanted to render service. But Krsna is so cleverthat He also wants to serve His devotee. He looks for an opportunity toserve His devotee. This is spiritual competition. A pure devotee doesnot want anything from Krsna; he simply wants to serve Him. And Krsnaalso looks for the opportunity to serve His devotee. Krsna is always asanxious to please His devotee as the devotee is to please Him.     This is the transcendental world. On the absolute plane, there isno exploitation. Everyone wants to serve; no one wants to take service.In the transcendental world, everyone wants to give service. You want togive service to me, and I want to give service to you. This is such anice attitude. This material world means that I want to pickpocket you,and you want to pickpocket me. That's all. This is the material world.We should try to understand it. In the material world, everyone wants toexploit his friend, his father, his mother, everyone. But in thetranscendental world, everyone wants to serve. Everyone has Krsna as thecentral point of serving, and all the devotees, either as friends orservants or parents or lovers of Krsna, all want to serve Him. And atthe same time, Krsna also wants to serve them. This is a transcendentalrelationship; the main function is service, although there is nonecessity of service, for everyone is full. There is no hunger, there isno necessity of eating, but still everyone offers nice things to eat.This is the transcendental world. Unless we attain the stage of simplyserving Krsna or His devotee, we cannot relish the transcendentalpleasure of service. If we have any motive, then that sense will neverbe awakened. Without a motive, without desire for personal sensegratification, service should be rendered to the Supreme Lord and Hisdevotees.The Perfection of Self-realizationIn this concluding chapter, Srila Prabhupada discusses the ultimate goalof the science of self-realization--full realization of the SupremeSelf, Krsna. The development of self-realization begins with theunderstanding that the selfis not material--not a physical body--butpure spiritual energy. Next, one realizes that the pure, spiritual selfis eternally a part of the Supreme Self, Krsna. Finally one learns howto live fully in that eternal, blissful, transcendental relationship.One who has attained this state has attained life's supreme perfection.     When Krsna was on this earth, all the residents of Vrndavana lovedHim. Indeed, they knew nothing but Krsna. They did not know whetherKrsna is God or not God, nor were they disturbed by such thoughts as, "Ishall love Krsna if He is God." Their attitude was one of pure love, andthey thought, "He may or may not be God--it doesn't matter. We loveKrsna, that's all." This then is the platform of real, unalloyed love.When one thinks, "If Krsna is God, I shall love Him," it should be knownthat this is not the platform of pure love but of conditional love.While on earth, Krsna exhibited extraordinary powers, and the vraja-
--- Page 199 ---
vasis, the residents of Vrndavana, often thought, "Oh, Krsna is such a
wonderful child. Maybe He is some demigod." They thought in this waybecause people were generally under the impression that the demigodswere all-powerful. Within the material world the demigods are powerful,but people are not aware that Krsna is above all of them. The highest ofthe demigods, Brahma, gave his opinion of this matter in the verseisvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah: "Krsna is the supremecontroller, and His body is full of knowledge, bliss, and eternality."Little did the residents of Vrndavana know of Krsna's power as theultimate controller and master of all the demigods. What is noteworthyis that their love for Him was not subject to such considerations.     As the residents of Vrndavana loved Krsna unconditionally,similarly Krsna loved them unconditionally. Vraja-jana-vallabha, giri-vara-dhari. When the inhabitants of Vrndavana stopped performingsacrifices to Lord Indra, the chief demigod of the heavens, they placedthemselves in a very dangerous position. Indra became very angry andsent powerful clouds that rained over Vrndavana incessantly for sevendays. The whole area began to flood, and the inhabitants became verydisturbed. Although He was only seven years old, Krsna saved theinhabitants of Vrndavana by lifting Govardhana Hill and holding it up asan umbrella to shield the village. Lord Krsna thus taught the demigodIndra that his disturbances could be stopped simply by His littlefinger. Seeing this, Lord Indra bowed down before Krsna.     Thus Krsna also became known as Gopijana-vallabha, which indicatesthat His only business is to protect the gopijana. This Krsnaconsciousness movement aims at teaching people how to become gopijanas,or pure lovers of Krsna. When we reach that stage of pure love of God,the Lord will save us from any danger, even if it means His lifting ahill or a mountain. Krsna did not have to practice some yoga system inorder to lift Govardhana Hill. As God, He is all-powerful, even as achild. He played like a child and dealt with others like a child, butwhen there was need, He manifested Himself as God Almighty. That is thenature of Krsna, or God: He does not have to practice meditation orfollow some system of yoga in order to become God. He is not amanufactured type of God, but is God eternally.     Although He is God, He enjoys loving relationships with Hisdevotees, and in order to satisfy His devotees, He often takes rolesthat appear to be subsidiary. Krsna often likes being the child of adevotee, and thus He became the beloved child of Yasoda, Yasoda-nandana.Because He is God and everyone worships Him, no one chastises Him.However, Krsna enjoys being chastised by His devotee father and mother,and because Krsna takes pleasure in being chastised, the devotees alsotake up the role, saying, "All right, I shall become Your father andchastise You." Similarly, when Krsna wants to fight, one of His devoteesbecomes the demon Hiranyakasipu and fights with Him. In this way, allKrsna's activities are carried out in connection with His devotees. Ifwe aspire to become such associates of Krsna, we must develop Krsnaconsciousness, awareness of Krsna.     Yasoda-nandana vraja-jana-ranjana. Krsna's only business issatisfying the vraja-janas, and their only business is satisfying Krsna.This is the reciprocation of love. Yamuna-tiravana-cari: Krsna, theSupreme Personality of Godhead, wanders on the banks of the Yamuna toplease the gopis, the cowherd boys, the birds, the bees, and the cowsand calves. These are not ordinary birds, bees, cows, calves, or men;
--- Page 200 ---
they have all reached the summit of self-realization and thus, after
many, many lives, have attained a position whereby they can play withKrsna. This Krsna consciousness movement can enable everyone to go toKrsnaloka and become Krsna's associate as a friend, servant, father, ormother. Krsna is agreeable to take any of these positions in relation toHis devotee. How He does so is all described in our book Teachings ofLord Caitanya. To realize our relationship with Krsna, we have but tofollow in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya and His chief associates, thesix Gosvamis--Sri Rupa, Sanatana, Sri Jiva, Gopala, Raghunatha dasa, andRaghunatha Bhatta. These Gosvamis were always engaged in chanting HareKrsna and dancing in ecstasy. They taught that when one is merged inkrsna-kirtana, or the chanting of the holy names of Krsna, he mergesinto the ocean of love of Krsna. As soon as the sound of Krsna's name isvibrated, one can immediately merge into the ocean of love. That is thesign of pure devotion. Thus at kirtanas the six Gosvamis would mergeimmediately into the ocean of love of Godhead.     The six Gosvamis were dear not only to the other devotees of LordCaitanya Mahaprabhu but to the nondevotees as well. A pure devotee'sposition is that he has no enemy because he is not envious. A puredevotee is always open to everyone, and he does not discriminate thatthis person can be allowed to chant Hare Krsna and that person shouldnot be allowed. On the material platform, which is a platform ofdualism, there are differences between high and low, man and woman, andthis or that, but on the spiritual platform there are no suchdistinctions. The pure devotee, seeing everything with an equal mind, istherefore nonenvious. Because he is nonenvious, he is worshipable.Indeed, it may even be said that a person is worshipable simply if he isnonenvious, for it is only possible to be nonenvious on the spiritualplatform. This is also the verdict of the Bhagavad-gita (5.18-19):
                            vidya-vinaya-sampanne
                            brahmane gavi hastini                            suni caiva svapake ca                            panditah sama-darsinah                            ihaiva tairjitah sargo                          yesam samye sthitam manah                           nirdosam hi samam brahma                          tasmad brahmani te sthitah
     "The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal
vision a learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog, and adog-eater. Those whose minds are established in sameness and equanimityhave already conquered the conditions of birth and death. They areflawless like Brahman, and thus they are already situated in Brahman."     Such a position can be obtained by one who has acquired the mercyof Lord Caitanya. Upon obtaining His mercy, a person can deliversuffering humanity from material contamination. Because the six Gosvamiswere such devotees, we offer our respectful obeisances unto them withthe mantra: vande rupa-sanatanau raghu-yugau sri-jiva-gopalakau. The sixGosvamis were expert in scrutinizingly studying all the scriptures withthe aim to establish real religion in the world. They left many books toguide us, the most famous of which is Sri Rupa Gosvami's Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (The Nectar of Devotion), which gives the neophytedevotee initial direction. The Gosvamis always worked very hard, day and
--- Page 201 ---
night, and their business was simply writing books, chanting, and
dancing. Indeed, they were practically released from the bodilynecessities of eating, sleeping, mating, and defending themselves out offear. There was no question of mating at all, nor was there any questionof fearing or defending, for they were totally absorbed in Krsna. Atmost they used to sleep one and a half hours daily, and they atepractically nothing. Whenever they felt hungry, they would simply go toa householder's home and beg one or two pieces of bread.     The mission of such saintly persons is but to make sufferinghumanity happy by elevating everyone to spiritual consciousness. In thematerial world, everyone is trying to exploit one another--one nation istrying to exploit another nation, one society is trying to exploitanother, one businessman is trying to exploit another, etc. This iscalled the struggle for existence, and out of it the people who arestruggling have invented a law called "Might is right," but we canactually see that even the most powerful must struggle, just as in thecurrent world situation. There is a great struggle going on betweenRussia, America, and China. Because of such struggle, everyone issuffering. Indeed, the very struggle for existence means suffering. Thepure devotees of Krsna, however, are interested not in exploiting othersbut in helping people become happy, and therefore they are worshiped onall planets. Canakya Pandita even said that a rich man and a learned mancannot be compared, for a rich man may be honored in his own country oron his own planet, but a learned man, a devotee of God, is honoredwherever he goes.     Nor for a devotee is there a distinction between heaven and hell,because Krsna is with him in both places. Where there is Krsna, there isno question of hell; every place is Vaikuntha. Haridasa Thakura, forinstance, did not enter the Jagannatha temple at Puri, for he was bornin a Muhammadan family, and the Hindus opposed the Muhammadans' enteringthe temple. Haridasa Thakura did not let this disturb him, however. Hethought, "Oh, why should I go and disturb them? I shall chant here."Consequently Lord Caitanya, who is Lord Jagannatha Himself, came dailyto see Haridasa. This is the power of a pure devotee: he doesn't have togo to Jagannatha; Jagannatha comes to him. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu usedto go see Haridasa Thakura daily when the Lord was going to bathe in thesea. The Lord would enter Haridasa's cottage and ask, "Haridasa, whatare you doing?" and Haridasa would reply, "Please come in, my Lord."This then is the actual position of a devotee. Therefore Krsna says thatworship of His devotee is even more valuable than worship of Himself.The devotee is actually able to deliver Krsna, for he knows the scienceof Krsna consciousness, the science of hearing Krsna's words, eatingkrsna-prasadam, and enjoying Krsna. The impersonalists and voidists maypreach dry philosophical treatises on aham brahmasmi-- "I am spirit"--but ultimately who will be attracted? What is the difference betweensomeone who thinks, "I am a stone," and someone who thinks, "I am void"?Why should we become stone, wood, or void? Our actual position should bein reciprocating loving affairs with Krsna.     The spark of love for Krsna is struck by the spiritual master, thepure devotee. As for myself, my spiritual master, His Divine Grace OmVisnupada Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Prabhupada, ordered me totake up the responsibility of spreading Krsna consciousness in theWestern world. His Divine Grace had a great desire to preach LordCaitanya's message in the West, and my success is both his grace and
--- Page 202 ---
pleasure. When I first met my spiritual master, I was a very young man
in India, a nationalist, engaged in a very responsible office. Butalthough I did not want to go, one of my friends, who is still living inCalcutta, forcibly took me to His Divine Grace. I was reluctant to seehim because in our home our father used to receive many sannyasis and Iwas not very satisfied with their dealings. I thought thatBhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja might be a similar man, andif he were, what business would I have in seeing him? But my friend tookme forcibly. "Why not see him?" he asked. I finally relented and wentwith him, and I profited.     On my first visit, His Divine Grace said that it was necessary foreducated boys like me to go to foreign countries and preach the gospelof Caitanya Mahaprabhu. I replied that India was a foreign-dominatednation and that no one would hear our messages. Actually, at the timeforeigners considered Indians very insignificant because in the face ofso many independent nations India was still dependent, being dominatedby Britain. At the time there was one Bengali poet who actually lamentedthat even uncivilized nations were independent, whereas India wasdependent on the British. His Divine Grace convinced me that dependenceand independence are simply temporary conditions, and he pointed outthat because we are concerned with the eternal benefit of humanity, weshould take up this challenge of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This meeting withHis Divine Grace, my Guru Maharaja, took place in 1922, half a centuryago.     I was officially initiated in 1933, just three years before thepassing of Guru Maharaja from this mortal world. At the last moment,just a fortnight before his passing away, he wrote me a letter repeatinghis instructions. He specifically said that I should try to preach thisgospel among English-speaking people. After receiving this letter, Isometimes dreamed that Guru Maharaja was calling me and that I wasleaving home and following him. I was dreaming in this way and thinking,"I have to give up my home. My Guru Maharaja wants me to give up my homeand take sannyasa." At the same time I thought, "This is horrible. Howcan I leave my home? My wife? My children?" This is called maya.Actually I did not want to give up my home life, but Guru Maharaja mademe give it up. Following his orders, I left my home, including a fewchildren, but now Guru Maharaja has given me many nice children all overthe world. Thus by serving Krsna no one becomes a loser, and this is anexample from my own practical experience.     When I left India alone in 1965, I feared that I would have a greatdeal of trouble. The Indian government would not allow me to take anymoney out of the country, so I came with only a few books and fortyrupees. I arrived in New York City in such a condition, but it was allby the grace of Guru Maharaja and Krsna. Everything happens by thecombined mercy of Krsna and the spiritual master. In the Caitanya-caritamrta it is stated that the mercy of Krsna and guru are combined.This is the secret of the success of this Krsna consciousness movement.Krsna is always within us, and consequently He knows everything aboutour purposes, and He gives us the opportunity to work as we decide. Ifwe decide to enjoy this material world, Krsna gives us the intelligenceto become a very shrewd businessman or a popular politician or a cunningman so that we can earn money and enjoy ourselves. According to thestandards of material life, many people are becoming great. They beginas very poor men and soon, by good fortune, become millionaires. We
--- Page 203 ---
Should not think, however, that they are attaining such success by their
own puny endeavors. Without intelligence, no one can improve, and thatintelligence is given by Krsna. In the Bhagavad-gita Krsna states thatHe is seated in everyone's heart as the Supersoul and that by His will aman can remember, and by His will a man can forget. Krsna suppliesforgetfulness and remembrance according to the living entity's desire.If we want to forget Krsna and enjoy the material world, He will give usthe necessary intelligence so that we can forget Him for good.     Many people are thinking, "I can enjoy this material world verynicely. Everyone is having such a good time. There is no reason I can'tenjoy myself as much as they." This idea is illusion because there is noreal enjoyment in the material world. We may rise to a very highposition like President Kennedy. We may be very good-looking, veryfamous, very intelligent, and well educated, very wealthy and verypowerful, and we may have a very beautiful wife and children and holdthe highest position in the country--but at any moment we are subject tobe shot down. This is the nature of the material world: we have to facedanger at every step. There is no question of having pleasure withoutimpediments. Even when the pleasures are earned, they are earned after agreat deal of struggle and sacrifice, and whatever pleasure may beacquired is temporary, for in the material world there is no pleasurethat can give us constant and unending enjoyment. Only Krsna can give usthat.     Therefore Krsna instructs in the Bhagavad-gita that it is thewelfare of every living entity to give up this nonsensical materialactivity and just surrender unto Him. Unfortunately, in this age peopleare so attracted by the glitter of material nature, to illusion, ormaya, that they are not very interested. Krsna even declares that if onesurrenders unto Him, He will give all protection from all sinfulreactions, but still people are so attached that they cannot do it.People always fear that by surrendering to Krsna they will losesomething, just as I feared losing my family by going to the Westernworld and preaching. But Krsna is so kind that if He takes anythingaway, He will reward us a thousandfold.     The spiritual master is also kind in that he begs from door todoor, country to country, town to town: "My dear ladies and gentlemen,my dear boys and girls, please take to Krsna consciousness." In this wayhe renders very confidential service to Krsna. Krsna is the Supreme Lordwho gives the orders, and the spiritual master executes those orders;therefore the spiritual master is very dear to Krsna. Whether Krsnasends him to heaven or to hell makes no difference to him. For thespiritual master, a pure devotee, heaven and hell are both the same ifthere is no Krsna consciousness. In hell people are suffering in so manyways, and in heaven they are enjoying their senses in so many ways, buta devotee of the Lord can live any place where there is Krsnaconsciousness, and since he brings this consciousness with him, he isalways self-satisfied. If he is sent to hell, he will be satisfiedsimply chanting Hare Krsna. In fact, he does not believe in hell but inKrsna. Similarly, if he were put in heaven, where there are so manyopportunities for sense gratification, he would also remain aloof, forhis senses are satisfied by Krsna Himself. Thus for the service of theLord a devotee is prepared to go anywhere, and for this reason he isvery dear to Krsna.
--- Page 204 ---
     Renounced impersonalist philosophers say that this world is false
and that the impersonal Brahman is truth. But if they are asked to goout into society where material sense gratification predominates, theywill refuse for fear of being affected by those conditions. For a Krsnaconscious person, however, there is no such difficulty. Because he iscontrolled and has taken shelter of Krsna, he is not afraid of goinganywhere.     Consequently, when devotees meet in a place where there is no Krsnaconsciousness, there is no harm, for they take the opportunity to chantHare Krsna and infuse the place with Krsna consciousness. Thisopportunity should always be taken. It is not that one should closehimself up in a room and chant alone. The great sage Narada is aspaceman who travels all over the universe. Although he can dwell in themost elevated planets, he sometimes goes to hell and preaches there.That is the beauty of a servant of God--he is always acting out of lovefor Krsna and His parts and parcels.     The underlying principle of devotional service is unalloyed lovefor Krsna. Regardless of the position of a particular devotee--asfriend, servant, parent, or lover of Krsna--his service isunconditional, for Krsna consciousness is not dependent on any materialcondition. It is transcendental and has nothing to do with the modes ofmaterial nature. A devotee is not afraid to go anywhere, and because ofthis he sees all material conditions as equal. In the world we may saythat this is a good place to be and that is a bad place, but, as pointedout before, the devotee is not subject to these mental concoctions. Forhim the basic principle of material existence is bad, for materialexistence means forgetfulness of Krsna.     In the neutral stage of devotion one may give more importance tothe impersonal effulgence of the Lord and to the Supersoul within theheart, but Krsna consciousness actually develops when one thinks, "Krsnais my very intimate master of intimate relationships." In the beginning,of course, impersonal realization and realization of the Supersoul arepart of Krsna consciousness. The partial realization of God in Hisimpersonal aspect or in His aspect as Supersoul enables one to developveneration for the Lord, but when one has an intimate relationship withKrsna as a friend, master, son, or lover, then the venerationdisappears.     This platform of personal relationship is certainly higher than theimpersonal platform or the platform of Supersoul, or Paramatma,realization. In the neutral conception, one simply realizes that he andthe Absolute Truth are one in quality, or he realizes that he is partand parcel of the Supreme. That is certainly knowledge, for when onedevelops a personal relationship with Krsna as servant, he begins toappreciate the full opulence of the Supreme Lord. One who realizes thatGod is full in six opulences actually begins rendering service. As soonas one becomes aware of the greatness of Krsna and understands Krsna'ssuperiority, his service begins. The awareness of God's greatness in.creases when transcendental service is rendered. A person who serves theLord in order to satisfy the senses of the Lord becomes satisfied,because Krsna is the Supersoul and the individual living entity is Hispart and parcel. If He is satisfied, then the living entity issatisfied. If the stomach is satisfied, then all the parts of the bodyare satisfied, for they receive nourishment through the stomach. Whenone of my Godbrothers began to fan my Guru Maharaja on a very hot day,
--- Page 205 ---
Guru Maharaja asked, ` `Why are you fanning me all of a sudden?" The boy
replied, ` `Because if you are satisfied, we are all satisfied." This isthe formula--we should not try to satisfy our senses separately, butshould try to satisfy Krsna's senses. Then naturally we will becomesatisfied.     A Krsna conscious person is always trying to give satisfaction toKrsna, and this is the beginning of Krsna consciousness. Because in theimpersonal conception there is no form of God, there is no opportunityto satisfy His senses. However, one who sees Krsna as master can renderservice. In the Bhagavad-gita Krsna is referred to as Hrsikesa, masterof the senses. When it is understood that the Absolute Truth is themaster of the senses, that our senses are products of His senses, andthat they should therefore be utilized for the satisfaction of Hissenses, Krsna consciousness, which is dormant within everyone, begins toawaken. Once Caitanya Mahaprabhu asked, "What is the difference betweenthe neutral position in relation to Krsna and the relationship of masterand servant?" In both cases one can understand that Krsna is great, butin the neutral position there is no inclination for service. Thereforethe master-servant relationship between Krsna and the living entity ismore elevated. Then when one attains friendship with Krsna, anothertranscendental quality is added. There is the conception that God isgreat and that service must be rendered unto Him, but there is also anextra feeling: "Krsna is my friend. Therefore I must treat Him in such away that He will be happy." With a friend we are not simply content withrendering service but in making him actually happy and satisfied. Thereis also equality in such a relationship, for Krsna and the devoteerelate on equal terms. Thus devotees in this position actually forgetKrsna's superiority. When Krsna's boyfriends used to ride on Krsna'sshoulders playing games, they did not think that they were greater thanHim. There is no question of sense gratification or self-glorification,for the relationship is based on pure love. The devotee's only desire isto give pleasure to Krsna, and Krsna also takes His friends on Hisshoulders to derive pleasure from them. Sometimes a person simplyaccepts the fact that his friend will slap his face--but there is noquestion of inferiority in such an action. When friendship and mutualpleasure are the basis of the relationship, there is no question ofinsult or inferiority.     The whole basis of Krsna consciousness and a relationship withKrsna is the pleasure potency of Krsna Himself. Srimati Radharani, thedamsels of Vraja, and Krsna's cowherd boyfriends are all expansions ofKrsna's pleasure potency. We all have a tendency toward pleasure,because the source from which we emanate is fully potent in pleasure.Impersonalists cannot think in these terms, for they deny the pleasurepotency; therefore the impersonalist philosophy is incomplete andinferior. Those who are in Krsna consciousness recognize the pleasurepotency in Krsna and in all His paraphernalia--His friends, servants,father, mother, and consort. All relationships with Krsna that aim atsatisfying Krsna's senses are manifestations of Krsna's pleasurepotency.     As far as the individual soul is concerned, it is originally a partand parcel of this pleasure potency, of the reservoir of pleasureHimself. However, due to contact with material nature, the soul hasforgotten its actual position and has become trapped in the evolutionaryprocess of transmigration from one body to another. Thus one struggles
--- Page 206 ---
hard for existence. Now we must extricate ourselves from the sufferings
of the struggle, from the countless transmigrations that force us tosuffer the miseries of birth, old age, disease, and death, and come tothe point of our eternal life in Krsna consciousness. That eternal lifeis possible. If one tries his best in this human form of life, in hisnext life he will get a spiritual body. The spiritual body is alreadywithin the gross material body, but it will develop only as soon as onebecomes free from the contamination of this material existence. That isthe aim of human life and the actual self-interest of all people. Self-interest is actually realizing, "I am part and parcel of God. I have toreturn to the kingdom of God and join with Him." Just as we have asocial life here, God has a social life in the spiritual kingdom, and wecan join Him there. It is not that after finishing this body we becomevoid. In the Bhagavad-gita (2.12) Krsna told Arjuna, "Never was there atime when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these kings, nor in thefuture shall any of us cease to be." Our existence is therefore eternal,and the changes of birth and death are simply the changes of thetemporary material bodies.     The actual process for achieving eternal life is not at alldifficult. This process of Krsna consciousness is based on knowledgereceived from Krsna, the most perfect being. Knowledge received fromothers is defective because the conditioned soul is certain to commitmistakes, certain to be illusioned, certain to cheat, and certain tohave imperfect senses. The knowledge received from Krsna, however,actually enables us to see Krsna. Someone may challenge, "Can you showme God?" and our answer is, "Yes. God can be seen at every moment."Krsna says, raso 'ham apsu kaunteya: "I am the taste of water." We drinkwater every day, and the taste of water is there, so if we think of thistaste as Krsna, we will have begun realizing God every day. In theBhagavad-gita Krsna further says, prabhasmi sasi-suryayoh: "I am thelight of the sun and the moon." Every day we receive sunlight, and inthe evening there is moonshine, so if we think of the source of theseemanations, we will ultimately become God conscious. There are so manysimilar instances given in the Bhagavad-gita, for Krsna is thebeginning, middle, and end of all manifestations. If we want to becomeGod conscious and realize our own essence, it is not very difficult. Weonly have to understand God in truth--how He appears, how He disappears,and what His functions are--then we can become eligible to enter intothe kingdom of God. After quitting this material body, a person whounderstands God, Krsna, does not return again to earth to accept anothermaterial body. Where does he go? Krsna says, mam eti: "He comes to Me."That should be the aim of any intelligent human being.
“Science of Self-Realization”  by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use this electronicfile to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your own privateuse, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, studentpapers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluation
--- Page 207 ---
copy to others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyright
information intact. You may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) ofthis book in any media without the express written permission from thecopyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Science of Self-Realization” by A.C. BhaktivedantaSwami, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International,
www.Krishna.com    .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1977-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, 
   www.Krishna.com    .