
                                Chapter Seven
                       Exploring the Spiritual FrontierSrila Prabhupada Arrives in America
Several years after Srila Prabhupada first arrived in America, adisciple discovered the diary he had kept during his passage from Indiaon the steamship Jaladuta. Inside was a poem, handwritten in Bengali,that Srila Prabhupada had written on board the ship just after it hadarrived in Boston harbor. The poem beautifully captures SrilaPrabhupada's first impressions of Western civilization and reveals hisheartfelt determination to change the consciousness of America.
--- Page 157 ---
My dear Lord Krsna, You are so kind upon this useless soul, but I do not
know why You have brought me here. Now You can do whatever You like withme.But I guess You have some business here, otherwise why would You bringme to this terrible place?Most of the population here is covered by the material modes ofignorance and passion. Absorbed in material life, they think themselvesvery happy and satisfied, and therefore they have no taste for thetranscendental message of Vasudeva. I do not know how they will be ableto understand it.But I know Your causeless mercy can make everything possible, becauseYou are the most expert mystic.How will they understand the mellows of devotional service? O Lord, I amsimply praying for Your mercy so that I will be able to convince themabout Your message.All living entities have become under the control of the illusory energyby Your will, and therefore, if You like, by Your will they can also bereleased from the clutches of illusion.I wish that You may deliver them. Therefore if You so desire theirdeliverance, then only will they be able to understand Your message.The words of the Srimad-Bhagavatam are Your incarnation, and if a soberperson repeatedly receives them with submissive aural reception, then hewill be able to understand Your message.     It is said in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.17-21): "Sri Krsna, thePersonality of Godhead, who is the Paramatma [supersoul] in everyone'sheart and the benefactor of the truthful devotee, cleanses desire formaterial enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who relishes Hismessages, which are in themselves virtuous when properly heard andchanted. By regularly hearing the Bhagavatam and rendering service untothe pure devotee, all that is troublesome to the heart is practicallydestroyed, and loving service unto the glorious Lord, who is praisedwith transcendental songs, is established as an irrevocable fact. At thetime loving service is established in the heart, the modes of passion[rajas] and ignorance [tamas], and lust and desire [kama] disappear fromthe heart. Then the devotee is established in goodness and he becomeshappy. Thus established in the mode of goodness, the man rejuvenated byloving service to the Lord gains liberation from material association[mukti] and comes to know scientifically of the Personality of Godhead.Thus the knots of the heart and all misgivings are cut to pieces. Thechain of fruitive actions [karma] is terminated when one sees the selfas master."He will become liberated from the influence of the modes of ignoranceand passion and thus all inauspicious things accumulated in the core ofthe heart will disappear.How will I make them understand this message of Krsna consciousness? Iam very unfortunate, unqualified, and the most fallen. Therefore I amseeking Your benediction so that I can convince them, for I am powerlessto do so on my own.Somehow or other, O Lord, You have brought me here to speak about You.Now, my Lord, it is up to You to make me a success or failure as Youlike.O spiritual master of all the worlds! I can simply repeat Your message,so if You like You can make my power of speaking suitable for theirunderstanding.
--- Page 158 ---
Only by Your causeless mercy will my words become pure. I am sure that
when this transcendental message penetrates their hearts they willcertainly feel engladdened and thus become liberated from all unhappyconditions of life.O Lord, I am just like a puppet in Your hands. So if You have brought mehere to dance, then make me dance, make me dance. O Lord, make me danceas You like.I have no devotion, nor do I have any knowledge, but I have strong faithin the holy name of Krsna. I have been designated as Bhaktivedanta, andnow, if You like, You can fulfill the real purport of Bhaktivedanta.Signed--the most unfortunate, insignificant beggarA. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami,on board the ship Jaladuta, Commonwealth Pier,Boston, Massachusetts, U.S.A.Build Your Nation on the Spiritual PlatformAsked to speak at the University of Nairobi in September 1972, SrilaPrabhupada addressed an overflow crowd of students and governmentofficials at the campus's Taifla (Independence) Hall. In his lecture headvised citizens of the developing nation of Kenya, "... please developspiritually , for spiritual development is sound development. Don'timitate the Americans and Europeans, who are living like cats and dogs.The atomic bomb is already there, and as soon as the next war breaksout, all their skyscrapers and everything else will be finished...."     Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much for kindly coming here toparticipate in this meeting for spreading Krsna consciousness. The Krsnaconsciousness movement is trying to bring human society to the pointwhere everyone's life can become successful. The subject today is thereal meaning of human life. We are trying to instruct the entire worldabout this meaning.     Human life is attained after many, many millions of years speciesof life according to the Padma Purana. Life began with the aquatics, forwe can understand from Vedic literature that at the beginning ofcreation the entire planet was merged in water. This material world iscomposed of five gross elements--earth, water, fire, air, and ether.Besides these there are three subtle elements--mind, intelligence, andego. Behind these curtains is the spirit soul, which is covered by theseeight elements. This information is given in the Bhagavad-gita.     Human beings are not the only living entities to have a spiritsoul. We are all spirit souls--beasts, birds, reptiles, insects, trees,plants, aquatics, and so on. The spirit soul is simply covered bydifferent dresses, just as some of you are dressed in white clothes,some in green, some in red, etc. But we are not concerned with thedress; we are concerned with you as spirit soul. Thus it is said in theBhagavad-gita (5.18):
                            vidya-vinaya-sampanne
                            brahmane ga vi hastini                            suni caiva svapake ca                            panditah sama-darsinah
     "The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal
vision a learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog, and adog-eater."
--- Page 159 ---
     The sage does not make any distinction on the basis of color,
intelligence, or species. He sees every living entity as a smallparticle of spirit soul. It is stated:
                            kesagra-sata-bhagasya
                            satamsah sadrsatmakah                          jivah suksma-svarupo 'yam                           sankhyatito hi cit-kanah
     "There are innumerable particles of spiritual atoms, which are
measured as one ten-thousandth of the upper portion of a hair." Becausewe have no instrument to measure the dimensions of the spirit soul, thesmall particle of spirit soul is measured in this way. In other words,the soul is so small that it is smaller than an atom. That smallparticle is within you, within me, within the elephant, within giganticanimals, in all men, in the ant, in the tree, everywhere. However,scientific knowledge cannot estimate the dimensions of the soul, nor cana doctor locate the soul within the body. Consequently materialscientists conclude that there is no soul, but that is not a fact. Thereis a soul. The presence of the soul makes a difference between a livingbody and a dead body. As soon as the soul departs from the body, thebody dies. It has no value. However great a scientist or a philosopherone may be, he must admit that as soon as the soul departs from thebody, the body dies. It then has no value and has to be thrown away. Weshould try to understand this; the soul is valuable, not the body. Thefact that the soul is transmigrating is explained in the Bhagavad-gita(2.22):
                         vasamsi jirnani yatha vihaya
                         na vani grhnati naro 'parani                        tatha sarirani vihaya jirnany                         anyani samyati na vani dehi
     "As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, similarly,
the soul accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and uselessones."     When a suit becomes old, we give it up and accept another suit;similarly the soul is changing dresses according to desire. Because thesoul is part and parcel of God, it has godly qualities. God is thesupreme will, the supreme power, the supreme independent one, and we,being part and parcel of Him, have all these qualities in minutequantity. We have willing, thinking, feeling, and desiring. In the Vedasit is stated that God is the supreme living force among all livingforces (cetanas cetananam). He is also supplying the necessities of allliving entities.     We living entities are innumerable; there is no limit to ournumber. God, however, is one. He is also living, as we are but we areminute particles of that living force. For example, a particle of goldis the same in quality as a gold mine. If we chemically analyze theingredients in a small drop of water, we will find all of theingredients that are to be found in the vast ocean. In a similar way, weare one with God, being His part and parcel. This godly particle, thesoul, or the living force, is transmigrating from aquatics to trees andplants and then from trees and plants to insect life, then to reptile
--- Page 160 ---
life, then to the bodies of birds and beasts. Darwin's theory of
evolution is but a partial explanation of the transmigration of thesoul. Darwin has simply taken information from Vedic literature, but hehas no conception of the soul. The difference is that the soul istransmigrating from aquatic life to plants and trees, then to insectlife, then to bird life, then animal life, then human life, and withinhuman life he moves from uncivilized life to civilized life, etc. Thecivilized life of a human being represents the culmination of evolution.Here is a junction: from this point we can again slide down into thecyclic process of evolution, or we can elevate ourselves to a godlylife. The choice is up to us. This is indicated in the Bhagavad-gita.     This human form of life actually means developed consciousness;therefore we should not waste our lives like cats, dogs, and hogs. Thatis the injunction. Although this body is perishable like a dog's orcat's body, it is different in that one can attain the highestperfection in this life. We are part and parcel of God, but somehow orother we have fallen into this material existence; now we have to evolvein such a way that we can go back home, back to Godhead. That is thehighest perfection.     There is actually another world, a spiritual world. As stated inthe Bhagavad-gita (8.20):
                          paras tasmat tu bhavo 'nyo
                          'vyakto 'vyaktat sanatanah                            yah sa sarvesu bhutesu                            nasyatsu na vinasyati
     "Yet there is another nature, which is eternal and is
transcendental to this manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supremeand is never annihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, thatpart remains as it is."     In this material nature, everything is created, it stays for sometime, produces some by-products, dwindles, and finally vanishes. Ourbodies are created at a certain moment by sexual intercourse. The semenof the father emulsifies and takes a pea form, and the living entity, orsoul, takes shelter in that form, and because it takes shelter, itdevelops hands, legs, eyes, etc. This development is complete in theseventh month, and in the ninth month the human being comes out of thewomb. It is because the soul is present that the child develops. If thesoul is not present, there is no development, and the child is borndead. We can take this dead body and preserve it in chemicals, but itwill not develop. Development means change of body. All of us have hadbaby bodies, but those bodies are no longer existing. The body of a babydevelops into the body of a child, and that body develops into the bodyof a boy, and that body develops into a youth's body, which eventuallyturns into an old man's body. Finally the body completely vanishes. Thewhole cosmic manifestation, the gigantic form of this material world, isalso working according to this same process. It is created at a certainpoint, it develops, it is maintained, and at a certain stage it isdissolved. That is the nature of the material world. It is manifest at acertain interval, and again it vanishes (bhutva bhutva praliyate).     The word bhava means "nature." There is another nature, which neverdissolves, which is eternal. As jivas, spirit souls, we are alsoeternal. This is verified in the Bhagavad-gita (2.20):
--- Page 161 ---
                         na jayate mriyate va kadacin
                      nayam bhutva bhavita va na bhuyah                        ajo nityah sasvato 'yam purano                         na hanyate hanyamane sarire
     "For the soul there is neither birth nor death. Nor, having once
been, does he ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing,undying, and primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain."     Just as God has no birth or death, we spirit souls can have neitherbirth nor death, but because we think, "1 am this body," we considerthat we are born and that we die. Such thinking is called maya, orillusion, and as soon as we get out of this illusion of identifying thesoul with the body, we attain the stage called brahma-bhuta. When onerealizes aham-brahmasmi, "I am not this body; I am spirit soul, part andparcel of the Supreme Brahman," he attains what is called Brahmanrealization. As soon as Brahman realization is attained, one becomeshappy.     Is this not a fact? If you understand clearly that you have nobirth and death, that you are eternal, will you not become happy? Yes,certainly. Thus when one is Brahman realized, spiritually realized, hehas no more to do with hankering or lamentation. The whole world issimply hankering and lamenting. You African people are now hankering tobe like Europeans and Americans, but the Europeans have lost theirempire, and now they are lamenting. So in this way one party ishankering and another is lamenting. Similarly, this material life issimply a combination of hankering and lamenting. We are hankering forthose things which we do not possess, and we are lamenting for thosethings which we have lost. That is our material business. If we realize,however, that we are part and parcel of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead (Parabrahman) and that we are Brahman, then we will transcendthis hankering and lamenting.     The so-called universal brotherhood or unity that the UnitedNations is trying to achieve is possible only when you come to thespiritual platform, or Brahman realization. Brahman realization is theaim of human life. One should not work like cats, dogs, and hogs. Thehog is always very busy day and night trying to find stool, and when hefinds it, he eats it and becomes sexually agitated and has sex withoutdiscrimination. A hog will have sex with its mother or sister or anyoneelse, and this is a hog's life. However, the scriptures indicate thatthe human form of life is not meant for working hard for sensegratification like cats, dogs, and hogs. It is meant for realizing, "Ido not belong to this material world. I am spirit soul and am eternal,but somehow or other I have fallen into this conditional life of birth,old age, disease, and death." This human form of life is meant formaking a solution to these four material miseries--birth, old age,disease, and death. That is the aim of human life. Just try tounderstand that human life is not meant for working very hard like hogsand then having some sense gratification and then all of a sudden dying.     People who do not believe in the soul are in a most unfortunatecondition. They do not know where they came from nor where they aregoing. Knowledge of the soul is the most important knowledge, but it isnot discussed in any university. But what is the constitution of thisbody? What is the distinction between a dead body and a living body? Why
--- Page 162 ---
is the body living? What is the condition of the body, and what is its
value? No one is presently studying these questions, but by this Krsnaconsciousness movement we are trying to educate people so that they canunderstand that they are not these bodies but are spirit souls. Thebusiness of human life is different from the business of cats and dogs.That is our message.     As far as the soul is concerned, the evolutionary process is goingon, and we are struggling for existence, struggling to come to the pointof eternal life. That eternal life is possible. If you try your best inthis human form of life, in your next life you can get a spiritual body.Your spiritual body is already within you, and it will develop as soonas you become free from the contamination of this material existence.That is the aim of human life. People do not know what actual self-interest is; it is to realize oneself, to realize, "I am part and parcelof God, and I have to return to the kingdom of God to join with God."     Just as we have a social life here, God has a social life in thespiritual kingdom. You can join Him there. It is not that after thisbody is finished you become void. No. That is a wrong conception. In theBhagavad-gita (2.12), Krsna told Arjuna on the Battlefield ofKuruksetra:
                            na tu evahamjatu nasam
                            na tvam nemejanadhipah                           na caiva na bhavisyamah                            sarve vayam atah param
     "Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all
these kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be."     The process for attaining eternal life is very easy, and yet at thesame time very difficult. It is difficult because people in thebeginning do not believe in the existence of transmigration of the soul.However, if we simply take knowledge from the authorities, the processbecomes very simple. Our process of Krsna consciousness is to takeknowledge from Krsna, the most perfect being, and not from an ordinarybeing conditioned by the laws of material nature. Knowledge taken from aconditioned being is sure to be defective.     What are the defects of the conditioned soul? He is sure to commitmistakes, sure to be illusioned, sure to cheat others, and sure to haveimperfect senses. We cannot attain knowledge perfectly, because we wantto cheat others and our senses are imperfect. Although our senses areimperfect, we are very proud of our eyes, and we want to see everything.Therefore someone says, "Can you show me God?" Actually the answer isyes. Why can't you see God at every moment? Krsna says, raso 'ham apsukaunteya: "I am the taste of water." Everyone drinks water, and thetaste is there--so if we think of this taste as God, we begin theprocess of God realization. Krsna also says, prabhasmi sasi-suryayoh: "Iam the sunshine, and I am the moonshine." We all see the sunshine andmoonshine every day, and if we think of how it is that the sun and moonare emanating light, we will ultimately reach God. There are so manysimilar instances. If you want to be God conscious and realize Godyourself, it is not very difficult. You have simply to follow theprescribed methods. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita (18.55), tato mam-tattvato jnatva. We must simply try to understand God in truth and tryto understand His appearance, disappearance, and functions. When we
--- Page 163 ---
understand Him in truth, we immediately enter the kingdom of God. After
quitting this body, the person who understands God, or Krsna, does notcome back again to accept another material body. Krsna says, mam eti:"He comes to Me." That is our aim.     Therefore we should not waste our time living like cats and dogs.We should live comfortably, but at the same time we should be Krsnaconscious, or God conscious. That will help us become happy. Withoutunderstanding God and without becoming God conscious, there is nopossibility of peace and happiness. The way of peace and happiness isoutlined in the Bhagavad-gita.     If you really want to understand God, He is very easy tounderstand. God is the proprietor of everything. Isavasyam idam sarvam.Unfortunately we are thinking, "I am the proprietor." In your country,for instance, the British have sometimes claimed to be proprietors, andnow you are claiming to be the proprietors--so who knows what willhappen in the future? Actually no one knows who the real proprietor is.The land is there, and it is the property of God, but we are simplythinking, "I am the proprietor. I own this, and I own that." Actually,America existed before the Europeans came, but now the Americans arethinking, "We are the proprietors." Similarly, before them the RedIndians were thinking, "We are the proprietors." The fact is that no manis an actual proprietor; the proprietor is God.
                            isavasyam idam sarvam
                          yat kim ca jagatyam jagat                           tena tyaktena bhunjitha-                         ma grdhah kasya svid dhanam
     "Everything animate or inanimate that is within the universe is
controlled and owned by the Lord. One should therefore accept only thosethings necessary for himself, which are set aside as his quota, and oneshould not accept other things, knowing well to whom they belong."(Isopanisad 1)     This realization is wanting. Krsna claims proprietorship over allforms--including American forms, African forms, cat forms, dog forms,tree forms, etc.--for in actuality He is the proprietor and the supremefather. If we simply realize this, we attain God realization. Actually,if we realize God as prescribed in the authorized books and Vedicliteratures, we will find that there will no longer be quarrels betweenthis party and that party. Everything will be peaceful.     Everyone has the right to use God's property, just as a son has theright to live at the cost of his father. It is stated in the scripturesthat even a small animal in the home must be given some food. That isspiritual communism. No one should remain hungry, not even a serpent. Weare always afraid of serpents, but if we find a serpent to be living inour house, it is our duty to see that the serpent is also fed. This isthe conception of God consciousness, or Krsna consciousness: samahsarvesu bhutesu. One who is transcendentally situated is equallydisposed to every living entity. Thus the Bhagavad-gita points out thatwhen one sees everyone equally, as part and parcel of the Supreme Lord,one actually begins his devotional life. This Krsna consciousnessmovement is trying in an authoritative way to make everyone understandwhat he is and what the aim of life is. This process of purification ofthe heart is very easily accomplished. One simply has to chant this
--- Page 164 ---
maha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. It can actually be seen that in thismovement there are boys and girls from different countries and differentreligions, but no one is concerned with any particular section, country,or religious body. We are simply concerned about knowing ourselves andour relationship with God.     God is the supreme proprietor, and we are all His sons, orservitors. Therefore let us engage ourselves in the service of the Lord,as recommended in the Bhagavad-gita. As soon as we understand that Godis the proprietor of everything, then all the troubles of the world willimmediately be solved. This may take some time. It is not expected thateveryone will understand this high philosophy, but if the intelligentpeople in every country try to understand it, that will be sufficient.In the Bhagavad-gita (3.21) it is stated:
                           yad yad acarati sresthas
                            tat tad evetaro janah                            sa yat pramanam kurute                             lokas tad anuvartate
     "Whatever action a great man performs, common men follow in his
footsteps. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all theworld pursues."     We therefore invite the most intelligent men in the world tounderstand this Krsna conscious philosophy and try to distribute it allover the world. We have now come to these African countries, and Iinvite all intelligent Africans to come and understand this philosophyand distribute it. You are trying to develop yourselves, so pleasedevelop spiritually, for spiritual development is sound development.Don't imitate the Americans and Europeans, who are living like cats anddogs. Such civilizations built on the consciousness of sensegratification cannot stand. The atomic bomb is already there, and assoon as the next war breaks out, all their skyscrapers and everythingelse will be finished. Try to understand this from the real viewpoint ofhuman life, the spiritual viewpoint. This is what this Krsnaconsciousness movement is about. We therefore request you to try tounderstand this philosophy. Thank you very much.Saintly CompassionEvery religion has its own saints, but all saints share one transcendentspiritual quality: compassion. Srila Prabhupada explains....     Today I shall speak to you about the glorification of the holy nameof God. This was discussed between Maharaja Pariksit and SukadevaGosvami in connection with a brahmana who was very fallen and addictedto all kinds of sinful activities but was saved simply by chanting theholy name. This is found in the Sixth Canto of the Srimad-Bhagavatam.     The universal planetary systems are very nicely explained in thefifth Canto of the Srimad-Bhagavatam. Within the universe there are someplanets which are hellish. Actually, not only the Bhagavatam but allreligious scriptures contain descriptions of hell and heaven. In theSrimad-Bhagavatam you can find out where those hellish planets are andhow distant they are from this planet, just as you can obtaininformation from modern astronomy. Astronomers have calculated how farthe moon is from here and what the distance is between this planet and
--- Page 165 ---
the sun; similarly, the Bhagavatam contains descriptions of the hellish
planets.     We have experience of different atmospheric conditions even on thisplanet. In the Western countries near the North Pole, the climate isdifferent than in India, which is near the equator. Just as there aredifferences in atmosphere and living conditions on this planet,similarly there are many planets which have different atmospheres andconditions of life.     After hearing a description of the hellish planets from SukadevaGosvami, Pariksit Maharaja said,
                             adhuneha maha-bhaga
                            yathaiva narakan narah                            nanogra-yatanan neyat                           tan me vyakhyatum arhasi
     "Sir, I have heard from you about the hellish planets. Men who are
very sinful are sent to those planets." (Srimad-Bhagavatam 6.1.6)Pariksit Maharaja is a Vaisnava [devotee], and a Vaisnava always feelscompassion for others' distress. He is very afflicted by the miseries ofothers. When Lord Jesus Christ presented himself, for instance, he wasgreatly afflicted by the miserable conditions of the people. Regardlessof which country or sect they belong to, all Vaisnavas, or devotees--anypeople who are God conscious, or Krsna conscious--are thuscompassionate. Therefore to blaspheme a Vaisnava, a preacher of God'sglories, is a great offense.     Krsna, God, is never tolerant of offenses committed at the lotusfeet of a Vaisnava. Krpambudhi: a Vaisnava is an ocean of mercy. Vancha-kalpa-taru: everyone has desires, but a Vaisnava can fulfill alldesires. Kalpa-taru means "desire tree." There is a tree in thespiritual world which is called a desire tree. In this material world,you get a particular type of fruit from a particular type of tree, butin Krsnaloka as well as in all the Vaikuntha planets, all the trees arespiritual and will fulfill all your desires. That is described in theBrahma-samhita: cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vrksa.     A Vaisnava is addressed as maha-bhaga, which means "fortunate." Onewho becomes a Vaisnava and is God conscious is understood to be greatlyfortunate.     Caitanya Mahaprabhu has explained that the living entities arerotating in different species of life, in different planetary systemsall over the universe. A living entity can go anywhere--to hell orheaven--as he likes and as he prepares himself. There are many heavenlyplanets, many hellish species of life. The living entity is rotating,wandering through these species and creating bodies according to hismentality in the present life. As you sow, so shall you reap.     Caitanya Mahaprabhu says that out of all these numberless livingentities who are traveling in the material world, one is fortunate, noteveryone. If everyone were fortunate, they would all have taken to Krsnaconsciousness. It is being distributed freely everywhere. But why arepeople not taking it? Because they are unfortunate. Therefore CaitanyaMahaprabhu says that only those who are fortunate take to this Krsnaconsciousness, and they get hopeful life, pleasant life, blissful life,a life of knowledge.
--- Page 166 ---
     It is the duty of a Vaisnava to go door to door to make the
unfortunate people fortunate. A Vaisnava thinks, "How can these peoplebe delivered from their hellish life?" That was Pariksit Maharaja'sinquiry. "Sir," he said, "you have described that on account of one'ssinful activities one is put into a hellish condition of life or in ahellish planetary system. Now, what are the countermethods by which suchpersons can be saved?" This is the question. When a Vaisnava comes, whenGod Himself comes, or when God's son or His very confidential devoteescome, their only mission is to save the sinful men who are suffering.They have knowledge of how to do this.     When Prahlada Maharaja met Nrsimhadeva, he said:
                    naivodvije para duratyaya vaitaranyas
                   tvad-virya-gayana-mahamrta-magna-cittah                    soce tato vimukha-cetasa indriyartha-                    maya-sukhaya bharam udvahato vimudhan
     "My dear Lord," Prahlada says, "I am not very anxious for my own
deliverance." (SB. 7.9.43) Mayavadi philosophers are very careful thattheir personal salvation is not interrupted. They think, "If I go topreach in association with others, I may fall down, and my realizationwill be finished." Therefore they do not come. Only the Vaisnavas come,at the risk of falldown--but they do not fall down. They may even go tohell to deliver the conditioned souls. This is Prahlada Maharaja'smission. He says, naivodvije: "I am not very anxious about living inthis material world."     Prahlada Maharaja says further, "I have no anxiety for myself,because somehow or other I have been trained to be always Krsnaconscious." Because he is Krsna conscious, he is confident that in hisnext life he is going to Krsna. It is stated in the Bhagavad-gita thatif one executes the Krsna conscious regulative principles carefully, itis certain that he will reach the supreme destination in his next life.     Prahlada Maharaja continues: "There is only one source of anxietyfor me." Just see--although he had no anxiety for himself, he still hadanxiety. He says, soce tato vimukha-cetasah: "I am anxious for thosepersons who are not Krsna conscious. That is my anxiety. for myself Ihave no anxiety, but I am thinking of those who are not Krsnaconscious." Why aren't they Krsna conscious? Maya-sukhaya bharamudvahato vimudhan. These rascals have created a humbug civilization fortemporary happiness.     Maya-sukhaya. Actually this is a fact. We have a humbugcivilization. So many cars are being manufactured every year, and forthat purpose so many roads have to be excavated and prepared. Thiscreates problem after problem. Therefore it is maya-sukhaya, illusoryhappiness, and yet we are trying to be happy in this way. We are tryingto manufacture some way to be happy, but this only creates otherproblems.     In your country you have the greatest number of cars, but that doesnot solve any problems. You have manufactured cars to help solve theproblems of life, but I have experienced that this also creates moreproblems. When my disciple Dayananda wanted to take me to a doctor inLos Angeles, I had to take the trouble to travel thirty miles before Icould even consult the doctor. Once you create cars, then you musttravel thirty or forty miles to meet your friends.
--- Page 167 ---
     You can fly from New York to Boston in one hour, but it takes even
longer than that just to get to the airport. This situation is calledmaya-sukhaya. Maya means "false," "illusory." We are trying to createsome very comfortable situation, but we have created anotheruncomfortable situation. This is the way of the material world; if weare not satisfied by the natural comforts offered by God and nature andwe want to create artificial comforts, then we have to create somediscomfort also. Most people do not know that. They think that they arecreating a very comfortable situation, but actually they are travelingfifty miles to go to the office to earn a livelihood and fifty miles tocome back. Because of such conditions, Prahlada Maharaja says that thesevimudhans--these materialistic persons, these rascals--have created anunnecessary burden on themselves simply for temporary happiness.Vimudhan, maya-sukhaya bharam udvahato. Therefore, in Vedic civilizationit is recommended that one free himself from material life, takesannyasa, the renounced order of life, and prosecute spiritual life withabsolutely no anxiety.     If one can execute Krsna consciousness in family life, that is verygood. Bhaktivinoda Thakura was a family man, a magistrate. and still heexecuted devotional service so nicely. Dhruva Maharaja and PrahladaMaharaja were grhasthas, householders, but they trained themselves insuch a way that even as householders they were faced with nointerruption in their service. Therefore, Prahlada Maharaja says, "Ihave learned the art of always remaining in Krsna consciousness." Whatis that art? Tvad-virya-gayana-mahamrta-magna-cittah. Simply glorifyingthe victorious activities and pastimes of the Lord. Virya means "veryheroic."     Krsna's activities are heroic. You can read about them in Krsna,the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Krsna's name, His fame, Hisactivities, His associates, and all other things related to Him areheroic. Prahlada Maharaja says in this connection, "I am certain thatwherever I go, I can glorify Your heroic activities and be safe. Thereis no question of my falling down. But I am simply anxious for thesepersons who have created a type of civilization in which they are alwaysbusy working hard. I am thinking of them."     Prahlada says further:
                    prayena deva munayah sva-vimukti-kama
                  maunam caranti vijane na parartha-nisthah                     naitan vihaya krpanan vimumuksa eko                  nanyam tvad asya saranam bhramato 'nupasye
     "My dear Lord, there are many saintly persons and sages who are
very interested in their own liberation." (SB. 7.9.44) Munayah means"saintly persons" or "philosophers." Prayena deva munayah sva-vimukti-kamah: they are very interested in their own liberation. They try tolive in solitary places like the Himalaya Mountains. They do not talk toanyone, and they are always afraid of mixing with ordinary people in thecity and becoming disturbed or maybe even falling down. They think,"Better let me save myself."     Prahlada Maharaja regrets that these great saintly persons do notcome to the city, where people have manufactured a civilization of veryhard work all day and night. Such saints are not very compassionate. He
--- Page 168 ---
says, "I am anxious for these fallen people who are unnecessarily
working so hard simply for sense gratification."     Even if there were some point in working that hard, such people donot know what it is. All they know is sex. Either they go to a nakeddance or to a naked club or to this or that. Prahlada Maharaja says,naitan vihaya krpanan vimumuksa ekah: "My Lord, I do not need salvationalone. Unless I take all these fools with me, I shall not go." Herefuses to go to the kingdom of God without taking all these fallensouls with him. This is a Vaisnava. Nanyam tvad asya saranam bhramato'nupasye: "I simply want to teach them how to surrender unto You. That'sall. That is my goal."     The Vaisnava knows that as soon as one surrenders, one's path isclear. Naivodvije para duratyaya-vaitaranyas tvad-virya-gayana-mahamrta-magna-cittah: ` `Somehow or other, let them bow down before Krsna." Thisis a simple method. All you have to do is bow down before Krsna withfaith and say, "My Lord Krsna, I was forgetful of You for so long, forso many lives. Now I have come to consciousness; please accept me."That's all. If one simply learns this technique and sincerely surrendershimself to the Lord, his path is immediately open. These are thephilosophical thoughts of a Vaisnava. A Vaisnava is always thinkingabout how the fallen conditioned souls can be delivered. He is alwaysinvolved in making plans in that way, just like the Gosvamis. What wasthe business of the six Gosvamis of Vrndavana, Lord Caitanya's directdisciples? That is stated by Srinivasa Acarya:
           nana-sastra-vicaranaika-nipunau sad-dharma-samsthapakau
             lokanam hita-karinau tribhuvane manyau saranyakarau              radha-krsna-padara vinda-bhajananandena mattalikau             vande rupa-sanatanau raghu-yugau sri-jiva-gopalakau
     "The six Gosvamis, namely, Sri Sanatana Gosvami, Sri Rupa Gosvami,
Sri Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami, Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvami, Sri JivaGosvami, and Sri Gopala Bhatta Gosvami, are very expert inscrutinizingly studying the revealed scriptures with the aim ofestablishing eternal religious principles for the benefit of all humanbeings. They are always absorbed in the mood of the gopis and areengaged in the transcendental loving service of Radha and Krsna." (Sad-gosvamy-astaka 2)     With similar Vaisnava compassion, Pariksit Maharaja says toSukadeva Gosvami: "You have described the different types of hellishconditions of life. Now, tell me how those who are suffering can bedelivered. Kindly explain this to me.
                             adhuneha maha-bhaga
                            yathaiva narakan narah                            nanogra-yatanan neyat                           tan me vyakhyatum arhasi
     Nara means human beings, those who are fallen. Narakan narah/
nanogra-yatanan neyat tan me: "How can they be delivered from theirfierce miseries and horrible pains?" That is a Vaisnava heart. MaharajaPariksit says, "Somehow or other they have fallen down to this hellishlife. But that does not mean that they should remain in that condition.
--- Page 169 ---
There must be some means by which they can be delivered, so kindly
explain that."     Sukadeva Gosvami replied:
                       na ced ihaivapacitim yathamhasah
                      krtasya kuryan mana-ukta-panibhih                     dhruvam sa vai pretya narakan upaiti                     ye kirtita me bhavatas tigma-yatanah
     "Yes, I've already described the different types of hellish
conditions and very severe painful life, but one has to counteract it."(SB. 6.1.7)     How can this be done? Sinful activities are committed in variousways. We can commit sinful activity or thus make a plan, thinking, "Ishall kill that man." Either way, it is sinful. When the mind isthinking, feeling, and willing, then there is action.     The other day I was reading in a book that if someone's dog barksat you when you are passing on the road, then that is an offense on thepart of the dog-owner, according to law. No one should have to be scaredby dogs barking, so one should take care of his dog. I read this. It isa law in your country. The dog is simply barking, but it is sinful. Thedog is not responsible, because it is an animal, but because the ownerof the animal has made the dog his best friend, he is responsible bylaw. If an outside dog enters your house, it may not be killed, but theowners of the dog may be prosecuted.     Just as the barking of the dog is unlawful, so when you speaksomething offensive to others, that is also sinful. That is just likebarking. Therefore sinful activities are committed in so many ways.Whether we think of sinful activities, or we speak something sinful, orwe actually commit a sinful activity, they are all considered sinfulactivities. Dhruvam sa vai pretya narakan upaiti. One has to sufferpunishment for such sinful activities.     People do not believe in a next life, because they want to avoidthis botheration. But we cannot avoid it. We must act according to thelaw, or we will be punished. Similarly, I cannot avoid God's law. Thatis not possible. I can cheat others, commit theft, and hide myself,thereby saving myself from the punishment of the state law, but I cannotsave myself from the superior law, the law of nature. It is verydifficult. There are so many witnesses. The daylight is witness, themoonlight is witness, and Krsna is the supreme witness. You cannot say,"I am committing this sin, but no one can see me."     Krsna is the supreme witness sitting within your heart. He notesdown what you are thinking and what you are doing. He also givesfacility. If you want to do something to satisfy your senses, Krsnagives the facility for that action. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gita.Sarvasya caham hrdi sannivistah: "I am sitting in everyone's heart."Mattah smrtir jnanam apohanam ca: "From Me come remembrance, knowledge,and forgetfulness."     In this way Krsna gives us a chance. If you want Krsna, then Hewill give you a chance to have Him, and if you don't want Krsna, then Hewill give you a chance to forget Him. If you want to enjoy lifeforgetting Krsna, forgetting God, then Krsna will give you all facilityso that you can forget, and if you want to enjoy life with Krsna
--- Page 170 ---
consciousness, then Krsna will give you the chance to make progress in
Krsna consciousness. That is up to you.     If you think that you can be happy without Krsna consciousness,Krsna does not object to that. Yathecchasi tatha kuru. After advisingArjuna, He simply said, "Now I have explained everything to you.Whatever you desire you can do." Arjuna replied immediately, karisyevacanam tava: "Now I shall execute Your order." That is Krsnaconsciousness.     God does not interfere with your little independence. If you wantto act according to the order of God, then God will help you. Even ifyou fall down sometimes, if you become sincere--"From this time on Ishall remain Krsna conscious and execute His orders"--then Krsna willhelp you. In all respects, even if you fall down, He will excuse you andgive you more intelligence. This intelligence will say, "Don't do this.Now go on with your duty." But if you want to forget Krsna, if you wantto become happy without Krsna, He will give you so many chances that youwill forget Krsna life after life.     Pariksit Maharaja says here, "It is not that if I say there is noGod then there will be no God or I will not be responsible for what Ido." That is the atheistic theory. Atheists do not want God, becausethey are always sinful--if they thought that there were God, then theywould be forced to shudder at the thought of punishment. Therefore theydeny the existence of God. That is their process. They think that ifthey do not accept God then there is no punishment and they can dowhatever they like.     When rabbits are being attacked by bigger animals, they close theireyes and think, "I am not going to be killed." But they are killedanyway. Similarly, we may deny the existence of God and the law of God,but still God and His law are there. In the high court you may say, "Idon't care for the law of the government," but you will be forced toaccept the government law. If you deny the state law, then you will beput into prison and be caused to suffer. Similarly, you may foolishlydecry the existence of God--"There is no God" or "I am God"--butnevertheless you are responsible for all your actions, both good andbad.     There are two kinds of activities--good and bad. If you act nicelyand perform pious activities, then you get good fortune, and if you actsinfully, then you have to suffer. Therefore Sukadeva Gosvami says:
                      tasmat puraivasv iha papa-niskrtau
                        yateta mrtyor a vipadyatatmana                     dosasya drstva guru-lagha vam yatha                      bhisak cikitseta rujam nidana-vit                                 (SB. 6.1.8)
     There are different kinds of atonement. If you commit some sin and
counteract it by something else, that is atonement. There are examplesof this in the Christian Bible. Sukadeva Gosvami says, "You should knowthat you are responsible, and according to the gravity of sinful life,you should accept some type of atonement as described in the sastras,the scriptures."     Actually, just as when one is diseased he must go to a doctor andpay doctor bills as a form of atonement, according to the Vedic way of
--- Page 171 ---
life there is a class of brahmanas to whom one should go for the
prescribed atonement according to the sins one commits.     Sukadeva Gosvami says that one has to execute the prescribedatonement according to the gravity of one's sinful life. He continuesthe example: dosasya drstva guru-lagha vam yatha bhisak cikitseta rujamnidana-vit. When you consult a physician, he prescribes an inexpensivemedicine or a costly medicine, according to the gravity of the disease.If you simply have a headache, he may prescribe an aspirin, but if youhave something very severe, he immediately prescribes a surgicaloperation that will cost a thousand dollars. Similarly, sinful life is adiseased condition, so one must follow the prescribed cure to becomehealthy.     Acceptance of the chain of birth and death is a diseased conditionof the soul. The soul has no birth and death and no disease, because itis spirit. Krsna says in the Bhagavad-gita (2.20): najayate, the soulhas no birth, and mriyate, it has no death. Nityah sasvato 'yam purano/na hanyate hanyamane sarire. The soul is eternal and everlasting. It isnot lost with the dissolution of this body. Na hanyate hanyamane sarire.Na hanyate means that it is not killed or destroyed, even after thedestruction of this body.     The missing point of modern civilization is that there is noeducational system to instruct people on what happens after death. Thuswe have the most defective education, because without this knowledge ofwhat happens after death, one dies like an animal. The animal does notknow that he is going to have another body; he has no such knowledge.     Human life is not meant for becoming an animal. One should notsimply be interested in eating, sleeping, sex life, and defense. You mayhave a very nice arrangement for eating, or many nice buildings forsleeping, or a very good arrangement for sex life, or a very gooddefense force to protect you, but that does not mean that you are ahuman being. That type of civilization is animal life. Animals are alsointerested in eating, sleeping, and sex life, and according to their ownmethods they defend also. Where, then, is the distinction between humanlife and animal life if you simply engage in these four principles ofbodily nature?     The distinction is made when a human being is inquisitive--"Whyhave I been put into this miserable condition? ls there any remedy forit? ls there any perpetual, eternal life? I do not want to die. I wantto live very happily and peacefully. Is there a chance of this? What isthat method? What is that science?" When these inquiries are there andsteps are taken to answer these questions, that is human civilization;otherwise it is doggish civilization, animal civilization.     Animals are satisfied if they can eat, sleep, have some sex life,and have some defense. Actually there is no defense, because no one canprotect himself from the hands of cruel death. Hiranyakasipu, forinstance, wanted to live forever, and so he underwent severeausterities. So-called scientists are now saying that we shall stopdeath by scientific methods. This is also another crazy utterance. Thatis not possible. You may make great advancement in scientific knowledge,but there is no scientific solution to these four problems--birth,death, old age, and disease.     One who is intelligent will be eager to solve these four primeproblems. No one wants to die. But there is no remedy. I have to die.Everyone is very anxious to stop the increase of population by employing
--- Page 172 ---
so many contraceptive methods, but still, birth is going on. So there is
no stoppage or birth. You may invent up-to-date medicines by yourscientific methods, but you cannot stop disease. It is not possible justto take a tablet to put an end to disease.     In the Bhagavad-gita it is said, janma-mrtyu jara-vyadhi-duhkha-dosanudarsanam: one might think that he has solved all the problems ofhis life, but where is the solution to these four problems of birth,death, old age, and disease? That solution is Krsna consciousness.     Krsna also says in the same book,
                           janma karma ca me divyam
                           evam yo vetti tattvatah                          tyaktva deham punar janma                           naiti mam eti so 'rjuna                                  (Bg. 4.9)
     Every one of us is giving up our body at every moment. The last
phase of giving up this body is called death. But Krsna says, "If anyoneunderstands My appearance and disappearance and My activities--notsuperficially, but in truth--after giving up this body he never againaccepts a material body."     What happens to such a person? Mam eti--he returns to Krsna. If youare to go to Krsna, then you have to prepare your spiritual body. Thatis Krsna consciousness. If you keep yourself in Krsna consciousness,then gradually you prepare your next body, a spiritual body, which willcarry you immediately to Krsnaloka, the abode of Krsna, and you willbecome happy. You will live there perpetually and blissfully.Protecting Oneself from IllusionIn 1973 Srila Prabhupada received an unusual letter from a woman inCalifornia who had encountered two of his young disciples. Shecomplained that they had "a very negative outlook toward the people theymeet." Moved by her genuine concern, Srila Prabhupada took time out fromhis busy schedule to write her this thoughtful letter.Your Grace:     Please accept this letter with Love... K-Mart; San Fernando. Wehave talked with two of your boys at different times. Both had a verynegative outlook toward the people they meet.     Do not believe this is in any way as it should be.     These boys happen to represent God. This comes from within. Theiroutlook must have mercy. We realize this; therefore handpick theselittle peaces [sic] of heaven to place in the middle of these people. Orelse it will defeat your purpose.     Love Is. Let it be as it is; with Love or not at all.     My prayers be with you... and I beg yours with me.     Yours in God, Blessed Be,     Lynne LudwigMy dear Lynne Ludwig,     Please accept my blessings. I beg to acknowledge receipt of yourletter from California, and I have noted the contents carefully,although due to extensively traveling and preaching in a tour in India Ihave not had the opportunity to reply to you at length until now. Yourcomplaint is that you have met two of my young disciples in Californiaand they appeared to you to have "a very negative outlook toward thepeople they meet." Of course, I do not know the case and what the
--- Page 173 ---
circumstances are, but kindly forgive my beloved disciples for any
unkindness or indiscretion on their part. After all, to give up one'slife completely for serving the Lord is not an easy thing, and maya, orthe illusory, material energy, tries especially hard to again entrapthose who have left her service to become devotees. Therefore, in orderto withstand the attack of maya and remain strong under all conditionsof temptation, young or inexperienced devotees in the neophyte stage ofdevotional service will sometimes adopt an attitude against those thingsor persons which may possibly be harmful or threatening to their tenderdevotional creepers. They may even overindulge in such feelings just toprotect themselves, and thus they will appear to some nondevotees, whoare perhaps themselves still very much enamored by the material energyof maya, to be negative or pessimistic.     But the actual fact is that this material world is a miserable,negative place, full of danger at every step; it is duhkhalayamasasvatam, a temporary abode of death, birth, disease, and old age, ahome of suffering and pain only. To come to the platform ofunderstanding these things as they are is not very common, and thereforepersons who attain to it are described as "great souls."
                            mam upetya punarjanma
                            duhkhalayam asasvatam                            napnu vanti mahatmanah                           samsiddhim paramam gatah
     This means that those who have understood that the material worlds
are places of misery and temporality (duhkhalayam asasvatam) neverreturn here again, and because they are mahatmanah, the great souls,Krsna keeps them with Him because they have qualified themselves toescape this nasty place by becoming His pure devotees. This verse isspoken by Krsna, or God Himself, in the Bhagavad-gita (8.15). Who can bea more final authority? The point is that to make advancement inspiritual life, one must view everything material with a pessimistic eyeunless it is utilized to serve and please Krsna. We are not very muchhopeful for any lasting pleasure or satisfaction for our deepestcravings within this realm of gross matter.     You refer to the word "love" several times in your letter, but theactual fact is that there is no love in this material world. That isfalse propaganda. What they call love here is lust only, or desire forpersonal sense gratification:
                             kama esa krodha esa
                            rajo-guna-samudbha vah                             mahasano maha-papma                           viddhy enam iha vairinam     Krsna tells Arjuna, His disciple, that "It is lust only... which isthe all-devouring, sinful enemy of this world." (Bg. 3.37) In the Vediclanguage there is no word for materialistic "love," as we call it in thepresent day. The word kama describes lust or material desire, not love,but the word that we find in the Vedas for actual love is prema, meaningone's love of God only. Outside of loving God there is no possibility ofloving. Rather, there is lusty desire only. Within this atmosphere ofmatter, the entire range of human activities--and not only everyactivity of human beings but all living entities--is based upon, given
--- Page 174 ---
impetus and thus polluted by sex desire, the attraction between male and
female. For that sex life, the whole universe is spinning around--andsuffering! That is the harsh truth. So-called love here means that "yougratify my senses, I'll gratify your senses," and as soon as thatgratification stops, immediately there is divorce, separation, quarrel,and hatred. So many things are going on under this false conception oflove. Actual love means love of God, Krsna.     Everyone wants to repose his loving tendency in some object whichis in his opinion worthy. But the question is one of ignorance only,because people have a poor fund of knowledge about where to find thatsupreme lovable object who is actually worthy to accept and reciprocatetheir love. People simply do not know. There is no proper information.As soon as you have some attachment for anything material, it will kickyou upon the face, deteriorate, and disappoint you. It's bound todissatisfy and frustrate you. That's a fact. But these young boys inyour country, and all over the world, are accepting, "Yes, that is afact," and they are getting the right information from Krsna:
                            bahunam janmanam ante
                           jnana van mam prapadyate                             vasudevah sarvam iti                            sa mahatma sudurlabhah
     "After many births and deaths, he who is actually wise surrenders
unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and all that is. Sucha great soul is very rare." (Bg. 7.19) Again Krsna uses that wordmahatma, great soul. Therefore our devotees that you have met are notordinary boys and girls. No. They are to be considered actually wise,great souls because they have experienced in many births the miserabledisease of material life and have become disgusted. Therefore they areseeking higher knowledge--they are seeking something better--and whenthey find Krsna and surrender unto Him, they become mahatmas, who areactually situated in knowledge. This material world is just like aprison house; it is a punishing place meant to bring us to that point ofbecoming disgusted, surrendering at last to Krsna, and going back to ouroriginal nature of eternal life in bliss and complete knowledge.Therefore it is to the credit of these devotees that they have done whatis sudurlabhah, very rare among all men in human society.     By surrendering to Krsna one will find the final object in which toinvest his love: God. Love of God is present in everyone, just like firein an unlit match, but it is covered over. But if one somehow or otherdevelops his dormant love of God, and Krsna becomes his supreme adorableobject, supreme friend, supreme master, or supreme lover, than he shallnever again become disappointed or unhappy. Rather, because his lovingpropensity is rightfully placed:
                           mac-citta mad-gata-prana
                            bodhayantah parasparam                          kathayantas ca mam nityam                            tusyanti ca ramanti ca                                  (Bg. 10.9)
     I he devotee whose life is surrendered to Krsna is always enjoying
"great satisfaction and bliss," and he is constantly enlightened, always
--- Page 175 ---
positive, not negative, as you say. The advanced devotee is the friend
of everyone. The yoga-yukto visuddhatma, purified soul engaged in lovingdevotional service to Krsna, is sarva-bhutatma-bhutatma, dear toeveryone, and everyone is dear to him. In another place Krsna claimsthat yo mad-bhaktah sa me priyah, His devotee, who is very dear to Him,advesta sarva-bhutanam maitrah karuna eva ca, is not envious but is akind friend to all living entities. The devotee is supposed to be,furthermore, equal to everyone (panditah sama-darsinah). He neverdiscriminates, saying, "This one is good, this one is bad." No.     These are descriptions of the more advanced stages of Krsnaconsciousness that devotees get by development of mature knowledge. Atpresent many of our students are young boys. They are learninggradually, and the process is so effective, certain, and authorized thatif they stick to it they will come to the right point, as you say, ofloving. But that love is not material, so it should not be judged on thefalse, sentimental platform of ordinary, mundane dealings. That is ourpoint. Therefore to say they are not loving may be true from thematerialists' point of view. They have given up affection for family,friends, wife, country, race, and so on, which is all based upon thebodily concept of life, or flickering sense gratification. They havebecome a little detached from maya's love, or lust, and they wantKrsna's love, or endless, fully rewarding love, but they have not yetdeveloped to that point, that's all. We cannot expect that all of asudden your countrymen, who are addicted to so many bad habits, willgive up eating flesh, taking intoxicants, having illicit sex life, andso many other nasty things, and overnight become great, self-realizedsouls. That is not possible. That is utopian. But just being initiatedas Krsna's devotee puts one in the topmost category of human society. Sabuddhiman manusyesu sa yuktah krtsna-karma-krt: "He is intelligent inhuman society. He is in the transcendental position, although engaged inall sorts of activities." And although such a devotee may not yet haveadvanced to the highest level of spiritual understanding, still he is tobe considered the most exalted personality, regardless of any temporaryfrailties.
                              api cet suduracaro
                           bhajate mam ananya-bhak                           sadhur eva sa mantavyah                           samyag vyavasito hi sah
     "Even if a devotee commits the most abominable actions, he is to be
considered saintly because he is properly situated." (Bg. 9.30) As youwill say, "To err is human." Therefore in the neophyte stage we mayalways expect some discrepancies. Kindly see the thing in this light andforgive their small mistakes. The big thing is that they have giveneverything, even their lives, to Krsna--and that is never a mistake.     Your ever well-wisher,     A. C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiAn Awareness of What Is Best and Most BeautifulDuring May 1974, the noted Irish poet Desmond James Bernard O 'Gradyvisited Srila Prabhupada at his quarters in Rome, and the two had alengthy and lively discussion. Among other things, the spiritual leaderand the poet discussed personal identity and individual duty, putting an
--- Page 176 ---
end to war, modern education and its problems, life beyond time, and the
essential nature of love.Mr. O'Grady: Your edition of the Bhagavad-gita is very nice.Srila Prabhupada: It is the fifth edition in two years.Mr. O'Grady: In which country has the Hare Krsna movement been the mostsuccessful?Srila Prabhupada: Everywhere. In Africa, America, Canada, Japan, China.But actually it has been most successful in America. Many Americans havetaken to Krsna consciousness.Mr. O'Grady: What about here in Rome? Have you had problems with thepolice?Srila Prabhupada: We have problems everywhere. Police sometimes harassus, but usually they become tired and eventually don't do anything.[Laughter.]Mr. O'Grady: The system give up? That's marvelous. I feel very tired ofthe system myself. Something is wrong with the present state of affairs.Maybe you can give me some advice on how to beat the system.Srila Prabhupada: You Irish people! You are never tired of fighting.Mr. O'Grady: No. [Laughter.] It's inside us.Srila Prabhupada: Actually, the fighting has been going on constantly.Mr. O'Grady: Well, what do you suggest we do about it? I mean, is itmorally correct for me to be sitting here...Srila Prabhupada: As long as we remain illusioned by the bodilyconception of life, thinking we are these bodies, one man thinking "I amIrish," another thinking "I am Italian," "... American," "... Indian,"and so on--as long as this goes on, the fighting will go on. You cannotstop fighting between dogs and cats. Why do they fight? The dog simplythinks, "I am a big dog." And the cat thinks, "I am a big cat." In thesame way, if we think, "I am an Irishman" or "I am an Englishman," thenwe are no better than the cats and dogs. As long as people remain in abodily conception of life, there will be fighting.Mr. O'Grady: What was Mahatma Gandhi fighting in the House of Commons?Srila Prabhupada: That was another dog-ism. There is no difference. Adog thinks, "I am a dog," because he has the body of a dog. If I amthinking that I am Indian because this body was born on Indian soil,then how am I different from the dog? The bodily conception of life issimply animalism. When we understand that we are not these bodies butare spirit souls, there will be peace. There cannot be any peaceotherwise. Sa eva go-kharah. The Vedic literatures state that a personin the bodily concept of life is exactly like a cow or an ass. Peoplehave to transcend this inferior conception of the self. How is thatdone?
                           mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena
                            bhakti-yogena se vate                            sa gunan samatityaitan                            brahma-bhuyaya kalpate
     "One who engages in the spiritual activities of unalloyed
devotional service at once transcends the modes of material nature andis elevated to the spiritual platform." (Bhagavad-gita 14.25)     In our society, there are many Mexicans, Canadians, Indians, Jews,and Muslims, but they no longer consider themselves Muslims, Christians,
--- Page 177 ---
Jews, or whatever. They are all servants of Krsna. That is Brahman
realization.Mr. O'Grady: That's giving it a name also.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, a name must be there. But although, for example,your name is different from that of another Irishman, you nonethelessall feel that you are Irish. One's name may be different, but thatdoesn't matter. The quality should be one. That is required. When weacquire Krsna's quality, then, despite different names, there will bepeace. That is called so 'ham. The names of different people in a nationmay be different, but all the people feel the same nationality.Varieties may exist, but if the quality is the same, that is oneness,brahma-bhuta.
                          brahma-bhutah prasannatma
                            na socati na kanksati                            samah sarvesu bhutesu                          mad-bhaktim labhate param
     "One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the
Supreme Brahman. He never laments nor desires to have anything; he isequally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains puredevotional service unto Me." (Bg. 18.54)     This world is miserable for the materially infected person, but forthe devotee, the entire world is as good as Vaikuntha. For theimpersonalist, achieving the Brahman stage, becoming one with theAbsolute, is the last word.Mr. O'Grady: Is the Absolute external or internal?Srila Prabhupada: There is no external or internal. The Absolute iswithout duality.Mr. O'Grady: OK, but on an individual level...Srila Prabhupada: We are not absolute. When we are situated on theabsolute platform, we are absolute. However, now we are in the relativeworld. The Absolute Truth is here also, but our senses are notsufficiently elevated to understand that Absolute Truth. As long as weare under the control of time, there is no question of becomingabsolute.Mr. O'Grady: So "absolute" means life beyond time?Srila Prabhupada: That is stated in the Bhagavad-gita (4.9):
                           janma karma ca me divyam
                           evam yo vetti tattvatah                          tyaktva deham punar janma                           naiti mam eti so 'rjuna
     "One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and
activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in thismaterial world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."     That is absolute--going back home, back to Godhead. As long as oneis in the material world and identifies with this body, he transmigratesfrom one body to another. That is not absolute. This is clearly statedhere. When one goes back to the spiritual world, he attains the absoluteposition.
--- Page 178 ---
Mr. O'Grady: All right, but this is my question: Is it sufficient for us
to sit here--you sitting there and we as friends sitting with youengaging in the gentle art of conversation, while across the ocean...Srila Prabhupada: The point you have missed is that although you aresitting in one place and I am sitting in a different place, thisdifference does not affect our actual existence. We are both humanbeings. The conceptions of "Irishman," " Englishman," "Protestant,""Catholic," and so on are but different dresses. One has to become freefrom these designations. When one is thus free, he becomes purified.
                            sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam
                            tat-paratvena nirmalam                              hrsikena hrsikesa-                            sevanam bhaktir ucyate                       (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.1.12)
     When you have purified your senses and engaged those purified
senses in the service of the master of the senses, Krsna, you haveperfected your life. That is nonduality, and that is absolute.Mr. O'Grady: But the system insists that you think yourself American orIndian or African or whatever.Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Materialistic society means duality.Mr. O'Grady: But that is unavoidable. How can you avoid materialexistence?Srila Prabhupada: That is possible in Krsna consciousness. The lotuslives in the water but never touches the water.Mr. O'Grady: I don't think you can explain situations in one area withmetaphors from another. How can you argue political problems in terms ofvague spiritual concepts? Their nature is completely different.Srila Prabhupada: Sometimes a variety of examples helps us to understandor appreciate the problem better. In the vase there is a variety offlowers, and that variety helps us better appreciate the idea offlowers. From any point of view, Krsna can resolve all problems. Whyjust the problems of Irishmen or Englishmen? All problems. That iscalled unity in diversity. Our students come from different backgrounds,but because they are all in Krsna consciousness, they are unified.Mr. O'Grady: Very good. Yes, I accept that. I would like to know,though, that when you say "Krsna consciousness," is there any differencebetween that and Christ consciousness?Prabhupada: No, there is nodifference. Christ came to preach the message of God. If you actuallybecome Christ conscious, you become Krsna conscious.Mr. O'Grady: And does becoming Krsna conscious or God conscious meanbecoming self-conscious? That is, conscious of who we really are?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, God consciousness includes self-consciousness,but self-consciousness is not necessarily God consciousness.Mr. O'Grady: But it may be?Srila Prabhupada: No. Mr. O'Grady: One may achieve consciousness of theGod that is within.Srila Prabhupada: That means he is God conscious. You are now in thesunlight, and consciousness of the sun includes your ability to seeyourself. In the darkness you cannot see yourself. At night you can'teven see your own hands or legs, but if you come before the sun, you seethe sun and yourself also. Without sunlight, without God consciousness,
--- Page 179 ---
self-consciousness is incomplete. However, God consciousness makes self-
consciousness very clear.Mr. O'Grady: We meet a lot of young people in our teaching profession,and we don't try to teach them any kind of didactic salvation. We do tryto direct them toward an awareness of what is best and what is mostbeautiful and what is most spiritually nourishing in the world aboutthem--that is, insofar as the system allows us. Very frequently thestudents are not neutral enough to be in a spiritual condition; they aremore in an emotional one. What we are faced with often is the basicquestion of "Who am I?" or, "What is it all about?"Srila Prabhupada: Yes.Mr. O'Grady: Or they ask, "Why am I here?"Srila Prabhupada: Yes, very good.Mr. O'Grady: We are asked, "Why should I be here? Who are you, teacher,and what gives you the right to tell us what to think or what to be orwhat not to be? Why should I read Shakespeare? Why should I listen toMozart? I prefer Bob Dylan." These kind of questions seem to emanatefrom a very disillusioned state of mind, and insecurity, anduncertainty, and a lack of credibility in the total structure of thingsas they are. Frequently we have to answer these questions in acataclysmic sort of way. Rather than presenting direct answers, we mustanswer indirectly, taking account of the conditioning that promptedstudents to ask these questions in the first place. Do you think that weshould try to reach them more directly?Srila Prabhupada: You are talking about the problem of...Mr. O'Grady: Modern education.Srila Prabhupada: Yes. So many questions are there, but they are notanswered by modern education. "Why have I come here? What is thepurpose?" These questions should be answered perfectly. Therefore theVedas enjoin: tad-vijnanartham sa gurum evabhigacchet. To find answersto all these questions, one must approach a bona fide spiritual master.Mr. O'Grady: What if you have none? What if we are told that Mr. Nixonis the bona fide spiritual master? What do we do?Srila Prabhupada: No, no. [Laughter.] There is a standard for bona fidespiritual masters. You have only heard one line of the verse. Who is thespiritual master? That is the next line: srotriyam brahma-nistham. Theword srotriyam refers to one who has heard from another bona fidesource. A spiritual master is he who has taken the message from anotherqualified spiritual master. This is just like a medical man who hastaken the knowledge of medical science from another medical man.Similarly, the bona fide spiritual master must come in a line ofsuccessive spiritual masters. The original spiritual master is God.Mr. O'Grady: Yes. Granted.Srila Prabhupada: One who has heard from God explains the same messageto his disciples. If the disciple doesn't change the message, he is abona fide spiritual master. That is our process. We take lessons byhearing from Krsna, God, and from Him understand who is perfect. Or wehear from His representative, who does not contradict Krsna and who hasrealized His message. It is not that we speak one thing and do allnonsense. One who does so is not a spiritual master.Mr. O'Grady: Now there's my poor old father, living west of Ireland. Asimple old man, seventy-eight years now, your generation. He has gottento the point at his age where he says, "They tell me, the priests, theytell me ultimately that it's God who knows. But I want to know who told
--- Page 180 ---
God." Then he comes to me and says, "You went to school, and you read
books. Tell me, who told God?" So I have no answer. That is thedifference between seventy-eight and thirty-nine years.Srila Prabhupada: No, it is not a difference of age. The difference isknowledge. In the Brahma-sutra the question is raised: Who is God? Firstof all there is this question.Mr. O'Grady: Who taught God?Srila Prabhupada: No. First of all there is the question who is God.Then we shall ask who taught God. The Vedanta-sutra says, athato brahmajijnasa: now we should inquire who is God. Unless you know who God is,how can you raise the question of who instructed God? If you don't knowGod, the question does not arise who instructed God. Is this not so?Mr. O'Grady: Yes.Srila Prabhupada: Who God is, is explained in the Brahma-sutra. Janmadyasya yatah: God is He from whom everything emanates. That is God--theSupreme Being from whom everything emanates. Now, what is the nature ofthat Supreme Being? Is He a dead stone or a living entity? That is alsoexplained. Janmady asya yato 'nvayad itaratas carthesv abhijnah svarat(Srimnad-Bhagavatam 1.1.1): the Supreme Being is fully cognizant ofeverything, directly and indirectly. Unless He is fully cognizant ofeverything, He cannot be God. Then the question that you raised comes,Who taught God? And that is also answered. Svarat: He is fullyindependent. He does not need to take lessons from anyone. That is God.If one needs to take lessons from others, he is not God. Krsna spoke theBhagavad-gita, and He did not have to learn it from anyone. I had tolearn it from my spiritual master, but Krsna did not have to learn itfrom anyone. One who does not need to take lessons from others is God.Mr. O'Grady: Where does human love come in?Srila Prabhupada: Everything is coming from God. Being part and parcelof God, we manifest partial love because the original love is there inHim. Nothing can exist if it is not in God; therefore love is there inGod.Mr. O'Grady: And manifestations of love are manifestations of God?Srila Prabhupada: Unless the loving propensity is there in God, how canwe manifest it? A son born of a particular father has the symptoms ofthe father. Because the loving propensity is in God, we have that samepropensity.Mr. O'Grady: Maybe love is generated in you by the need.Srila Prabhupada: No, there is no question of "maybe." We are definingGod in absolute terms. Janmady asya yatah: God is He from whomeverything has emanated. The fighting propensity is also there in God,but His fighting and His loving are absolute. In the material world weexperience that fighting is just the opposite of loving, but in God thefighting propensity and the loving propensity are one and the same. Thatis the meaning of "absolute." We learn from the Vedic scriptures thatwhen the so-called enemies of God are killed by God, they attainliberation.Mr. O'Grady: Is it possible to arrive at this understanding of Godalone?Srila Prabhupada: No. Therefore we have cited this verse: tad-vijnanartham sa gurum evabhigacchet. The word abhigacchet means "must."It is not possible alone. In Sanskrit grammar this is called thevidhilin form of a verb, and this form is used when there is no choice.The word abhigacchet means that one must approach a guru. That is the
--- Page 181 ---
Vedic version. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gita you will find that Arjuna
was talking to Krsna, but when he saw that things were not beingresolved, he surrendered himself to Krsna and accepted Him as his guru.
                        karpanya-dosopahata-svabhavah
                     prcchami tvam dharma-sammudha-cetah                    yac chreyah syan niscitam bruhi tan me                   sisyas te 'ham sadhi mam tvam prapannam
     "Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure
because of weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell meclearly what is best for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soulsurrendered unto You. Please instruct me." (Bg. 2.7) So here we can seethat Arjuna is confused about his duty.Mr. O'Grady: Is this duty to the self, to others, or to the state?Srila Prabhupada: A soldier's duty is to fight with the enemy. Arjunawas a soldier, and Krsna advised him, "The opposite party is your enemy,and you are a soldier. Why are you trying to be nonviolent? This is notgood." Then Arjuna said, "Actually, I am confused. In this confusion Icannot make the right decision. I therefore accept You as my spiritualmaster. Please give me the proper lesson." In a chaotic condition, in aconfused state of life, one should approach another, who is in fullknowledge of the matter. You go to a lawyer to solve legal problems, andyou go to a physician to solve medical problems. Everyone in thematerial world is confused about spiritual identity. It is therefore ourduty to approach a bona fide spiritual master, who can give us realknowledge.Mr. O'Grady: I am very confused.Srila Prabhupada: So you must approach a spiritual master.Mr. O'Grady: And he makes a decision on how to help me stop thisconfusion?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, the spiritual master is one who solves allconfusion. If the spiritual master cannot save his disciple fromconfusion, he is not a spiritual master. That is the test.
                         samsara-davanala-lidha-loka-
                        tranaya karunya-ghanaghanatvam                       praptasya kalyana-gunarna vasya                       vande guroh sri-caranara vindam
     This whole confused world is just like a blazing forest fire. In a
forest fire all the animals are confused. They do not know where to goto save their lives. In the blazing fire of the material world, everyoneis confused. How can that blazing forest fire be extinguished? It is notpossible to utilize your man-made fire brigade, nor is it possible tosimply pour buckets of water. The solution comes when rain from theclouds falls on the forest fire. Only then can the fire be extinguished.That ability is not in your hands, but is in the mercy of God. So, humansociety is in a confused state, and it cannot find a solution. Thespiritual master is one who has received the mercy of God, and he candeliver the solution to the confused man. One who has received the mercyof God can become a spiritual master and deliver that mercy to others.Mr. O'Grady: The problem is to find this spiritual master.
--- Page 182 ---
Srila Prabhupada: That is not the problem. The problem is whether you
are sincere. You have problems, but God is within your heart. Isvarahsarva-bhutanam. God is not far away. If you are sincere, God sends you aspiritual master. Therefore God is also called caitya-guru, thespiritual master within the heart. God helps from within and fromwithout. Everything is thus described in the Bhagavad-gita. Thismaterial body is like a machine, but within the heart is the soul, andwith the soul is the Supersoul, Krsna, who gives directions. The Lordsays, "You wanted to do this; now here is the chance. Go and do it." Ifyou are sincere, you say, "Now, God, I want You." Then He will give youdirections. "Yes, now you come and get Me like this." This is Hiskindness. However, if we want something else, that is all right. We canhave it. God is very kind. When I want something, He is in my heartdirecting me and telling me how to have it. So why should He not givedirections on how to have a spiritual master? First of all we must againbe eager to revive our God consciousness. Then God will give us aspiritual master.Mr. O'Grady: Thank you very much.Srila Prabhupada: Thank you very much. My request to you is this. Youare a poet. Just describe God. You are expert in describing, andtherefore I ask you to kindly describe God in your occupation. Then yourlife will be successful. And if one hears you, his life will also besuccessful. That is the injunction:
                      idam hi pumsas tapasah srutasya va
                    svistasya suktasya ca buddhi-dattayoh                      avicyuto 'rthah kavibhir nirupito                       yad uttamasloka-gunanu varnanam                          (Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.5.22)
     There are many leaders in society who are poets, scientists,
religionists, philosophers, politicians, and so on. Those who are soexpert are given this injunction: Your duty is to perfect youroccupation by describing the glories of the Supreme Being.Mr. O'Grady: My experience is that, for some extraordinary reason, oneis chosen to do a particular thing.Srila Prabhupada: That reason is given here. Avicyutah. The infalliblechoice is this: "Let them describe the glories of the Lord."Mr. O'Grady: But you were saying that the spiritual master is chosen.The spiritual master, the poet, the priest, is chosen by God. Thisperson is chosen to write poems or paint pictures or make music.Srila Prabhupada: So when you compose music, compose music about God.That is your perfection.Mr. O'Grady: When one works for God in his line, then his line becomeshis perfection?Srila Prabhupada: Yes.Mr. O'Grady: Thank you very much.