
                                 Chapter Four
                        Understanding Krsna and ChristKrsna, Christos, Christ
In 1974, near ISKCON's center in Frankfurt am Main, West Germany, SrilaPrabhupada and several of his disciples took a morning walk with fatherEmmanuel Jungclaussen, a Benedictine monk from Niederalteich Monastery.Noticing that Srila Prabhupada was carrying meditation beads similar tothe rosary, Father Emmanuel explained that he also chanted a constantprayer: "Lord Jesus Christ, be merciful unto us." The followingconversation ensued.Srila Prabhupada: What is the meaning of the word Christ?Father Emmanuel: Christ comes from the Greek word Christos, meaning "theanointed one."Srila Prabhupada: Christos is the Greek version of the word Krsna.Father Emmanuel: This is very interesting.Srila Prabhupada: When an Indian person calls on Krsna, he often says,"Krsta." Krsta is a Sanskrit word meaning "attraction." So when weaddress God as "Christ," "Krsta," or "Krsna," we indicate the same all-attractive Supreme Personality of Godhead. When Jesus said, "Our Father,who an in heaven, sanctified be Thy name," that name of God was "Krsta"or "Krsna." Do you agree?Father Emmanuel: I think Jesus, as the son of God, has revealed to usthe actual name of God: Christ. We can call God "Father," but if we wantto address Him by His actual name, we have to say "Christ."Srila Prabhupada: Yes. "Christ" is another way of saying Krsta, and"Krsta" is another way of pronouncing Krsna, the name of God. Jesus saidthat one should glorify the name of God, but yesterday I heard onetheologian say that God has no name--that we can call Him only "Father."A son may call his father "Father," but the father also has a specificname. Similarly, "God" is the general name of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, whose specific name is Krsna. Therefore whether you call God"Christ," "Krsta," or "Krsna," ultimately you are addressing the sameSupreme Personality of Godhead.
--- Page 79 ---
Father Emmanuel: Yes, if we speak of God's actual name, then we must
say, "Christos." In our religion, we have the Trinity: the Father, Son,and the Holy Spirit. We believe we can know the name of God only byrevelation from the Son of God. Jesus Christ revealed the name of thefather, and therefore we take the name Christ as the revealed name ofGod.Srila Prabhupada: Actually, it doesn't matter--Krsna or Christ--the nameis the same. The main point is to follow the injunctions of the Vedicscriptures that recommend chanting the name of God in this age. Theeasiest way is to chant the maha-mantra: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, KrsnaKrsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. Rama andKrsna are names of God, and Hare is the energy of God. So when we chantthe maha-mantra, we address God together with His energy. This energy isof two kinds, the spiritual and the material. At present we are in theclutches of the material energy. Therefore we pray to Krsna that He maykindly deliver us from the service of the material energy and accept usinto the service of the spiritual energy. That is our whole philosophy.Hare Krsna means, "O energy of God, O God [Krsna], please engage me inYour service." It is our nature to render service. Somehow or other wehave come to the service of material things, but when this service istransformed into the service of the spiritual energy, then our life isperfect. To practice bhakti-yoga [loving service to God] means to becomefree from designations like "Hindu," "Muslim," "Christian," this orthat, and simply to serve God. We have created Christian, Hindu, andMuhammadan religions, but when we come to a religion withoutdesignations, in which we don't think we are Hindus or Christians orMuhammadans, then we can speak of pure religion, or bhakti.Father Emmanuel: Mukti?Srila Prabhupada: No, bhakti. When we speak of bhakti, mukti [liberationfrom material miseries] is included. Without bhakti there is no mukti,but if we act on the platform of bhakti, then mukti is included. Welearn this from the Bhagavad-gita (14.26):
                           mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena
                             bhakti-yogena sevate                            sa gunan samatityaitan                            brahma-bhuyaya kalpate
     "One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down
under any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material natureand thus comes to the level of Brahman."Father Emmanuel: Is Brahman Krsna?Srila Prabhupada: Krsna is Parabrahman. Brahman is realized in threeaspects: as impersonal Brahman, as localized Paramatma, and as personalBrahman. Krsna is personal, and He is the Supreme Brahman, for God isultimately a person. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.11), this isconfirmed:
                           vadanti tat tattva-vidas
                          tattvam yajjnanam advayam                             brahmeti paramatmeti                            bhagavan iti sabdyate
--- Page 80 ---
     "Learned transcendentalists who know the Absolute Truth call this
nondual substance Brahman, Paramatma, or Bhagavan." The feature of theSupreme Personality is the ultimate realization of God. He has all sixopulences in full: He is the strongest, the richest, the most beautiful,the most famous, the wisest, and the most renounced.Father Emmanuel: Yes, I agree.Srila Prabhupada: Because God is absolute, His name, His form, and Hisqualities are also absolute, and they are nondifferent from Him.Therefore to chant God's holy name means to associate directly with Him.When one associates with God, one acquires godly qualities, and when oneis completely purified, one becomes an associate of the Supreme Lord.Father Emmanuel: But our understanding of the name of God is limited.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, we are limited, but God is unlimited. And becauseHe is unlimited, or absolute, He has unlimited names, each of which isGod. We can understand His names as much as our spiritual understandingis developed.Father Emmanuel: May I ask a question? We Christians also preach love ofGod, and we try to realize love of God and render service to Him withall our heart and all our soul. Now, what is the difference between yourmovement and ours? Why do you send your disciples to the Westerncountries to preach love of God when the gospel of Jesus Christ ispropounding the same message?Srila Prabhupada: The problem is that the Christians do not follow thecommandments of God. Do you agree?Father Emmanuel: Yes, to a large extent you're right.Srila Prabhupada: Then what is the meaning of the Christians' love forGod? If you do not follow the orders of God, then where is your love?Therefore we have come to teach what it means to love God: if you loveHim, you cannot be disobedient to His orders. And if you're disobedient,your love is not true.     All over the world, people love not God but their dogs. The Krsnaconsciousness movement is therefore necessary to teach people how torevive their forgotten love for God. Not only the Christians, but alsothe Hindus, the Muhammadans, and all others are guilty. They haverubber-stamped themselves "Christian," "Hindu," or "Muhammadan," butthey do not obey God. That is the problem. Visitor: Can you say in whatway the Christians are disobedient?Sri1a Prabhupada: Yes. The first point is that they violate thecommandment "Thou shalt not kill" by maintaining slaughterhouses. Do youagree that this commandment is being violated?Father Emmanuel: Personally, I agree.Srila Prabhupada: Good. So if the Christians want to love God, they muststop killing animals.Father Emmanuel: But isn't the most important point--Srila Prabhupada: If you miss one point, there is a mistake in yourcalculation. Regardless of what you add or subtract after that, themistake is already in the calculation, and everything that follows willalso be faulty. We cannot simply accept that part of the scripture welike, and reject what we don't like, and still expect to get the result.For example, a hen lays eggs with its back part and eats with its beak.A farmer may consider, "The front part of the hen is very expensivebecause I have to feed it. Better to cut it off." But if the head ismissing there will be no eggs anymore, because the body is dead.Similarly, if we reject the difficult part of the scriptures and obey
--- Page 81 ---
the part we like, such an interpretation will not help us. We have to
accept all the injunctions of the scripture as they are given, not onlythose that suit us. If you do not follow the first order, "Thou shaltnot kill," then where is the question of love of God?Visitor: Christians take this commandment to be applicable to humanbeings, not to animals.Srila Prabhupada: That would mean that Christ was not intelligent enoughto use the right word: murder. There is killing, and there is murder.Murder refers to human beings. Do you think Jesus was not intelligentenough to use the right word--murder--instead of the word killing?Killing means any kind of killing, and especially animal killing. IfJesus had meant simply the killing of humans, he would have used theword murder.Father Emmanuel: But in the Old Testament the commandment "Thou shaltnot kill" does refer to murder. And when Jesus said, "Thou shalt notkill," he extended this commandment to mean that a human being shouldnot only refrain from killing another human being, but should also treathim with love. He never spoke about man's relationship with other livingentities, but only about his relationship with other human beings. Whenhe said, "Thou shalt not kill," he also meant in the mental andemotional sense--that you should not insult anyone or hurt him, treathim badly, and so on.Srila Prabhupada: We are not concerned with this or that testament butonly with the words used in the commandments. If you want to interpretthese words, that is something else. We understand the direct meaning."Thou shalt not kill" means, "The Christians should not kill." You mayput forth interpretations in order to continue the present way ofaction, but we understand very clearly that there is no need forinterpretation. Interpretation is necessary if things are not clear. Buthere the meaning is clear. "Thou shalt not kill" is a clear instruction.Why should we interpret it?Father Emmanuel: Isn't the eating of plants also killing?Srila Prabhupada: The Vaisnava philosophy teaches that we should noteven kill plants unnecessarily. In the Bhagavad-gita (9.26) Krsna says:
                          patram puspam phalam toyam
                          yo me bhaktya prayacchati                           tad aham bhakty-upahrtam                             asnami prayatatmanah
     "If someone offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, a
fruit, or a little water, I will accept it." We offer Krsna only thekind of food He demands, and then we eat the remnants. If offeringvegetarian food to Krsna were sinful, then it would be Krsna's sin, notours. But God is apapa-viddha--sinful reactions are not applicable toHim. He is like the sun, which is so powerful that it can purify evenurine--something impossible for us to do. Krsna is also like a king, whomay order a murderer to be hanged but who himself is beyond punishmentbecause he is very powerful. Eating food first offered to the Lord isalso something like a soldier's killing during wartime. In a war, whenthe commander orders a man to attack, the obedient soldier who kills theenemy will get a medal. But if the same soldier kills someone on hisown, he will be punished. Similarly, when we eat only prasada [the
--- Page 82 ---
remnants of food offered to Krsna], we do not commit any sin. This is
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita (3.13):
                            yajna-sistasinah santo
                           mucyante sarva-kilbisaih                          bhunjate te tv agham papa                           ye pacanty atma-karanat
     "The devotees of the Lord are released from all kinds of sins
because they eat food that is first offered for sacrifice. Others, whoprepare food for personal sense enjoyment, verily eat only sin."Father Emmanuel: Krsna cannot give permission to eat animals?Srila Prabhupada: Yes--in the animal kingdom. But the civilized humanbeing, the religious human being, is not meant to kill and eat animals.If you stop killing animals and chant the holy name Christ, everythingwill be perfect. I have not come to teach you, but only to request youto please chant the name of God. The Bible also demands this of you. Solet's kindly cooperate and chant, and if you have a prejudice againstchanting the name Krsna, then chant "Christos" or "Krsta"--there is nodifference. Sri Caitanya said: namnam akari bahudha nija-sarva-saktih."God has millions and millions of names, and because there is nodifference between God's name and Himself, each one of these names hasthe same potency as God." Therefore, even if you accept designationslike "Hindu," "Christian," or "Muhammadan," if you simply chant the nameof God found in your own scriptures, you will attain the spiritualplatform. Human life is meant for self-realization--to learn how to loveGod. That is the actual beauty of man. Whether you discharge this dutyas a Hindu, a Christian, or a Muhammadan, it doesn't matter--butdischarge it!Father Emmanuel: I agree.Srila Prabhupada [pointing to a string of 108 meditation beads]: Wealways have these beads, just as you have your rosary. You are chanting,but why don't the other Christians also chant? Why should they miss thisopportunity as human beings? Cats and dogs cannot chant, but we can,because we have a human tongue. If we chant the holy names of God, wecannot lose anything; on the contrary, we gain greatly. My disciplespractice chanting Hare Krsna constantly. They could also go to thecinema or do so many other things, but they have given everything up.They eat neither fish nor meat nor eggs, they don't take intoxicants,they don't drink, they don't smoke, they don't partake in gambling, theydon't speculate, and they don't maintain illicit sexual connections. Butthey do chant the holy name of God. If you would like to cooperate withus, then go to the churches and chant, "Christ," "Krsta," or "Krsna."What could be the objection?Father Emmanuel: There is none. For my part, I would be glad to joinyou.Srila Prabhupada: No, we are speaking with you as a representative ofthe Christian church. Instead of keeping the churches closed, why notgive them to us? We would chant the holy name of God there twenty-fourhours a day. In many places we have bought churches that werepractically closed because no one was going there. In London I sawhundreds of churches that were closed or used for mundane purposes. Webought one such church in Los Angeles. It was sold because no one camethere, but if you visit this same church today, you will see thousands
--- Page 83 ---
of people. Any intelligent person can understand what God is in five
minutes; it doesn't require five hours.Father Emmanuel: I understand.Srila Prabhupada: But the people do not. Their disease is that theydon't want to understand.Visitor: I think understanding God is not a question of intelligence,but a question of humility.Srila Prabhupada: Humility means intelligence. The humble and meek ownthe kingdom of God. This is stated in the Bible, is it not? But thephilosophy of the rascals is that everyone is God, and today this ideahas become popular. Therefore no one is humble and meek. If everyonethinks that he is God, why should he be humble and meek? Therefore Iteach my disciples how to become humble and meek. They always offertheir respectful obeisances in the temple and to the spiritual master,and in this way they make advancement. The qualities of humbleness andmeekness lead very quickly to spiritual realization. In the Vedicscriptures it is said, "To those who have firm faith in God and thespiritual master, who is His representative, the meaning of the Vedicscriptures is revealed."Father Emmanuel: But shouldn't this humility be offered to everyoneelse, also?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, but there are two kinds of respect: special andordinary. Sri Krsna Caitanya taught that we shouldn't expect honor forourselves, but should always respect everyone else, even if he isdisrespectful to us. But special respect should be given to God and Hispure devotee.Father Emmanuel: Yes, I agree.Srila Prabhupada: I think the Christian priests should cooperate withthe Krsna consciousness movement. They should chant the name Christ orChristos and should stop condoning the slaughter of animals. Thisprogram follows the teachings of the Bible; it is not my philosophy.Please act accordingly and you will see how the world situation willchange.Father Emmanuel: I thank you very much.Srila Prabhupada: Hare Krsna.Jesus Christ Was a GuruThe spiritual leader of the Hare Krsna movement here recognizes LordJesus Christ as "the son of God, the representative of God... ourguru... our spiritual master," yet he has some sharp words for those whocurrently claim to be Christ's followers...     The Srimad-Bhagavatam states that any bona fide preacher of Godconsciousness must have the qualities of titiksa (tolerance) and karuna(compassion). In the character of Lord Jesus Christ we find both thesequalities. He was so tolerant that even while he was being crucified, hedidn't condemn anyone. And he was so compassionate that he prayed to Godto forgive the very persons who were trying to kill him. (Of course,they could not actually kill him. But they were thinking that he couldbe killed, so they were committing a great offense.) As Christ was beingcrucified he prayed, "Father, forgive them. They know not what they aredoing."     A preacher of God consciousness is a friend to all living beings.Lord Jesus Christ exemplified this by teaching, "Thou shalt not kill."But the Christians like to misinterpret this instruction. They think theanimals have no soul, and therefore they think they can freely kill
--- Page 84 ---
billions of innocent animals in the slaughterhouses. So although there
are many persons who profess to be Christians, it would be verydifficult to find one who strictly follows the instructions of LordJesus Christ.     A Vaisnava is unhappy to see the suffering of others. Therefore,Lord Jesus Christ agreed to be crucified--to free others from theirsuffering. But his followers are so unfaithful that they have decided,"Let Christ suffer for us, and we'll go on committing sin." They loveChrist so much that they think, "My dear Christ, we are very weak. Wecannot give up our sinful activities. So you please suffer for us."     Jesus Christ taught, "Thou shalt not kill." But his followers havenow decided, "Let us kill anyway," and they open big, modern, scientificslaughterhouses. "If there is any sin, Christ will suffer for us." Thisis a most abominable conclusion.     Christ can take the sufferings for the previous sins of hisdevotees. But first they have to be sane: "Why should I put Jesus Christinto suffering for my sins? Let me stop my sinful activities."     Suppose a man--the favorite son of his father--commits a murder.And suppose he thinks, "If there is any punishment coming, my father cansuffer for me." Will the law allow it? When the murderer is arrested andsays, "No, no. You can release me and arrest my father; I am his petson," will the police officials comply with that fool's request? Hecommitted the murder, but he thinks his father should suffer thepunishment! Is that a sane proposal? "No. You have committed the murder;you must be hanged." Similarly, when you commit sinful activities, youmust suffer--not Jesus Christ. This is God's law.     Jesus Christ was such a great personality--the son of God, therepresentative of God. He had no fault. Still, he was crucified. Hewanted to deliver God consciousness, but in return they crucified him--they were so thankless. They could not appreciate his preaching. But weappreciate him and give him all honor as the representative of God.     Of course, the message that Christ preached was just according tohis particular time, place, and country, and just suited for aparticular group of people. But certainly he is the representative ofGod. Therefore we adore Lord Jesus Christ and offer our obeisances tohim.     Once, in Melbourne, a group of Christian ministers came to visitme. They asked, "What is your idea of Jesus Christ?" I told them, "He isour guru. He is preaching God consciousness, so he is our spiritualmaster." The ministers very much appreciated that.     Actually, anyone who is preaching God's glories must be accepted asa guru. Jesus Christ is one such great personality. We should not thinkof him as an ordinary human being. The scriptures say that anyone whoconsiders the spiritual master to be an ordinary man has a hellishmentality. If Jesus Christ were an ordinary man, then he could not havedelivered God consciousness."Thou Shalt Not Kill" or "Thou Shalt Not Murder"?At a monastic retreat near Paris, in July of 1973, Srila Prabhupadatalked with Cardinal Jean Danielou: "... the Bible does not simply say,`Do not kill the human being.' It says broadly, `Thou shalt notkill.'... why do you interpret this to suit your own convenience?"Srila Prabhupada: Jesus Christ said, "Thou shalt not kill." So why is itthat the Christian people are engaged in animal killing?
--- Page 85 ---
Cardinal Danielou: Certainly in Christianity it is forbidden to kill,
but we believe that there is a difference between the life of a humanbeing and the life of the beasts. The life of a human being is sacredbecause man is made in the image of God; therefore, to kill a humanbeing is forbidden.Srila Prabhupada: But the Bible does not simply say, "Do not kill thehuman being." It says broadly, "Thou shalt not kill."Cardinal Danielou: We believe that only human life is sacred.Srila Prabhupada: That is your interpretation. The commandment is "Thoushalt not kill."Cardinal Danielou: It is necessary for man to kill animals in order tohave food to eat.Srila Prabhupada: No. Man can eat grains, vegetables, fruits, and milk.Cardinal Danielou: No flesh?Srila Prabhupada: No. Human beings are meant to eat vegetarian food. Thetiger does not come to eat your fruits. His prescribed food is animalflesh. But man's food is vegetables, fruits, grains, and milk products.So how can you say that animal killing is not a sin?Cardinal Danielou: We believe it is a question of motivation. If thekilling of an animal is for giving food to the hungry, then it isjustified.Srila Prabhupada: But consider the cow: we drink her milk; therefore,she is our mother. Do you agree?Cardinal Danielou: Yes, surely.Srila Prabhupada: So if the cow is your mother, how can you supportkilling her? You take the milk from her, and when she's old and cannotgive you milk, you cut her throat. Is that a very humane proposal? InIndia those who are meat-eaters are advised to kill some lower animalslike goats, pigs, or even buffalo. But cow killing is the greatest sin.In preaching Krsna consciousness we ask people not to eat any kind ofmeat, and my disciples strictly follow this principle. But if, undercertain circumstances, others are obliged to eat meat, then they shouldeat the flesh of some lower animal. Don't kill cows. It is the greatestsin. And as long as a man is sinful, he cannot understand God. The humanbeing's main business is to understand God and to love Him. But if youremain sinful, you will never be able to understand God--what to speakof loving Him.Cardinal Danielou: I think that perhaps this is not an essential point.The important thing is to love God. The practical commandments can varyfrom one religion to the next.Srila Prabhupada: So, in the Bible God's practical commandment is thatyou cannot kill; therefore killing cows is a sin for you.Cardinal Danielou: God says to the Indians that killing is not good, andhe says to the Jews that...Srila Prabhupada: No, no. Jesus Christ taught, "Thou shalt not kill."Why do you interpret this to suit your own convenience?Cardinal Danielou: But Jesus allowed the sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb.Srila Prabhupada: But he never maintained a slaughterhouse.Cardinal Danielou: [Laughs.] No, but he did eat meat.Srila Prabhupada: When there is no other food, someone may eat meat inorder to keep from starving. That is another thing. But it is mostsinful to regularly maintain slaughterhouses just to satisfy yourtongue. Actually, you will not even have a human society until thiscruel practice of maintaining slaughterhouses is stopped. And although
--- Page 86 ---
animal killing may sometimes be necessary for survival, at least the
mother animal, the cow, should not be killed. That is simply humandecency. In the Krsna consciousness movement our practice is that wedon't allow the killing of any animals. Krsna says, patram puspam phalamtoyam yo me bhaktya-prayacchati: "Vegetables, fruits, milk, and grainsshould be offered to Me in devotion." (Bhagavad-gita 9.26) We take onlythe remnants of Krsna's food (prasadam). The trees offer us manyvarieties of fruits, but the trees are not killed. Of course, one livingentity is food for another living entity, but that does not mean you cankill your mother for food. Cows are innocent; they give us milk. Youtake their milk--and then kill them in the slaughterhouse. This issinful.Student: Srila Prabhupada, Christianity's sanction of meat-eating isbased on the view that lower species of life do not have a soul like thehuman being's.Srila Prabhupada: That is foolishness. First of all, we have tounderstand the evidence of the soul's presence within the body. Then wecan see whether the human being has a soul and the cow does not. Whatare the different characteristics of the cow and the man? If we find adifference in characteristics, then we can say that in the animal thereis no soul. But if we see that the animal and the human being have thesame characteristics, then how can you say that the animal has no soul?The general symptoms are that the animal eats, you eat; the animalsleeps, you sleep; the animal mates, you mate; the animal defends, andyou defend. Where is the difference?Cardinal Danielou: We admit that in the animal there may be the sametype of biological existence as in men, but there is no soul. We believethat the soul is a human soul.Srila Prabhupada: Our Bhagavad-gita says sarva-yonisu, "In all speciesof life the soul exists." The body is like a suit of clothes. You haveblack clothes; I am dressed in saffron clothes. But within the dress youare a human being, and I am also a human being. Similarly, the bodies ofthe different species are just like different types of dress. There aresoul, a part and parcel of God. Suppose a man has two sons, not equallymeritorious. One may be a Supreme Court judge and the other may be acommon laborer, but the father claims both as his sons. He does not makethe distinction that the son who is a judge is very important and theworker-son is not important. And if the judge-son says, "My dear father,your other son is useless; let me cut him up and eat him," will thefather allow this?Cardinal Danielou: Certainly not, but the idea that all life is part ofthe life of God is difficult for us to admit. There is a greatdifference between human life and animal life.Srila Prabhupada: That difference is due to the development ofconsciousness. In the human body there is developed consciousness. Evena tree has a soul, but a tree's consciousness is not very developed. Ifyou cut a tree it does not resist. Actually, it does resist, but only toa very small degree. There is a scientist named Jagadish Chandra Bosewho has made a machine which shows that trees and plants are able tofeel pain when they are cut. And we can see directly that when someonecomes to kill an animal, it resists, it cries, it makes a horriblesound. So it is a matter of the development of consciousness. But thesoul is there within all living beings.
--- Page 87 ---
Cardinal Danielou: But metaphysically, the life of man is sacred. Human
beings think on a higher platform than the animals do.Srila Prabhupada: What is that higher platform? The animal eats tomaintain his body, and you also eat in order to maintain your body. Thecow eats grass in the field, and the human being eats meat from a hugeslaughterhouse full of modern machines. But just because you have bigmachines and a ghastly scene, while the animal simply eats grass, thisdoes not mean that you are so advanced that only within your body isthere a soul and that there is not a soul within the body of the animal.That is illogical. We can see that the basic characteristics are thesame in the animal and the human being.Cardinal Danielou: But only in human beings do we find a metaphysicalsearch for the meaning of life.Srila Prabhupada: Yes. So metaphysically search out why you believe thatthere is no soul within the animal--that is metaphysics. If you arethinking metaphysically, that's all right. But if you are thinking likean animal, then what is the use of your metaphysical study? Metaphysicalmeans "above the physical" or, in other words, "spiritual." In theBhagavad-gita Krsna says, sarva-yonisu kaunteya: "In every living beingthere is a spirit soul." That is metaphysical understanding. Now eitheryou accept Krsna's teachings as metaphysical, or you'll have to take athird-class fool's opinion as metaphysical. Which do you accept?Cardinal Danielou: But why does God create some animals who eat otheranimals? There is a fault in the creation, it seems.Srila Prabhupada: It is not a fault. God is very kind. If you want toeat animals, then He'll give you full facility. God will give you thebody of a tiger in your next life so that you can eat flesh very freely."Why are you maintaining slaughterhouses? I'll give you fangs and claws.Now eat." So the meat-eaters are awaiting such punishment. The animal-eaters become tigers, wolves, cats, and dogs in their next life--to getmore facility.