
                                 Chapter Two
                         Choosing a Spiritual MasterWhat Is a Guru?
On hearing the word guru, we tend to envision a caricaturelike image: abizarre-looking old fellow with a long, stringy beard and flowing robes,meditating on distant, esoteric truths. Or we think of a cosmic con mancashing in on young seekers' spiritual gullibility. But what really is aguru? What does he know that we don't? How does he enlighten us? In atalk given in England in 1973, Srila Prabhupada provides someenlightening answers.
                           om ajnana-timirandhasya
                             jnananjana-salakaya                            caksur unmilitam yena                           tasmai sri-gurave namah
     "I was born in the darkest ignorance, and my guru, my spiritual
master, opened my eyes with the torch of knowledge. I offer myrespectful obeisances unto him."     The word ajnana means "ignorance" or "darkness." If all the lightsin this room immediately went out, we would not be able to tell where we
--- Page 40 ---
or others are sitting. Everything would become confused. Similarly, we
are all in darkness in this material world, which is a world of tamas.Tamas or timira means "darkness." This material world is dark, andtherefore it needs sunlight or moonlight for illumination. However,there is another world, a spiritual world, that is beyond this darkness.That world is described by Sri Krsna in the Bhagavad-gita (15.6):
                            na tad bhasayate suryo
                            na sasanko na pavakah                           yad gatva na nivartante                            tad dhama paramam mama
     "That abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by
electricity. One who reaches it never returns to this material world."     The guru's business is to bring his disciples from darkness tolight. At present everyone is suffering due to ignorance, just as onecontracts a disease out of ignorance. If one does not know hygienicprinciples, he will not know what will contaminate him. Therefore due toignorance there is infection, and we suffer from disease. A criminal maysay, "I did not know the law," but he will not be excused if he commitsa crime. Ignorance is no excuse. Similarly, a child, not knowing thatfire will burn, will touch the fire. The fire does not think, "This is achild, and he does not know I will burn." No, there is no excuse. Justas there are state laws, there are also stringent laws of nature, andthese laws will act despite our ignorance of them. If we do somethingwrong out of ignorance, we must suffer. This is the law. Whether the lawis a state law or a law of nature, we risk suffering if we break it.     The guru's business is to see that no human being suffers in thismaterial world. No one can claim that he is not suffering. That is notpossible. In this material world, there are three kinds of suffering:adhyatmika, adhibhautika, and adhidaivika. These are miseries arisingfrom the material body and mind, from other living entities, and fromthe forces of nature. We may suffer mental anguish, or we may sufferfrom other living entities--from ants or mosquitos or flies--or we maysuffer due to some superior power. There may be no rain, or there may beflood. There may be excessive heat or excessive cold. So many types ofsuffering are imposed by nature. Thus there are three types of miserieswithin the material world, and everyone is suffering from one, two, orthree of them. No one can say that he is completely free from suffering.     We may then ask why the living entity is suffering. The answer is:out of ignorance. He does not think, "I am committing mistakes and amleading a sinful life; that is why I am suffering." Therefore the guru'sfirst business is to rescue his disciple from this ignorance. We sendour children to school to save them from suffering. If our children donot receive an education, we fear that they will suffer in the future.The guru sees that suffering is due to ignorance, which is compared todarkness. How can one in darkness be saved? By light. The guru takes thetorchlight of knowledge and presents it before the living entityenveloped in darkness. That knowledge relieves him from the sufferingsof the darkness of ignorance.     One may ask whether the guru is absolutely necessary. The Vedasinform us that he is:
                   tad-vijnanartham sa gurum evabhigacchet
--- Page 41 ---
                     samit-panih srotriyam brahma-nistham
                          (Mundaka Upanisad 1.2.12)
     The Vedas enjoin us to seek out a guru; actually, they say to seek
out the guru, not just a guru. The guru is one because he comes indisciplic succession. What Vyasadeva and Krsna taught five thousandyears ago is also being taught now. There is no difference between thetwo instructions. Although hundreds and thousands of acaryas have comeand gone, the message is one. The real guru cannot be two, for the realguru does not speak differently from his predecessors. Some spiritualteachers say, "In my opinion you should do this," but this is not aguru. Such so-called gurus are simply rascals. The genuine guru has onlyone opinion, and that is the opinion expressed by Krsna, Vyasadeva,Narada, Arjuna, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and the Gosvamis. Five thousandyears ago Lord Sri Krsna spoke the Bhagavad-gita, and Vyasadeva recordedit. Srila Vyasadeva did not say, "This is my opinion." Rather, he wrote,sri-bhagavan uvaca, that is, "The Supreme Personality of Godhead says."Whatever Vyasadeva wrote was originally spoken by the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Srila Vyasadeva did not give his own opinion.     Consequently, Srila Vyasadeva is a guru. He does not misinterpretthe words of Krsna, but transmits them exactly as they were spoken. Ifwe send a telegram, the person who delivers the telegram does not haveto correct it, edit it, or add to it. He simply presents it. That is theguru's business. The guru may be this person or that, but the message isthe same; therefore it is said that guru is one.     In the disciplic succession we simply find repetition of the samesubject. In the Bhagavad-gita (9.34) Sri Krsna says:
                          man-mana bhava mad-bhakto
                            mad-yaji mam namaskuru                           mam evaisyasi yuktvaivam                            atmanam mat-parayanah
     "Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, become My devotee,
offer obeisances, and worship Me. Being completely absorbed in Me,surely you will come to Me." These very instructions were reiterated byall the acaryas, such as Ramanujacarya, Madhvacarya, and CaitanyaMahaprabhu. The six Gosvamis also transmitted the same message, and weare simply following in their footsteps. There is no difference. We donot interpret the words of Krsna by saying, "In my opinion, theBattlefield of Kuruksetra represents the human body." Suchinterpretations are set forth by rascals. In the world there are manyrascal gurus who give their own opinion, but we can challenge anyrascal. A rascal guru may say, "I am God," or, "We are all God." That isall right, but we should find out from the dictionary what the meaningof God is. Generally, a dictionary will tell us that the word Godindicates the Supreme Being. Thus we may ask such a guru, "Are you theSupreme Being?" If he cannot understand this, then we should give themeaning of supreme. Any dictionary will inform us that supreme means"the greatest authority." We may then ask, "Are you the greatestauthority?" Such a rascal guru, even though proclaiming himself to beGod, cannot answer such a question. God is the Supreme Being and thehighest authority. No one is equal to Him or greater than Him. Yet thereare many guru-gods, many rascals who claim to be the Supreme. Such
--- Page 42 ---
rascals cannot help us escape the darkness of material existence. They
cannot illumine our darkness with the torchlight of spiritual knowledge.     The bona fide guru will simply present what the supreme guru, God,says in bona fide scripture. A guru cannot change the message of thedisciplic succession.     We must understand that we cannot carry out research to find theAbsolute Truth. Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself said, "My Guru Maharaja, Myspiritual master, considered Me a great fool." He who remains a greatfool before his guru is a guru himself. However, if one says, "I am soadvanced that I can speak better than my guru," he is simply a rascal.In the Bhagavad-gita (4.2) Sri Krsna says:
                            evam parampara-praptam
                             imam rajarsayo viduh                              sa kaleneha mahata                            yogo nastah parantapa
     "This supreme science was thus received through the chain of
disciplic succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way.But in course of time the succession was broken, and therefore thescience as it is appears to be lost."     Taking on a guru is not simply a fashion. One who is serious aboutunderstanding spiritual life requires a guru. A guru is a question ofnecessity, for one must be very serious to understand spiritual life,God, proper action, and one's relationship with God. When we are veryserious about understanding these subjects, we need a guru. We shouldn'tgo to a guru simply because a guru may be fashionable at the moment.Surrender must be there, for without surrender we cannot learn anything.If we go to a guru simply to challenge him, we will learn nothing. Wemust accept the guru just as Arjuna accepted his guru, Sri KrsnaHimself:
                        karpanya-dosopahata-svabhavah
                     prcchami tvam dharma-sammudha-cetah                    yac chreyah syan niscitam bruhi tan me                   sisyas te 'ham sadhi mam tvam prapannam
     "Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure
because of weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell meclearly what is best for me. Now I am Your disciple and a soulsurrendered unto You. Please instruct me." (Bhagavad-gita 2.7)     This is the process for accepting a guru. The guru is Krsna'srepresentative, the former acaryas' representative. Krsna says that allacaryas are His representatives; therefore the guru should be offeredthe same respect one would offer to God. As Visvanatha CakravartiThakura says in his prayers to the spiritual master, yasya prasadadbhagavat-prasadah: " By the mercy of the spiritual master, one receivesthe benediction of Krsna." Thus, if we surrender to the bona fide guru,we surrender to God. God accepts our surrender to the guru.     In the Bhagavad-gita (18.66) Krsna instructs:
                           sarva-dharman parityajya
                            mam ekam saranam vraja                           aham tvam sarva-papebhyo
--- Page 43 ---
                            moksayis yami ma sucah
     "Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I
shall deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." Someone mayargue, "Where is Krsna? I shall surrender to Him." But no, the processis that we first surrender to Krsna's representative; then we surrenderto Krsna. Therefore it is said, saksad-dharitvena samasta-sastraih: theguru is as good as God. When we offer respects to the guru, we areoffering respects to God. Because we are trying to be God conscious, itis required that we learn how to offer respects to God through God'srepresentative. In all the sastras the guru is described to be as goodas God, but the guru never says, "I am God." The disciple's duty is tooffer respect to the guru just as he offers respect to God, but the gurunever thinks, "My disciples are offering me the same respect they offerto God; therefore I have become God." As soon as he thinks like this, hebecomes a dog instead of God. Therefore Visvanatha Cakravarti says,kintu prabhor yah priya eva tasya. Because he is the most confidentialservitor of God, the guru is offered the same respect that we offer God.God is always God, guru is always guru. As a matter of etiquette, God isthe worshipable God, and guru is the worshiper God (sevaka-bhagavan).Therefore the guru is addressed as prabhupada. The word prabhu means"lord," and pada means "position." Thus prabhupada means "he who hastaken the position of the Lord." This is the same as saksad-dharitvenasamasta-sastraih.     Only if we are very serious about understanding the science of Godis a guru required. We should not try to keep a guru as a matter offashion. One who has accepted a guru speaks intelligently. He neverspeaks nonsense. That is the sign of having accepted a bona fide guru.We should certainly offer all respect to the spiritual master, but weshould also remember how to carry out his orders. In the Bhagavad-gita(4.34) Sri Krsna Himself tells us the method of seeking out andapproaching the guru:
                            tad viddhi pranipatena
                             pariprasnena sevaya-                            upadeksyanti te jnanam                           jnaninas tattva-darsinah
     "Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master.
Inquire from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen thetruth." The first process is that of surrender. We have to find anexalted person and willingly surrender before him. The sastras enjointhat before we take a guru we study him carefully to find out whether wecan surrender to him. We should not accept a guru suddenly, out offanaticism. That is very dangerous. The guru should also study theperson who wants to become a disciple to see if he is fit. That is theway a relationship is established between the guru and disciple.Everything is provided, but we must take up the process seriously. Thenwe can be trained to become a bona fide disciple. First we must find abona fide guru, establish our relationship with him, and actaccordingly. Then our life will be successful, for the guru canenlighten the sincere disciple who is in darkness.
--- Page 44 ---
     Everyone is born a rascal and a fool. If we are born learned, why
do we need to go to school? If we do not cultivate knowledge, we are nobetter than animals. An animal may say that there is no need of booksand that he has become a guru, but how can anyone obtain knowledgewithout the study of authoritative books on science and philosophy?Rascal gurus try to avoid these things. We must understand that we areall born rascals and fools and that we have to be enlightened. We haveto receive knowledge to make our lives perfect. If we do not perfect ourlives, we are defeated. What is this defeat? The struggle for existence.We are trying to obtain a better life, to attain a superior position,and for this we are struggling very hard. But we do not know what asuperior position actually is.     Whatever position we have in this material world must be given up.We may have a good position or a bad position; in any case, we cannotremain here. We may earn millions of dollars and think, "Now I am in agood position," but a little dysentery or cholera will finish ourposition. If the bank fails, our position is gone. So actually there isno good position in this material world. It is a farce. Those who try toattain a better position in the material world are ultimately defeated,because there is no better position. The Bhagavad-gita (14.26) says whatthe better position is:
                           mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena
                             bhakti-yogena sevate                            sa gunan samatityaitan                            brahma-bhuyaya kaipate
     "One who engages in the spiritual activities of unalloyed
devotional service at once transcends the modes of material nature andis elevated to the spiritual platform."     Is there any science that gives us the knowledge by which we maybecome immortal? Yes, we may become immortal, but not in the materialsense. We cannot receive this knowledge in so-called universities.However, there is knowledge contained in the Vedic scriptures by whichwe may become immortal. That immortality is our better position. No morebirth, no more death, no more old age, no more disease. Thus the gurutakes on a very great responsibility. He must guide his disciple andenable him to become an eligible candidate for the perfect position--immortality. The guru must be competent to lead his disciple back home,back to Godhead.Saints and SwindlersEvery day the number of people interested in practicing yoga andmeditation increases by the thousands. Unfortunately, a person lookingfor a suitable guide is likely to encounter a bewildering array ofmagicians, self-styled gurus, and self-proclaimed gods. In an interviewwith the London Times, Srila Prabhupada exlpains how a sincere seekercan tell the difference between a counterfeit and genuine spiritualguide.Reporter: What frankly worries me is that since the arrival in Britainsome time ago of an Indian yogi, who was the first "guru" that mostpeople had ever heard of, a lot of "gurus" have suddenly appeared out ofnowhere. Sometimes I get the feeling that not all of them are as genuineas they ought to be. Would it be right to warn people who are thinking
--- Page 45 ---
of taking up spiritual life that they should make sure that they have a
genuine guru to teach them?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Of course, to search out a guru is very nice, butif you want a cheap guru, or if you want to be cheated, then you willfind many cheating gurus. But if you are sincere, you will find asincere guru. Because people want everything very cheaply, they arecheated. We ask our students to refrain from illicit sex, meat-eating,gambling, and intoxication. People think that this is all verydifficult--a botheration. But if someone else says, "You may do whatevernonsense you like, simply take my mantra," then people will like him.The point is that people want to be cheated, and therefore cheaterscome. No one wants to undergo any austerity. Human life is meant forausterity, but no one is prepared to undergo austerity. Consequently,cheaters come and say, "No austerity. Whatever you like, you do. Simplypay me, and I'll give you some mantra, and you'll become God in sixmonths." All this is going on. If you want to be cheated like this, thecheaters will come.Reporter: What about the person who seriously wants to find spirituallife but who happens to finish up with the wrong guru?Srila Prabhupada: If you simply want an ordinary education, you have todevote so much time, labor, and understanding to it. Similarly, if youare going to take to spiritual life, you must become serious. How is itthat simply by some wonderful mantras, someone can become God in sixmonths? Why do people want something like that? This means that theywant to be cheated.Reporter: How can a person tell he has a genuine guru?Srila Prabhupada: Can any of my students answer this question?Disciple: Once I remember John Lennon asked you, "How will I know who isthe genuine guru?" And you answered, "Just find out the one who is mostaddicted to Krsna. He is genuine."Srila Prabhupada: Yes. The genuine guru is God's representative, and hespeaks about God and nothing else. The genuine guru is he who has nointerest in materialistic life. He is after God, and God only. That isone of the tests of a genuine guru: brahma-nistham. He is absorbed inthe Absolute Truth. In the Mundaka Upanisad it is stated, srotriyambrahma-nistham: "The genuine guru is well versed in the scriptures andVedic knowledge, and he is completely dependent on Brahman." He shouldknow what Brahman [spirit] is and how to become situated in Brahman.These signs are given in the Vedic literature. As I said before, thereal guru is God's representative. He represents the Supreme Lord, justas a viceroy represents a king. The real guru will not manufactureanything. Everything he says is in accordance with the scriptures andthe previous acaryas. He will not give you a mantra and tell you thatyou will become God in six months. This is not a guru's business. Aguru's business is to canvass everyone to become a devotee of God. Thatis the sum and substance of a real guru's business. Indeed, he has noother business. He tells whomever he sees, "Please become Godconscious." If he canvasses somehow or other on behalf of God and triesto get everyone to become a devotee of God, he is a genuine guru.Reporter: What about a Christian priest?Srila Prabhupada: Christian, Muhammadan, Hindu--it doesn't matter. If heis simply speaking on behalf of God, he is a guru. Lord Jesus Christ,for instance. He canvassed people, saying, "Just try to love God."Anyone--it doesn't matter who--be he Hindu, Muslim, or Christian, is a
--- Page 46 ---
guru if he convinces people to love God. That is the test. The guru
never says, "I am God," or "I will make you God." The real guru says, "Iam a servant of God, and I will make you a servant of God also." Itdoesn't matter how the guru is dressed. As Caitanya Mahaprabhu said,"Whoever can impart knowledge about Krsna is a spiritual master." Agenuine spiritual master simply tries to get people to become devoteesof Krsna, or God. He has no other business.Reporter: But the bad gurus...Srila Prabhupada: And what is a "bad" guru?Reporter: A bad guru just wants some money or some fame.Srila Prabhupada: Well, if he is bad, how can he become a guru?[Laughter.] How can iron become gold? Actually, a guru cannot be bad,for if someone is bad, he cannot be a guru. You cannot say "bad guru."That is a contradiction. What you have to do is simply try to understandwhat a genuine guru is. The definition of a genuine guru is that he issimply talking about God--that's all. If he's talking about some othernonsense, then he is not a guru. A guru cannot be bad. There is noquestion of a bad guru, any more than a red guru or a white guru. Gurumeans "genuine guru." All we have to know is that the genuine guru issimply talking about God and trying to get people to become God'sdevotees. If he does this, he is genuine.Reporter: If I wanted to be initiated into your society, what would Ihave to do?Srila Prabhupada: First of all, you'd have to give up illicit sex life.Reporter: Does that include all sex life? What is illicit sex life?Srila Prabhupada: Illicit sex is sex outside of marriage. Animals havesex with no restrictions, but in human society there are restrictions.In every country and in every religion, there is some system ofrestricting sex life. You would also have to give up all intoxicants,including tea, cigarettes, alcohol, marijuana--anything thatintoxicates.Reporter: Anything else?Srila Prabhupada: You'd also have to give up eating meat, eggs, andfish. And you'd have to give up gambling as well. Unless you gave upthese four sinful activities, you could not be initiated.Reporter: How many followers do you have throughout the world?Srila Prabhupada: For anything genuine, the followers may be very few.For something rubbish, the followers may be many. Still, we have aboutfive thousand initiated disciples.Reporter: Is the Krsna consciousness movement growing all the time?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, it is growing--but slowly. This is because wehave so many restrictions. People do not like restrictions.Reporter: Where is your following the greatest?Srila Prabhupada: In the United States, Europe, South America, andAustralia. And, of course, in India there are millions who practiceKrsna consciousness.Reporter: Could you tell me what the goal of your movement is?Srila Prabhupada: The purpose of this Krsna consciousness movement is toawaken man's original consciousness. At the present moment ourconsciousness is designated. Someone is thinking, "I am an Englishman,"and another is thinking, "I am an American." Actually, we do not belongto any of these designations. We are all part and parcel of God; that isour real identity. If everyone simply comes to that consciousness, allthe problems of the world will be solved. Then we shall come to know
--- Page 47 ---
that we are one--the same quality of spirit soul. The same quality of
spirit soul is within everyone, although it may be in a different dress.This is the explanation given in the Bhagavad-gita.     Krsna consciousness is actually a purificatory process (sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam). Its purpose is to make people free from all designations(tat-paratvena nirmalam). When our consciousness becomes purified of alldesignations, the activities we carry out with our purified senses makeus perfect. Eventually, we reach the ideal perfection of human life.Krsna consciousness is also a very simple process. It is not necessaryto become a great philosopher, scientist, or whatever. We need onlychant the holy name of the Lord, understanding that His personality, Hisname, and His qualities are all absolute.     Krsna consciousness is a great science. Unfortunately, in theuniversities there is no department for this science. Therefore weinvite all serious men who are interested in the welfare of humansociety to understand this great movement and, if possible, take part init and cooperate with us. The problems of the world will be solved. Thisis also the verdict of the Bhagavad-gita, the most important andauthoritative book of spiritual knowledge. Many of you have heard of theBhagavad-gita. Our movement is based on it. Our movement is approved byall great acaryas in India. Ramanujacarya, Madhvacarya, Lord Caitanya,and so many others. You are all representatives of newspapers, so I askyou to try to understand this movement as far as possible for the goodof all human society.Reporter: Do you think your movement is the only way to know God?Srila Prabhupada: Yes.Reporter: How are you assured of that?Srila Prabhupada: From the authorities and from God, Krsna. Krsna says:
                           sarva-dharman parityajya
                            mam ekam saranam vraja                           aham tvam sarva-papebhyo                            moksayisyami ma sucah
     "Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I
shall deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear." (Bhagavad-gita18.66)Reporter: Does "surrender" mean that someone would have to leave hisfamily?Srila Prabhupada: No.Reporter: But suppose I were to become an initiate. Wouldn't I have tocome and live in the temple?Srila Prabhupada: Not necessarily.Reporter: I can stay at home?Srila Prabhupada: Oh, yes.Reporter: What about work? Would I have to give up my job?Srila Prabhupada: No, you'd simply have to give up your bad habits andchant the Hare Krsna mantra on these beads--that's all.Reporter: Would I have to give any financial support?Srila Prabhupada: No, that is your voluntary wish. If you give, that'sall right. And if you don't, we don't mind. We do not depend on anyone'sfinancial contribution. We depend on Krsna.Reporter: I wouldn't have to give any money at all?Srila Prabhupada: No.
--- Page 48 ---
Reporter: Is this one of the main things that distinguishes the genuine
guru from the fake guru?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, a genuine guru is not a businessman. He is arepresentative of God. Whatever God says, the guru repeats. He does notspeak otherwise.Reporter: But would you expect to find a real guru, say, traveling in aRolls Royce and staying in a penthouse suite in a classy hotel?Srila Prabhupada: Sometimes people provide us with a room in a first-class hotel, but we generally stay in our own temples. We have some onehundred temples around the world, so we don't require to go to anyhotels.Reporter: I wasn't trying to make any accusations. I was merely tryingto illustrate that I think your warning is a valid one. There are somany people interested in finding a spiritual life, and at the same timethere are a lot of people interested in cashing in on the "gurubusiness."Srila Prabhupada: Are you under the impression that spiritual life meansvoluntarily accepting poverty?Reporter: Well, I don't know.Srila Prabhupada: A poverty-stricken man may be materialistic, and awealthy man may be very spiritual. Spiritual life does not depend oneither poverty or wealth. Spiritual life is transcendental. ConsiderArjuna, for instance. Arjuna was a member of a royal family, yet he wasa pure devotee of God. And in the Bhagavad-gita (4.2) Sri Krsna says,evam parampara-praptam imam rajarsayo viduh: "This supreme science wasreceived through the chain of disciplic succession, and the saintlykings understood it in that way." In the past, all kings who weresaintly understood spiritual science. Therefore, spiritual life does notdepend on one's material condition. Whatever a person's materialcondition may be--he may be a king or a pauper--he can still understandspiritual life. Generally people do not know what spiritual life is, andtherefore, they unnecessarily criticize us. If I asked you whatspiritual life is, how would you answer?Reporter: Well, I'm not sure.Srila Prabhupada: Although you do not know what spiritual life is, youstill say, "It is this," or "It is that." But first you should know whatspiritual life is. Spiritual life begins when you understand that youare not your body. This is the real beginning of spiritual life. Byseeing the difference between your self and your body, you come tounderstand that you are a spirit soul (aham brahmasmi).Reporter: Do you think this knowledge should be a part of everyone'seducation?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. People should first be taught what they are. Arethey their bodies, or something else? That is the beginning ofeducation. Now everyone is educated to think he is his body. Becausesomeone accidentally gets an American body, he thinks, "I am anAmerican." This is just like thinking, "I am a red shirt," just becauseyou are wearing a red shirt. You are not a red shirt; you are a humanbeing. Similarly, this body is like a shirt or coat over the realperson--the spirit soul. If we recognize ourselves simply by our bodily"shirt" or "coat," then we have no spiritual education.Reporter: Do you think that such education should be given in schools?Srila Prabhupada: Yes--in schools, colleges, and universities. There isan immense literature on this subject--an immense fund of knowledge.
--- Page 49 ---
What is actually required is that the leaders of society come forward to
understand this movement.Reporter: Have you ever had people come to you who had previously beeninvolved with a fake guru?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, there are many.Reporter: Were their spiritual lives in any way spoiled by the fakegurus?Srila Prabhupada: No, they were genuinely seeking something spiritual,and that was their qualification. God is within everyone's heart, and assoon as someone genuinely seeks Him, He helps that person find a genuineguru.Reporter: Have the real gurus like yourself ever tried to put a stop tothe false gurus--that is, put pressure on them to put them out ofbusiness, so to speak?Srila Prabhupada: No, that is not my purpose. I started my movementsimply by chanting Hare Krsna. I chanted in New York in a place calledTompkins Square Park, and soon people began to come to me. In this way,the Krsna consciousness movement gradually developed. Many accepted, andmany did not accept. Those who are fortunate have accepted.Reporter: Don't you feel that people are suspicious because of theirexperience with fake gurus? If you went to a quack dentist and he brokeyour tooth, you might be suspicious about going to another dentist.Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Naturally, if you are cheated, you becomesuspicious. But this does not mean that if you are cheated once, youwill always be cheated. You should find someone genuine. But to come toKrsna consciousness, you must be either very fortunate or well aware ofthis science. From the Bhagavad-gita we understand that the genuineseekers are very few: manusyanam sahasresu kascid yatati siddhaye. Outof many millions of people, there may be only one who is interested inspiritual life. Generally, people are interested in eating, sleeping,mating, and defending. So how can we expect to find many followers? Itis not difficult to notice that people have lost their spiritualinterest. And almost all those who are actually interested are beingcheated by so-called spiritualists. You cannot judge a movement simplyby the number of its followers. If one man is genuine, then the movementis successful. It is not a question of quantity, but quality.Reporter: I wondered how many people you think might have been taken inby fake gurus.Srila Prabhupada: Practically everyone. [Laughter.] There is no questionof counting. Everyone.Reporter: This would mean thousands of people, wouldn't it?Srila Prabhupada: Millions. Millions have been cheated, because theywant to be cheated. God is omniscient. He can understand your desires.He is within your heart, and if you want to be cheated, God sends you acheater.Reporter: ls it possible for everyone to attain the perfectional stageyou spoke of previously?Srila Prabhupada: Within a second. Anyone can attain perfection within asecond--providing he is willing. The difficulty is that no one iswilling. In the Bhagavad-gita (18.66) Krsna says, sarva-dharmanparityajya mam ekam saranam vraja: "Simply surrender unto Me." But whois going to surrender to God? Everyone says, "Oh, why should I surrenderto God? I will be independent." If you simply surrender, it is a
--- Page 50 ---
second's business. That's all. But no one is willing, and that is the
difficulty.Reporter: When you say that lots of people want to be cheated, do youmean that lots of people want to carry on with their worldly pleasuresand at the same time, by chanting a mantra or by holding a flower,achieve spiritual life as well? Is this what you mean by wanting to becheated?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, this is like a patient thinking, "I shallcontinue with my disease, and at the same time I shall become healthy."It is contradictory. The first requirement is that one become educatedin spiritual life. Spiritual life is not something one can understand bya few minutes' talk. There are many philosophy and theology books, butpeople are not interested in them. That is the difficulty. For instance,the Srimad-Bhagavatam is a very long work, and if you try to read thisbook, it may take many days just to understand one line of it. TheBhagavatam describes God, the Absolute Truth, but people are notinterested. And if, by chance, someone becomes a little interested inspiritual life, he wants something immediate and cheap. Therefore, he ischeated. Actually, human life is meant for austerity and penance. Thatis the way of Vedic civilization. In Vedic times they would train boysas brahmacaris; no sex life was allowed at all up to the age of twenty-five. Where is that education now? A brahmacari is a student who lives alife of complete celibacy and obeys the commands of his guru at thegurukula [school of the spiritual master]. Now schools and colleges areteaching sex from the very beginning, and twelve- or thirteen-year-oldboys and girls are having sex. How can they have a spiritual life?Spiritual life means voluntarily accepting some austerities for the sakeof God realization. That is why we insist on no illicit sex, meat-eating, gambling, or intoxication for our initiated students. Withoutthese restrictions, any "yoga meditation" or so-called spiritualdiscipline cannot be genuine. It is simply a business deal between thecheaters and the cheated.Reporter: Thank you very much.Srila Prabhupada: Hare Krsna.The Absolute Necessity of a Spiritual MasterIn February 1936, in Bombay, India, the members of a reputed religioussociety, the Gaudiya Majha, were astonished by the powerful and eloquentwords of a young member who spoke in honor of his spiritual master,Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami. Three decades later, the youngspeaker would become the world-renowned founder and spiritual master ofthe Krsna consciousness movement. Srila Prabhupada's presentation is amemorable statement on the importance of the guru in spiritual life.
                      saksad-dharitvena samasta-sastrair
                       uktas tatha bhavyata eva sadbhih                      kintu prabhor yah priya eva tasya                       vande guroh sri-caranara vindam
     "In the revealed scriptures it is declared that the spiritual
master should be worshiped like the Supreme Personality of Godhead, andthis injunction is obeyed by pure devotees of the Lord. The spiritualmaster is the most confidential servant of the Lord. Thus let us offerour respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of our spiritual master."
--- Page 51 ---
     Gentlemen, on behalf of the members of the Bombay branch of the
Gaudiya Matha, let me welcome you all because you have so kindly joinedus tonight in our congregational offerings of homage to the lotus feetof the world teacher, Acaryadeva, who is the founder of this GaudiyaMission and is the president-acarya of Sri Sri Visva-vaisnava Raja-sabha--I mean my eternal divine master, Paramahamsa Parivrajakacarya SriSrimad Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja.     Sixty-two years ago, on this auspicious day, the Acaryadeva madehis appearance by the call of Thakura Bhaktivinoda at Sri-ksetraJagannatha-dhama at Puri.     Gentlemen, the offering of such an homage as has been arranged thisevening to the Acaryadeva is not a sectarian concern, for when we speakof the fundamental principle of gurudeva, or acaryadeva, we speak ofsomething that is of universal application. There does not arise anyquestion of discriminating my guru from yours or anyone else's. There isonly one guru, who appears in an infinity of forms to teach you, me, andall others.     The guru, or acaryadeva, as we learn from the bona fide scriptures,delivers the message of the absolute world, the transcendental abode ofthe Absolute Personality, where everything nondifferentially serves theAbsolute Truth. We have heard so many times: mahajano yena gatah sapanthah ("Traverse the trail which your previous acarya has passed"),but we have hardly tried to understand the real purport of this sloka.If we scrutinizingly study this proposition, we understand that themahajana is one, and the royal road to the transcendental world is alsoone. In the Mundaka Upanisad (1.2.12) it is said:
                   tad-vijnanartham sa gurum evabhigacchet
                     samit-panih srotriyam brahma-nistham
     "In order to learn the transcendental science, one must approach
the bona fide spiritual master in disciplic succession, who is fixed inthe Absolute Truth."     Thus it has been enjoined herewith that in order to receive thattranscendental knowledge, one must approach the guru. Therefore, if theAbsolute Truth is one, about which we think there is no difference ofopinion, the guru also cannot be two. The Acaryadeva for whom we haveassembled tonight to offer our humble homage is not the guru of asectarian institution or one out of many differing exponents of thetruth. On the contrary, he is the Jagad-guru, or the guru of all of us;the only difference is that some obey him wholeheartedly, while othersdo not obey him directly.     In the Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.17.27) it is said:
                            acaryam mam vijaniyan
                            na vamanyeta karhicit                           na martya-buddhyasuyeta                             sarva-devamayo guruh
     "One should understand the spiritual master to be as good as I am,"
said the Blessed Lord. "Nobody should be jealous of the spiritual masteror think of him as an ordinary man, because the spiritual master is thesum total of all demigods." That is, the acarya has been identified withGod Himself. He has nothing to do with the affairs of this mundane
--- Page 52 ---
world. He does not descend here to meddle with the affairs of temporary
necessities, but to deliver the fallen, conditioned souls--the souls, orentities, who have come here to the material world with a motive ofenjoyment by the mind and the five organs of sense perception. Heappears before us to reveal the light of the Vedas and to bestow upon usthe blessings of full-fledged freedom, after which we should hanker atevery step of our life's journey.     The transcendental knowledge of the Vedas was first uttered by Godto Brahma, the creator of this particular universe. From Brahma theknowledge descended to Narada, from Narada to Vyasadeva, from Vyasadevato Madhva, and in this process of disciplic succession thetranscendental knowledge was transmitted by one disciple to another tillit reached Lord Gauranga, Sri Krsna Caitanya, who posed as the discipleand successor of Sri Isvara Puri. The present Acaryadeva is the tenthdisciplic representative from Sri Rupa Gosvami, the originalrepresentative of Lord Caitanya who preached this transcendentaltradition in its fullness. The knowledge that we receive from ourGurudeva is not different from that imparted by God Himself and thesuccession of the acaryas in the preceptorial line of Brahma. We adorethis auspicious day as Sri Vyasa-puja-tithi, because the Acarya is theliving representative of Vyasadeva, the divine compiler of the Vedas,the Puranas, the Bhagavad-gita, the Mahabharata, and the Srimad-Bhagavatam.     One who interprets the divine sound, or sabda-brahma, by hisimperfect sense perception cannot be a real spiritual guru, because, inthe absence of proper disciplinary training under the bona fide acarya,the interpreter is sure to differ from Vyasadeva (as the Mayavadis do).Srila Vyasadeva is the prime authority of Vedic revelation, andtherefore such an irrelevant interpreter cannot be accepted as the guru,or acarya, howsoever equipped he may be with all the acquirements ofmaterial knowledge. As it is said in the Padma Purana:
                             sampradaya-vihina ye
                          mantras te nisphala matah
     "Unless you are initiated by a bona fide spiritual master in the
disciplic succession, the mantra that you might have received is withoutany effect."     On the other hand, one who has received the transcendentalknowledge by aural reception from the bona fide preceptor in thedisciplic chain, and who has sincere regard for the real acarya, mustneeds be enlightened with the revealed knowledge of the Vedas. But thisknowledge is permanently sealed to the cognitive approach of theempiricists. As it is said in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (6.23):
                           yasya deve para bhaktir
                            yatha deve tatha gurau                          tasyaite kathita hy arthah                            prakasante mahatmanah
     "Only unto those great souls who simultaneously have implicit faith
in both the Lord and the spiritual master are all the imports of Vedicknowledge automatically revealed."
--- Page 53 ---
     Gentlemen, our knowledge is so poor, our senses are so imperfect,
and our sources are so limited that it is not possible for us to haveeven the slightest knowledge of the absolute region without surrenderingourselves at the lotus feet of Sri Vyasadeva or his bona fiderepresentative. Every moment we are being deceived by the knowledge ofour direct perception. It is all the creation or concoction of the mind,which is always deceiving, changing, and flickering. We cannot knowanything of the transcendental region by our limited, perverted methodof observation and experiment. But all of us can lend our eager ears forthe aural reception of the transcendental sound transmitted from thatregion to this through the unadulterated medium of Sri Gurudeva or SriVyasadeva. Therefore, gentlemen, we should surrender ourselves today atthe feet of the representative of Sri Vyasadeva for the elimination ofall our differences bred by our unsubmissive attitude. It is accordinglysaid in Sri Gita (4.34):
                            tad viddhi pranipatena
                             pariprasnena sevaya                            upadeksyanti te jnanam                           jnaninas tattva-darsinah
     "Just approach the wise and bona fide spiritual master. Surrender
unto him first and try to understand him by inquiries and service. Sucha wise spiritual master will enlighten you with transcendentalknowledge, for he has already known the Absolute Truth."     To receive the transcendental knowledge we must completelysurrender ourselves to the real acarya in a spirit of ardent inquiry andservice. Actual performance of service to the Absolute under theguidance of the acarya is the only vehicle by which we can assimilatethe transcendental knowledge. Today's meeting for offering our humbleservices and homage to the feet of the Acaryadeva will enable us to befavored with the capacity for assimilating the transcendental knowledgeso kindly transmitted by him to all persons, without distinction.     Gentlemen, we are all more or less proud of our past Indiancivilization, but we actually do not know the real nature of thatcivilization. We cannot be proud of our past material civilization,which is now a thousand times greater than in days gone by. It is saidthat we are passing through the age of darkness, the Kali-yuga. What isthis darkness? The darkness cannot be due to backwardness in materialknowledge, because we now have more of it than formerly. If not weourselves, our neighbors, at any rate, have plenty of it. Therefore, wemust conclude that the darkness of the present age is not due to a lackof material advancement, but that we have lost the clue to our spiritualadvancement, which is the prime necessity of human life and thecriterion of the highest type of human civilization. Throwing of bombsfrom airplanes is no advancement of civilization from the primitive,uncivilized practice of dropping big stones on the heads of enemies fromthe tops of hills. Improvement of the art of killing our neighbors bymeans of machine guns and poisonous gases is certainly no advancementfrom primitive barbarism, which prided itself on its art of killing bybows and arrows. Nor does the development of a sense of pamperedselfishness prove anything more than intellectual animalism. True humancivilization is very different from all these states, and therefore inthe Katha Upanisad (1.3.14) there is the emphatic call:
--- Page 54 ---
                              uttisthata jagrata
                            prapya varan nibodhata                       ksurasya dhara nisita duratyaya                       durgam pathas tat kavayo vadanti
     "Please wake up and try to understand the boon that you now have in
this human form of life. The path of spiritual realization is verydifficult; it is sharp like a razor's edge. That is the opinion oflearned transcendental scholars."     Thus, while others were yet in the womb of historical oblivion, thesages of India had developed a different kind of civilization, whichenabled them to know themselves. They had discovered that we are not atall material entities, but that we are all spiritual, permanent, andindestructible servants of the Absolute. But because we have, againstour better judgment, chosen to completely identify ourselves with thispresent material existence, our sufferings have multiplied according tothe inexorable law of birth and death, with its consequent diseases andanxieties. These sufferings cannot be really mitigated by any provisionof material happiness, because matter and spirit are completelydifferent elements. It is just as if you took an aquatic animal out ofwater and put it on the land, supplying all manner of happiness possibleon land. The deadly sufferings of the animal are not capable of beingrelieved at all until it is taken out of its foreign environment. Spiritand matter are completely contradictory things. All of us are spiritualentities. We cannot have perfect happiness, which is our birthright,however much we may meddle with the affairs of mundane things. Perfecthappiness can be ours only when we are restored to our natural state ofspiritual existence. This is the distinctive message of our ancientIndian civilization, this is the message of the Gita, this is themessage of the Vedas and the Puranas, and this is the message of all thereal acaryas, including our present Acaryadeva, in the line of LordCaitanya.     Gentlemen, although it is imperfectly that we have been enabled byhis grace to understand the sublime messages of our Acaryadeva, OmVisnupada Paramahamsa Parivrajakacarya Sri Srimad BhaktisiddhantaSarasvati Gosvami Maharaja, we must admit that we have realizeddefinitely that the divine message from his holy lips is the congenialthing for suffering humanity. All of us should hear him patiently. If welisten to the transcendental sound without unnecessary opposition, hewill surely have mercy upon us. The Acarya's Message is to take us backto our original home, back to God. Let me repeat, therefore, that weshould hear him patiently, follow him in the measure of our conviction,and bow down at his lotus feet for releasing us from our presentcauseless unwillingness for serving the Absolute and all souls.     From the Gita we learn that even after the destruction of the body,the atma, or the soul, is not destroyed; he is always the same, alwaysnew and fresh. Fire cannot burn him, water cannot dissolve him, the aircannot dry him up, and the sword cannot kill him. He is everlasting andeternal, and this is also confirmed in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.84.13):
                     yasyatma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke
                    sva-dhih kalatradisu bhauma ijya-dhih                    yat-tirtha-buddhih salile na karhicij
--- Page 55 ---
                      janesv abhijnesu sa eva go-kharah
     "Anyone who accepts this bodily bag of three elements [bile, mucus,
and air] as his self, who has an affinity for an intimate relationshipwith his wife and children, who considers his land worshipable, whotakes bath in the waters of the holy places of pilgrimage but nevertakes advantage of those persons who are in actual knowledge--he is nobetter than an ass or a cow."     Unfortunately, in these days we have all been turned foolish byneglecting our real comfort and identifying the material cage withourselves. We have concentrated all our energies for the meaninglessupkeep of the material cage for its own sake, completely neglecting thecaptive soul within. The cage is meant for the undoing of the bird; thebird is not meant for the welfare of the cage. Let us, therefore, deeplyponder this. All our activities are now turned toward the upkeep of thecage, and the most we do is try to give some food to the mind by art andliterature. But we do not know that this mind is also material in a moresubtle form. This is stated in the Gita (7.4):
                            bhumir apo 'nalo vayuh
                           kham mano buddhir eva ca                              ahankara itiyam me                           bhinna prakrtir astadha
     "Earth, fire, water, air, sky, intelligence, mind, and ego are all
My separated energies."     We have scarcely tried to give any food to the soul, which isdistinct from the body and mind; therefore we are all committing suicidein the proper sense of the term. The message of the Acaryadeva is togive us a warning to halt such wrong activities. Let us therefore bowdown at his lotus feet for the unalloyed mercy and kindness he hasbestowed upon us.     Gentlemen, do not for a moment think that my Gurudeva wants to puta complete brake on the modern civilization--an impossible feat. But letus learn from him the art of making the best use of a bad bargain, andlet us understand the importance of this human life, which is fit forthe highest development of true consciousness. The best use of this rarehuman life should not be neglected. As it is said in the Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.9.29):
                 labdh va sudurlabham idam bahu-sambha vante
                    manusyam arthadam anityam apiha dhirah                    turnam yateta na pated anu mrtyu yavan                   nihsreyasaya visayah khalu sarvatah syat
     "This human form of life is obtained after many, many births, and
although it is not permanent, it can offer the highest benefits.Therefore a sober and intelligent man should immediately try to fulfillhis mission and attain the highest profit in life before another deathoccurs. He should avoid sense gratification, which is available in allcircumstances."     Let us not misuse this human life in the vain pursuit of materialenjoyment, or, in other words, for the sake of only eating, sleeping,
--- Page 56 ---
fearing, and sensuous activities. The Acaryadeva's message is conveyed
by the words of Sri Rupa Gosvami (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.255-256):
                             anasaktasya visayan
                            yatharham upayunjatah                          nirbandhah krsna-sambandhe                           yuktam vairagyam ucyate                            prapancikataya buddhya                           hari-sambandhi-vastunah                            mumuksubhih parityago                          vairagyam phalgu kathyate
     "One is said to be situated in the fully renounced order of life if
he lives in accordance with Krsna consciousness. He should be withoutattachment for sense gratification and should accept only what isnecessary for the upkeep of the body. On the other hand, one whorenounces things that could be used in the service of Krsna, under thepretext that such things are material, does not practice completerenunciation.     The purport of these slokas can only be realized by fullydeveloping the rational portion of our life, not the animal portion.Sitting at the feet of the Acaryadeva, let us try to understand fromthis transcendental source of knowledge what we are, what is thisuniverse, what is God, and what is our relationship with Him. Themessage of Lord Caitanya is the message for the living entities and themessage of the living world. Lord Caitanya did not bother Himself forthe upliftment of this dead world, which is suitably named Martyaloka,the world where everything is destined to die. He appeared before usfour hundred fifty years ago to tell us something of the transcendentaluniverse, where everything is permanent and everything is for theservice of the Absolute. But recently Lord Caitanya has beenmisrepresented by some unscrupulous persons, and the highest philosophyof the Lord has been misinterpreted to be the cult of the lowest type ofsociety. We are glad to announce tonight that our Acaryadeva, with hisusual kindness, saved us from this horrible type of degradation, andtherefore we bow down at his lotus feet with all humility.     Gentlemen, it has been a mania of the cultured (or uncultured)society of the present day to accredit the Personality of Godhead withmerely impersonal features and to stultify Him by claiming that He hasno senses, no form, no activity, no head, no legs, and no enjoyment.This has also been the pleasure of the modern scholars due to theirsheer lack of proper guidance and true introspection in the spiritualrealm. All these empiricists think alike: all the enjoyable thingsshould be monopolized by the human society, or by a particular classonly, and the impersonal God should be a mere order-supplier for theirwhimsical feats. We are happy that we have been relieved of thishorrible type of malady by the mercy of His Divine Grace ParamahamsaParivrajakacarya Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja. He is oureye-opener, our eternal father, our eternal preceptor, and our eternalguide. Let us therefore bow down at his lotus feet on this auspiciousday.     Gentlemen, although we are like ignorant children in the knowledgeof the Transcendence, still His Divine Grace, my Gurudeva, has kindled asmall fire within us to dissipate the invincible darkness of empirical
--- Page 57 ---
knowledge. We are now so much on the safe side that no amount of
philosophical argument by the empiric schools of thought can deviate usan inch from the position of our eternal dependence on the lotus feet ofHis Divine Grace. Furthermore, we are prepared to challenge the mosterudite scholars of the Mayavada school and prove that the Personalityof Godhead and His transcendental sports in Goloka alone constitute thesublime information of the Vedas. There are explicit indications of thisin the Chandogya Upanisad (8.13.1):
                          syamac cha valam prapadye
                          sa valac chyamam prapadye
     "For receiving the mercy of Krsna, I surrender unto His surrender
unto Krsna." Also in the Rg Veda (1.22.20):
                tad visnoh paramam padam sada pasyanti surayah
                             diviva caksur atatam                           visnor yat paramam padam
     "The lotus feet of Lord Visnu are the supreme objective of all the
demigods. These lotus feet of the Lord are as enlightening as the sun inthe sky."     The plain truth so vividly explained in the Gita, which is thecentral lesson of the Vedas, is not understood or even suspected by themost powerful scholars of the empiric schools. Herein lies the secret ofSri Vyasa-puja. When we meditate on the transcendental pastimes of theAbsolute Godhead, we are proud to feel that we are His eternalservitors, and we become jubilant and dance with joy. All glory to mydivine master, for it is he who has out of his unceasing flow of mercystirred up within us such a movement of eternal existence. Let us bowdown at his lotus feet.     Gentlemen, had he not appeared before us to deliver us from thethralldom of this gross worldly delusion, surely we should have remainedfor lives and ages in the darkness of helpless captivity. Had he notappeared before us, we would not have been able to understand theeternal truth of the sublime teaching of Lord Caitanya. Had he notappeared before us, we could not have been able to know the significanceof the first sloka of the Brahma-samhita:
                            isvarah paramah krsnah
                           sac-cid-ananda- vigrahah                             anadir adir govindah                             sarva-karana-karanam
     "Krsna, who is known as Govinda, is the Supreme Godhead. He has an
eternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has noother origin, and He is the prime cause of all causes."     Personally, I have no hope for any direct service for the comingcrores of births of the sojourn of my life, but I am confident that someday or other I shall be delivered from this mire of delusion in which Iam at present so deeply sunk. Therefore let me with all my earnestnesspray at the lotus feet of my divine master to allow me to suffer the lotfor which I am destined due to my past misdoings, but to let me havethis power of recollection: that I am nothing but a tiny servant of the
--- Page 58 ---
Almighty Absolute Godhead, realized through the unflinching mercy of my
divine master. Let me therefore bow down at his lotus feet with all thehumility at my command.
“Science of Self-Realization”  by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use this electronicfile to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your own privateuse, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, studentpapers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluationcopy to others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyrightinformation intact. You may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) ofthis book in any media without the express written permission from thecopyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Science of Self-Realization” by A.C. BhaktivedantaSwami, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International,
www.Krishna.com    .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1977-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, 
   www.Krishna.com    .