
                                 Chapter Five
                      Practicing Yoga in the Modern AgeSuperconsciousness
The goals of modern-day Western yoga enthusiasts are dwarfed by theachievements of India's ancient yogis, who, according to historicalaccounts, could become smaller than atoms and lighter than air and whocould travel, unaided, anywhere in the universe. Yet even thesesuperachievements, says Srila Prabhupada, are "only a step forward." Howthe true pinnacle of human consciousness, superconsciousness, isobtainable--here and now--is disclosed by Srila Prabhupada in thefollowing talk given in 1967.     Krsna consciousness is the highest yoga performance by traineddevotional yogis. The yoga system, as is stated in the standard yogapractice formula given by Lord Krsna in the Bhagavad-gita, and asrecommended in the Patanjali yoga discipline, is different from thenowadays practiced hatha-yoga as is generally understood in the Westerncountries.
--- Page 88 ---
     Real yoga practice means to control the senses and, after such
control is established, to concentrate the mind on the Narayana form ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. Lord Krsna is theoriginal Absolute Personality, the Godhead, and all the other Visnuforms--with four hands, decorated with conch, lotus, club, and wheel--are plenary expansions of Krsna.     In the Bhagavad-gita it is recommended that we should meditate uponthe form of the Lord. For practicing concentration of the mind, one hasto sit down in a secluded place sanctified by a sacred atmosphere, andthe yogi should observe the rules and regulations of brahmacarya--tolive a life of strict self-restraint and celibacy. No one can practiceyoga in a congested city, living a life of extravagance, includingunrestricted sex indulgence and adultery of the tongue.     We have already stated that yoga practice means controlling thesenses, and the beginning of controlling the senses is to control thetongue. You cannot allow the tongue to take all kinds of forbidden foodand drink, and at the same time improve in the practice of yoga. It is avery regrettable fact that many stray, unauthorized so-called yogis nowcome to the West and exploit the leaning of the people toward yoga. Suchunauthorized yogis even dare to say publicly that one can indulge indrinking and at the same time practice meditation.     Five thousand years ago, in the Bhagavad-gita dialogue, Lord Krsnarecommended the yoga practice to His disciple Arjuna, but Arjuna flatlyexpressed his inability to follow the stringent rules and regulations ofyoga. One should be practical in every field of activity. One should notwaste his valuable time simply in practicing some gymnastic feats in thename of yoga. Real yoga is to search out the four-handed Supersoulwithin one's heart and to see Him perpetually in meditation. Suchcontinued meditation is called samadhi. If, however, one wants tomeditate upon something void or impersonal, it will require a very longtime to achieve anything by yoga practice. We cannot concentrate ourmind on something void or impersonal. Real yoga practice is to fix themind on the person of the four-handed Narayana who dwells in everyone'sheart.     Sometimes it is said that by meditation one will understand thatGod is seated within one's heart always, even when one does not know it.God is seated within the heart of everyone. Not only is He seated in theheart of the human being, but He is also within the hearts of the catsand dogs. The Bhagavad-gita certifies this with the declaration thatIsvara, the supreme controller of the world, is seated in the heart ofeveryone. He is present not only in everyone's heart, but also withinthe atoms. No place is vacant; no place is without the presence of theLord.     The feature of the Lord by which He is present everywhere is calledthe Paramatma. Atma means the individual soul, and Paramatma means theindividual Supersoul. Both atma and Paramatma are individual persons.The difference between them, however, is that the atma, or soul, ispresent only in one particular place, whereas the Paramatma is presenteverywhere.     In this connection, the example of the sun is very nice. Anindividual person may be situated in one place, but the sun, even thougha specific individual entity, is present over the head of everyindividual person. In the Bhagavad-gita this is very nicely explained.Therefore, even though the qualities of all entities, including the
--- Page 89 ---
Lord, are equal, the Supersoul is different from the individual soul by
quantity of expansion. The Lord, or Supersoul, can expand Himself intomillions of different forms, while the individual soul cannot do so.     The Supersoul, being seated in everyone's heart, can witnesseveryone's activities, past, present, and future. In the Upanisads theSupersoul is said to be sitting with the individual soul as a friend andwitness. As a friend He is always anxious to get the individual soulback home, back to Godhead. As a witness, He is the endower of allbenedictions that result from the individual's actions. The Supersoulgives the individual soul all facility for achieving whatever he maydesire. But He instructs His friend, so that he may ultimately give upall other engagements and simply surrender unto God for perpetual blissand eternal life, full of knowledge. This is the last instruction of theBhagavad-gita, the most authorized and widely read book on all forms ofyoga.     The last word of the Bhagavad-gita, as stated above, is the lastword in the matter of perfecting the yoga system. It is further statedin the Bhagavad-gita that a person who is always absorbed in Krsnaconsciousness is the topmost yogi. What is this Krsna consciousness?     Just as the individual soul is present by his consciousnessthroughout the whole body, so the Supersoul, or Paramatma, is presentthroughout the whole creation by His superconsciousness. Thissuperconsciousness cannot be imitated by the individual soul, who haslimited awareness: I can understand what is going on within my limitedbody, but I cannot feel what is going on in another's body. I am presentall over my body by my consciousness, but I am not present in anyother's body by my consciousness. However, the Supersoul, or Paramatma,being present within everyone, situated everywhere, is conscious ofevery existence. The theory that the soul and the Supersoul are one isnot acceptable, because the individual soul's consciousness cannot actin superconsciousness. This superconsciousness can only be achieved bydovetailing individual consciousness with the superconsciousness; andthis dovetailing process is called surrender, or Krsna consciousness.     From the teachings of the Bhagavad-gita we learn very clearly thatArjuna in the beginning did not want to fight with his relatives, butafter understanding the Bhagavad-gita, when he dovetailed hisconsciousness with the superconsciousness of Krsna, his consciousnesswas Krsna consciousness. A person in full Krsna consciousness acts bythe dictation of Krsna, and so Arjuna agreed to fight the Battle ofKuruksetra.     In the beginning of Krsna consciousness this dictation of the Lordis received through the transparent medium of the spiritual master. Whenone is sufficiently trained and acts with submissive faith and love forKrsna, under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master, thedovetailing process becomes more firm and accurate. At this stage Krsnadictates from within. From without, the devotee is helped by thespiritual master, the bona fide representative of Krsna, and from withinthe Lord helps the devotee as caitya-guru, being seated within the heartof everyone.     Simply to understand that God is seated in everyone's heart is notperfection. One has to be acquainted with God from within and withoutand thus act in Krsna consciousness. This is the highest perfectionalstage for the human form of life, and the topmost stage in all yogasystems.
--- Page 90 ---
     For a perfect yogi there are eight kinds of superachievements:
     1. One can become smaller than an atom.     2. One can become bigger than a mountain.     3. One can become lighter than the air.     4. One can become heavier than any metal.     5. One can achieve any material effect he likes (create a planet,for example).     6. One can control others like the Lord can.     7. One can freely travel anywhere within (or beyond) the universe.     8. One can choose his own time and place of death, and take rebirthwherever he may desire.     But when one rises to the perfectional stage of receiving dictationfrom the Lord, one is above the stage of the material achievements abovementioned.     The breathing exercise of the yoga system that is generallypracticed is just the beginning of the system. Meditation on theSupersoul is just a step forward. Achievement of wonderful materialsuccess is also only a step forward. But to attain direct contact withthe Supersoul and to take dictation from Him is the highest perfectionalstage.     The breathing exercises and meditational practices of yoga are verydifficult in this age. They were difficult even five thousand years ago,or else Arjuna would not have rejected the proposal of Krsna. This ageof Kali is called a fallen age. At the present moment, people in generalare short-living and very slow in understanding self-realization, orspiritual life. They are mostly unfortunate, and as such, if someone isa little bit interested in self-realization, he is misguided by so manyfrauds. The only actual way to realization of the perfect stage of yogais to follow the principles of the Bhagavad-gita as they were practicedby Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This is the simplest and highest perfectionof yoga practice.     Lord Caitanya practically demonstrated Krsna consciousness yogasimply by chanting the holy names of Krsna, as they are mentioned in theVedanta, the Srimad-Bhagavatam, and many important Puranas. The largestnumber of Indians follow this yoga practice, and in the United Statesand other countries also it is gradually growing in many cities. It isvery easy and practical for this age, especially for those who areserious about success in yoga. No other process can be successful inthis age.     The meditational process in right earnest was possible in theGolden Age, Satya-yuga, because the people at that time lived for ahundred thousand years on the average.     In the present age, however, if you want success in practical yoga,take to the chanting of Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, and feel for yourself howyou are making progress. One should know for himself how much he isprogressing in yoga practice.     In the Bhagavod-gita this practice of Krsna consciousness isdescribed as raja-vidya, the king of all erudition; raja-guhyam, themost confidential system of spiritual realization; pavitram, the purestof all that is pure; susukham, very happily performed; and avyayam,inexhaustible.     Those who have taken to this most sublime bhakti-yoga system, thispractice of devotional service in transcendental love of Krsna, can
--- Page 91 ---
testify to how they are nicely enjoying its happy and easy execution.
Yoga means controlling the senses, and bhakti-yoga means purifying thesenses. When the senses are purified, they are also, automatically,controlled. You cannot stop the activities of the senses by artificialmeans, but if you purify the senses, not only are they kept back fromrubbish engagement, but also they become positively engaged intranscendental service to the Lord.     Krsna consciousness is not manufactured by us through mentalspeculation. It is prescribed in the Bhagavad-gita, which says that whenwe think in Krsna, chant in Krsna, live in Krsna, eat in Krsna, talk inKrsna, hope in Krsna, and sustain in Krsna, we return to Krsna, withoutany doubt. And this is the substance of Krsna consciousness.The Appearance of Lord CaitanyaOnly five hundred years ago Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, a great saint andmystic, prophesied that the Hare Krsna mantra would resound throughoutevery town and village in the world. At a time when Western man wasdirecting his exploratory spirit toward studying the physical universeand circumnavigating the globe, in India Sri Caitanya was inauguratingand masterminding a revolution directed inward. His movement swept thesubcontinent, gained millions of followers, and profoundly influencedthe future of religious and philosophical thinking, both in India andthe West. In the following talk, presented in November 1969 at London'sConway Hall, Srila Prabhupada describes the divine appearance of SriCaitanya.     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the golden avatara, appeared in Indianearly five hundred years ago. It is the custom in India that when achild is born, an astrologer is called for. When Lord Krsna, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, appeared five thousand years ago, Gargamuni wascalled by His father, and he said, "This child formerly incarnated inthree complexions, such as red and golden, and now He has appeared inblackish color." Krsna's color is described in the scriptures asblackish, just like the color of a cloud. Lord Caitanya is understood tobe Krsna appearing in golden complexion.     There is much evidence in Vedic literature that Caitanya Mahaprabhuis an incarnation of Krsna, and this is confirmed by scholars anddevotees. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is confirmed that the incarnationof Krsna, or God, in this present age, Kali-yuga, will always engage indescribing Krsna. He is Krsna, but as a devotee of Krsna He describesHimself. And in this age His bodily complexion will not be blackish.This means that it may be white, it may be red, or it may be yellow,because these four colors--white, red, yellow, and black--are the colorsassumed by the incarnations for the different ages. Therefore, since thered, white, and blackish colors were already taken by formerincarnations, the remaining color, golden, is assumed by CaitanyaMahaprabhu. His complexion is not blackish, but He is Krsna.     Another feature of this avatara is that He is always accompanied byHis associates. In the picture of Caitanya Mahaprabhu one will find thatHe is always followed by many devotees chanting. Whenever God incarnatesHe has two missions, as stated in the Bhagavad-gita. There Krsna says,"Whenever I appear, My mission is to deliver the pious devotees and toannihilate the demons." When Krsna appeared, He had to kill many demons.If we see a picture of Visnu we will notice that He has a conchshell,lotus flower, club, and disc. These last two items are meant for killingdemons. Within this world there are two classes of men--the demons and
--- Page 92 ---
the devotees. The devotees are called demigods; they are almost like God
because they have godly qualities. Those who are devotees are calledgodly persons, and those who are nondevotees, atheists, are calleddemons. So Krsna, or God, comes with two missions: to give protection tothe devotees and to destroy the demons. In this age CaitanyaMahaprabhu's mission is also like that: to deliver the devotees and toannihilate the nondevotees, the demons. But in this age He has adifferent weapon. That weapon is not a club or disc or lethal weapon--His weapon is the sankirtana movement. He killed the demoniac mentalityof the people by introducing the sankirtana movement. That is thespecific significance of Lord Caitanya. In this age people are alreadykilling themselves. They have discovered atomic weapons with which tokill themselves, so there is no need for God to kill them. But Heappeared to kill their demonic mentality. That is possible by this Krsnaconsciousness movement.     Therefore, in the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is said that this is theincarnation of God in this age. And who worships Him? The process isvery simple. Just keep a picture of Lord Caitanya with His associates.Lord Caitanya is in the middle, accompanied by His principal associates--Nityananda, Advaita, Gadadhara, and Srivasa. One simply has to keepthis picture. One can keep it anywhere. It is not that one has to cometo us to see this picture. Anyone can have this picture in his home,chant this Hare Krsna mantra, and thus worship Lord Caitanya. That isthe simple method. But who will capture this simple method? Those whohave good brains. Without much bother, if one simply keeps a picture ofSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu at home and chants Hare Krsna, then one willrealize God. Anyone can adopt this simple method. There is noexpenditure, there is no tax, nor is there any need to build a very bigchurch or temple. Anyone, anywhere, can sit down on the road or beneatha tree and chant the Hare Krsna mantra and worship God. Therefore it isa great opportunity. For example, in business or political life onesometimes finds a great opportunity. Those who are intelligentpoliticians take a good opportunity and make a success of it the firsttime it comes. Similarly, in this age, those who have sufficientintelligence take to this sankirtana movement, and they advance veryquickly.     Lord Caitanya is called "the golden avatara." Avatara means"descending, coming down." Just as one may come down from the fifthstory or the one-hundredth story of a building, an avatara comes downfrom the spiritual planets in the spiritual sky. The sky we see with ournaked eyes or with a telescope is only the material sky. But beyond thisthere is another sky, which is not possible to see with our eyes orinstruments. That information is in the Bhagavad-gita; it is notimagination. Krsna says that beyond the material sky is another sky, thespiritual sky.     We have to take Krsna's word as it is. For example, we teach smallchildren that beyond England there are other places, called Germany,India, etc., and the child has to learn about these places from theversion of the teacher because they are beyond his sphere. Similarly,beyond this material sky there is another sky. One cannot experiment tofind it, any more than a small child can experiment to find Germany orIndia. That is not possible. If we want to get knowledge, then we haveto accept authority. Similarly, if we want to know what is beyond thematerial world then we have to accept the Vedic authority, otherwise
--- Page 93 ---
there is no possibility of knowing. It is beyond material knowledge. One
cannot go to the far planets in this universe, what to speak of goingbeyond this universe. The estimation is that in order to go to thehighest planet of this universe with modern machinery one would have totravel for forty thousand light-years. So we cannot even travel withinthis material sky. Our lifetime and means are so limited that we cannothave proper knowledge of even this material world.     In the Bhagavad-gita, when Arjuna asked Krsna, "Will you kindlyexplain the extent to which Your energies are working?" the Supreme Lordgave him so many instances, and at the end He finally said, "My dearArjuna, what shall I explain about My energies? It is not actuallypossible for you to understand. But you can just imagine the expansionof My energies: this material world, which consists of millions ofuniverses, is a display of only one fourth of My creation." We cannotestimate the position of even one universe, and there are millions ofuniverses. Then beyond that is the spiritual sky, and there are millionsof spiritual planets. All this information is available from the Vedicliterature. If one accepts Vedic literature, then he can get thisknowledge. If one doesn't accept it, there is no other means. That isour choice. Therefore, according to Vedic civilization, whenever anacarya speaks he immediately gives references from the Vedic literature.Then others will accept it: "Yes, it is correct." In a law court thelawyer gives references from past judgments of the court, and if hiscase is tight, the judge accepts. Similarly, if one can give evidencefrom the Vedas, then it is understood that his position is factual.     The avatara for this age, Lord Caitanya, is described in Vedicliterature. We cannot accept anyone as an avatara unless he has thesymptoms described in the scriptures. We do not whimsically accept LordCaitanya as an avatara on the basis of votes. Nowadays it has become afashion that any man can come and say that he is God or an incarnationof God, and some fools and rascals will accept it: "Oh, he is God." Wedo not accept an avatara like that. We take evidence from the Vedas. Anavatara must conform to descriptions in the Vedas. Then we accept him;otherwise no. For each avatara there is a description in the Vedas: Hewill appear at such and such a place, in such and such a form, and Hewill act like this. That is the nature of Vedic evidence.     In the Srimad-Bhagavatam there is a list of the avataras, and thereis mention of Lord Buddha's name. This Srimad-Bhagavatam was writtenfive thousand years ago, and it mentions different names for futuretimes. It says that in the future the Lord would appear as Lord Buddha,his mother's name would be Anjana, and he would appear in Gaya. SoBuddha appeared twenty-six hundred years ago, and the Srimad-Bhagavatam,which was written five thousand years ago, mentioned that in the futurehe would appear. Similarly, there is mention of Lord Caitanya, andsimilarly the last avatara of this Kali-yuga is also mentioned in theBhagavatam. It is mentioned that the last incarnation in this age isKalki. He will appear as the son of a brahmana whose name is Visnu-yasa,in a place called Sambhala. There is a place in India with that name, soperhaps it is there that the Lord will appear.     So an avatara must conform to the descriptions in the Upanisads,Srimad-Bhagavatam, Mahabharata, and other Vedic literatures. And on theauthority of Vedic literature and the commentary of great, stalwartgosvamis like Jiva Gosvami, who was the greatest scholar and philosopherin the world, we can accept Lord Caitanya as an incarnation of Krsna.
--- Page 94 ---
     Why did Lord Caitanya appear? In the Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna says,
"Give up all other engagements and simply engage in My service. I willgive you protection from all results of sinful actions." In thismaterial world, in conditional life, we are simply creating sinfulreactions. That's all. And because of sinful reactions, we have receivedthis body. If our sinful reactions stopped we would not have to take amaterial body; we should get a spiritual body.     What is a spiritual body? A spiritual body is a body which is freefrom death, birth, disease, and old age. It is an eternal body, full ofknowledge and bliss. Different bodies are created by different desires.As long as we have desires for different kinds of enjoyment, we have toaccept different kinds of material bodies. Krsna, God, is so kind thatHe awards whatever we want. If we want a tiger's body, with tigerlikestrength and teeth with which to capture animals and suck fresh blood,then Krsna will give us the opportunity. And if we want the body of asaintly person, a devotee engaged only in the service of the Lord, thenHe will give us that body. This is stated in the Bhagavad-gita.     If a person engaged in yoga, the process of self-realization,somehow or other fails to complete the process, he is given anotherchance; he is given birth in a family of a pure brahmana or a rich man.If one is fortunate enough to take birth in such a family, he gets allfacilities to understand the importance of self-realization. From thevery beginning of life our Krsna conscious children are getting theopportunity to learn how to chant and dance, so when they are grown upthey will not change, but instead will automatically make progress. Theyare very fortunate. Regardless of whether he is born in America orEurope, a child will advance if his father and mother are devotees. Hegets this opportunity. If a child takes birth in a family of devotees,this means that in his last life he had already taken to the yogaprocess, but somehow or other he could not finish it. Therefore thechild is given another opportunity to make progress under the care of agood father and mother so that he will again advance. In this way, assoon as one completes his development of God consciousness, then he nolonger has to take birth in this material world, but returns to thespiritual world.     Krsna says in the Bhagavad-gita: "My dear Arjuna, if oneunderstands My appearance, disappearance, and activities, simply becauseof this understanding he is given the opportunity to take birth in thespiritual world after giving up this body." One has to give up thisbody--today, tomorrow, or maybe the day after that. One has to. But aperson who has understood Krsna will not have to take another materialbody. He goes directly to the spiritual world and takes birth in one ofthe spiritual planets. So Krsna says that as soon as one gets this body--it doesn't matter if it is from India or the moon or the sun orBrahmaloka or anywhere within this material world--one should know thatit is due to his sinful activities. There are degrees of sinfulactivities, so according to the degree of sinfulness, one takes amaterial body. Therefore our real problem is not how to eat, sleep,mate, and defend--our real problem is how to get a body that is notmaterial but spiritual. That is the ultimate solution to all problems.So Krsna guarantees that if one surrenders unto Him, if one becomesfully Krsna conscious, then He will give one protection from allreactions to sinful life.
--- Page 95 ---
     This assurance was given by Krsna in the Bhagavad-gita, but there
were many fools who could not understand Krsna. In the Bhagavad-gitathey are described as mudhas. Mudha means "rascal," and Krsna says inthe Gita, "They do not know what I actually am." So many peoplemisunderstood Krsna. Although Krsna gave us this message of theBhagavad-gita so that we could understand Him, many people missed theopportunity. Therefore Krsna, out of His compassion, came again, as adevotee, and showed us how to surrender unto Krsna. Krsna Himself cameto teach us how to surrender. His last instruction in the Bhagavad-gitais to surrender, but people--mudhas, rascals--said, "Why should Isurrender?" Therefore, although Caitanya Mahaprabhu is Krsna Himself,this time He teaches us practically how to execute the mission of theBhagavad-gita. That's all. Caitanya Mahaprabhu is teaching nothingextraordinary, nothing beyond the process of surrendering to the SupremePersonality of Godhead, which was already taught in the Bhagavad-gita.There is no other teaching, but the same teaching is presented indifferent ways so that different kinds of people may take it and takethe opportunity to approach God.     Caitanya Mahaprabhu gives us the opportunity to reach God directly.When Rupa Gosvami, the principal disciple of Lord Caitanya, first sawCaitanya Mahaprabhu, he was a minister in the government of Bengal butwanted to join Caitanya Mahaprabhu's movement. So he gave up hisposition as a minister, and after joining, when he surrendered, heoffered a nice prayer to Lord Caitanya. This prayer says:
                             namo maha-vadanyaya
                            krsna-prema-pradaya te                           krsnaya krsna-caitanya-                           namne gaura-tvise namah
     "My dear Lord, You are the most munificent of all the
incarnations." Why? Krsna-prema-pradaya te: "You are directly givinglove of God. You have no other purpose. Your process is so nice that onecan immediately learn to love God. Therefore You are the most munificentof all incarnations. And it is not possible for any personality otherthan Krsna Himself to deliver this benediction; therefore I say that Youare Krsna." Krsnaya krsna-caitanya-namne: "You are Krsna, but You haveassumed the name Krsna Caitanya. I surrender unto You."     So this is the process. Caitanya Mahaprabhu is Krsna Himself, andHe is teaching how to develop love of God by a very simple method. Hesays simply to chant Hare Krsna.
                            harer nama harer nama
                            harer namaiva kevalam                          kalau nasty eva nasty eva                           nasty eva gatir anyatha
     "In this age, simply go on chanting the Hare Krsna mantra. There is
no other alternative." People are embarrassed by so many methods ofrealization. They cannot take to the actual ritualistic processes ofmeditation or yoga; it is not possible. Therefore Lord Caitanya saysthat if one takes up this process of chanting, then immediately he canreach the platform of realization.
--- Page 96 ---
     The chanting process offered by Lord Caitanya for achieving love of
God is called sankirtana. Sankirtana is a Sanskrit word. Sam meanssamyak--"complete." And kirtana means "glorifying" or "describing." Socomplete description means complete glorification of the Supreme, or theSupreme Complete Whole. It is not that one can describe anything orglorify anything and that will be kirtana. From the grammatical point ofview that may be kirtana, but according to the Vedic system, kirtanameans describing the supreme authority, the Absolute Truth, the SupremePersonality of Godhead. That is called kirtana.     This devotional service begins with the method of sravana. Sravanameans "hearing," and kirtana means "describing." One should describe,and another should hear. Or the same man himself can both describe andhear. He does not need anyone else's help. When we chant Hare Krsna, wechant and hear. This is complete. This is a complete method. But what isthat chanting and hearing? One must chant and hear about Visnu, Krsna.Not of anything else. Sravanam kirtanam visnoh: one can understandVisnu, the all-pervading Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, by the method of hearing.     We have to hear; if one simply hears, that is the beginning. Onedoes not need any education or development of material knowledge. Justlike a child: as soon as he hears, immediately he can respond and dance.So by nature God has given us these nice instruments--ears--so that wecan hear. But we must hear from the right source. That is stated in theSrimad-Bhagavatam. One must hear from those who are devoted to theSupreme Personality of Godhead. They are called satam. If one hears fromthe right source, from a realized soul, then it will act. And thesewords of God, or Krsna, are very relishable. If one is intelligentenough, he will listen to what is spoken by the realized soul. Then verysoon he will be released from material entanglements.     This human life is meant for advancing on the path of liberation.That is called apavarga, freedom from entanglement. We are allentangled. Our acceptance of this material body means that we arealready entangled. But we should not progress in the process ofentanglement. That process is called karma. As long as the mind isabsorbed in karma, we will have to accept a material body. At the timeof death, our mind may be thinking, "Oh, I could not complete this work.Oh, I am dying! I have to do this. I have to do that." This means thatKrsna will give us another chance to do it, and so we will have toaccept another body. He will give us the chance: "All right. You couldnot do it. Now do it. Take this body." Therefore the Srimad-Bhagavatamsays, "These rascals have become madly intoxicated; because ofintoxication they are doing something they should not have done." Whatare they doing? Maharaja Dhrtarastra is a very good example. MaharajaDhrtarastra was cunningly planning to kill the Pandavas in order tofavor his own sons, so Krsna sent His uncle, Akrura, to advise him notto do that. Dhrtarastra understood Akrura's instructions, but he said,"My dear Akrura, what you are saying is quite right, but it does notstand in my heart, so I cannot change my policy. I have to follow thispolicy and let whatever happens take place."     So when men want to satisfy their senses, they become mad, and inthis madness they'll do anything and everything. For example, there havebeen many instances in material life where someone has become mad aftersomething and has committed a criminal act such as murder. The personcould not check himself. Similarly, we are accustomed to sense
--- Page 97 ---
gratification. We are mad, and therefore our minds are fully absorbed in
karma. This is very unfortunate, because our body, although temporary,is the reservoir of all misfortunes and miseries; it is always giving ustrouble. These matters are to be studied. We should not be mad. Humanlife is not meant for that. The defect of the present civilization isthat people are mad after sense gratification. That is all. They do notknow the real value of life, and therefore they are neglecting the mostvaluable form of life, this human form.     When this body is finished there is no guarantee what kind of bodyone will take next. Suppose in my next life I by chance get the body ofa tree. For thousands of years I will have to stand up. But people arenot very serious. They even say, "What is that? Even if I have to standup, I shall forget." The lower species of life are situated inforgetfulness. If a tree were not forgetful it would be impossible forit to live. Suppose we were told, "You stand up for three days here!"Because we are not forgetful, we would become mad. So, by nature's law,all these lower species of life are forgetful. Their consciousness isnot developed. A tree has life, but even if someone cuts it, because itsconsciousness is not developed, it does not respond. So we should bevery careful to utilize this human form of life properly. The Krsnaconsciousness movement is meant for achieving perfection in life. It isnot a bluff or exploitation, but unfortunately people are accustomed tobeing bluffed. There is a verse by an Indian poet: "If one speaks nicethings, people will quarrel with him: `Oh, what nonsense you arespeaking.' But if he bluffs them and cheats them, they will be veryglad." So if a bluffer says, "Just do this, give me my fee, and withinsix months you will become God," then they will agree: "Yes, take thisfee, and I shall become God within six months." No. These cheatingprocesses will not solve our problem. If one actually wants to solve theproblems of life in this age, then he has to take to this process ofkirtana. That is the recommended process.
                            harer nama harer nama
                            harer namaiva kevalam                          kalau nasty eva nasty eva                           nasty eva gatir anyatha
     In this age, Kali-yuga, one cannot execute any process of self-
realization or perfection of life other than kirtana. Kirtana isessential in this age.     In all Vedic literatures it is confirmed that one must meditate onthe Supreme Absolute Truth, Visnu, not on anything else. But there aredifferent processes of meditation recommended for different ages. Theprocess of mystic yogic meditation was possible in Satya-yuga, when menlived for many thousands of years. Now people will not believe this, butin a previous age there were people who lived for one hundred thousandyears. That age was called Satya-yuga, and the meditation of mystic yogawas possible at that time. In that age the great yogi Valmiki Munimeditated for sixty thousand years. So that is a long-term process,which is not possible to execute in this age. If one wishes to conduct afarce, that is another matter. But if one actually wants to practicesuch meditation, it takes an extremely long time to perfect. In the nextage, Treta-yuga, the process of realization was to perform the variousritualistic sacrifices recommended in the Vedas. In the next age,
--- Page 98 ---
Dvapara-yuga, the process was temple worship. In this present age the
same result can be achieved by the process of hari-kirtana,glorification of Hari, Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.     No other kirtana is recommended. This hari-kirtana was started fivehundred years ago in Bengal by Lord Caitanya. In Bengal there iscompetition between the Vaisnavas and the saktas. The saktas haveintroduced a certain type of kirtana called kali-kirtana. But in theVedic scriptures there is no recommendation of kali-kirtana. Kirtanameans hari-kirtana. One cannot say, "Oh, you are Vaisnava. You canperform hari-kirtana. I shall perform siva-kirtana or devi-kirtana organesa-kirtana." No. The Vedic scriptures do not authorize any kirtanaother than hari-kirtana. Kirtana means hari-kirtana, the glorificationof Krsna.     So this process of hari-kirtana is very simple: Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, HareHare. Actually there are only three words: Hare, Krsna, and Rama. Butthey are very nicely arranged for chanting so that everyone can take themantra and chant Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare. Sincewe have started this movement in the Western countries, Europeans,Americans, Africans, Egyptians, and Japanese are all chanting. There isno difficulty. They are chanting very gladly, and they are getting theresults. What is the difficulty? We are distributing this chanting freeof charge, and it is very simple. Simply by chanting, one can have self-realization, God realization, and when there is God realization, thennature realization is included also. For example, if one learns one,two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, and zero, then he hasstudied the entirety of mathematics, because mathematics means simplychanging the places of these ten figures. That's all. Similarly, if onesimply studies Krsna, then all his knowledge is perfect. And Krsna iseasily understood simply by chanting this mantra, Hare Krsna. So why nottake this opportunity?     Take this opportunity that is being offered to human society. It isvery ancient and scientific. It is not that it is a concoction that willlast for only three or four years. No. In the Bhagavad-gita KrsnaHimself says, "This philosophy is inexhaustible and indestructible. Itis never lost or destroyed." It may be covered for the time being, butit is never destroyed. Therefore it is called avyayam. Vyaya means"exhaustion." For example, one may have a hundred dollars, and if theyare spent one after another, the next day it will come to zero. That isvyaya, exhaustible. But Krsna consciousness is not like that. If youcultivate this knowledge of Krsna consciousness, then it will increase.That is certified by Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Anandam-budhi-vardhanam.Ananda means "pleasure," "transcendental bliss," and ambudhi means"ocean." In the material world we see that the ocean does not increase.But if one cultivates Krsna consciousness, then his transcendental blisswill simply increase. Anandambudhi-vardhanam. And I shall always remindeveryone that the process is very simple. Anyone can chant, anywhere,without taxation or loss, but the gain is very great.     Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has explained this kirtana movement in HisSiksastaka. Siksa means "instruction," and astaka means "eight." He hasgiven us eight verses to help us understand this Krsna consciousnessmovement, and I shall explain the first of these instructions. The Lordsays, ceto-darpana-marjanam: one should cleanse the heart. I haveexplained this several times, but it does not become monotonous. It is
--- Page 99 ---
just like the chanting of Hare Krsna; it does not become tiresome. Our
students can chant the Hare Krsna mantra twenty-four hours a day, andthey will never get tired. They will continue to dance and chant. Andanyone can try it; because it is not material, one will never get tiredof chanting Hare Krsna. In the material world, if one chants anything,any favorite name, for three, four, or ten times, he will get tired ofit. That is a fact. But because Hare Krsna is not material, if onechants this mantra, he will never get tired. The more one chants, themore his heart will be cleansed of material dirt and the more theproblems of his life within this material world will be solved.     What is the problem of our lives? That we do not know. Moderneducation never gives enlightenment about the real problem of life. Thatis indicated in the Bhagavad-gita. Those who are educated and areadvancing in knowledge should know what is the problem of life. Thisproblem is stated in the Bhagavad-gita: one should always see theinconveniences of birth, death, old age, and disease. Unfortunately noone pays attention to these problems. When a man is diseased he thinks,"All right. Let me go to the doctor. He will give me some medicine, andI will be cured." But he does not consider the problem very seriously."I did not want this disease. Why is there disease? Is it not possibleto become free from disease?" He never thinks that way. This is becausehis intelligence is very low-grade, just like that of an animal. Ananimal suffers, but it has no sense. If an animal is brought to aslaughterhouse and sees that the animal before him is being slaughtered,he will still stand there contentedly eating the grass. This is animallife. He does not know that next time it will be his turn and he will beslaughtered. I have seen it. In a Kali temple I have seen that a goatwas standing there ready to be sacrificed and another goat was veryhappily eating the grass.     Similarly, Maharaja Yudhisthira was asked by Yamaraja, "What is themost wonderful thing in this world? Can you explain?" So MaharajaYudhisthira answered, "Yes. The most wonderful thing is that at everymoment one can see that his friends, his fathers, and his relatives havedied, but he is thinking, `I shall live forever."' He never thinks thathe will die, just as an animal never thinks that at the next moment hemay be slaughtered. He is satisfied with the grass, that's all. He issatisfied with the sense gratification. He does not know that he is alsogoing to die.     My father has died, my mother has died, he has died, she has died.So I will also have to die. Then what is after death? I do not know.This is the problem. People do not take this problem seriously, but theBhagavad-gita indicates that that is real education. Real education isto inquire why, although we do not want to die, death comes. That isreal inquiry. We do not want to become old men. Why does old age comeupon us? We have many problems, but this is the sum and substance of allof them.     In order to solve this problem, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu prescribesthe chanting of Hare Krsna. As soon as our heart is cleansed by chantingthis Hare Krsna mantra, the blazing fire of our problematic materialexistence is extinguished. How is it extinguished? When we cleanse ourheart we will realize that we do not belong to this material world.Because people are identifying with this material world, they arethinking, "I am an Indian, I am an Englishman, I am this, I am that."But if one chants the Hare Krsna mantra, he will realize that he is not
--- Page 100 ---
this material body. "I do not belong to this material body or this
material world. I am a spirit soul, part and parcel of the Supreme. I ameternally related with Him, and I have nothing to do with the materialworld." This is called liberation, knowledge. If I don't have anythingto do with this material world, then I am liberated. And that knowledgeis called brahma-bhuta.     A person with this realization has no duty to perform. Because weare now identifying our existence with this material world, we have somany duties. The Srimad-Bhagavatam says that as long as there is noself-realization, we have so many duties and debts. We are indebted tothe demigods. The demigods are not merely fictitious. They are real.There are demigods controlling the sun, the moon, and the air. Just asthere are directors of government departments, so for the heatingdepartment there is the sun-god, for the air department there is Varuna,and similarly there are other departmental demigods. In the Vedas theyare described as controlling deities, so we cannot neglect them. Also,there are great sages and philosophers who have given us knowledge, andwe are indebted to them. So as soon as we take birth we are indebted toso many living entities, but it is impossible to liquidate all thesedebts. Therefore the Vedic literature recommends that one take shelterof the lotus feet of Krsna. And Krsna says, "If one takes shelter of Me,then he doesn't have to take shelter of anyone else."     Therefore those who are Krsna conscious devotees have taken shelterof Krsna, and the beginning is hearing and chanting. Sravanam kirtanamvisnoh. So our fervent, humble request to everyone is to please acceptthis chanting. This movement of Krsna consciousness was introduced byLord Caitanya five hundred years ago in Bengal, and now all over Indiaand especially in Bengal there are millions of followers of CaitanyaMahaprabhu. Now this movement is starting in the Western countries, sojust be very serious in understanding it. We do not criticize any otherreligion. Don't take it in that way. We have no business criticizing anyother process of religion. Krsna consciousness is giving people the mostsublime religion--love of God. That's all. We are teaching to love God.Everyone is already loving, but that love is misplaced. We love this boyor this girl or this country or that society or even the cats and dogs,but we are not satisfied. So we must place our love in God. If oneplaces one's love in God, he will be happy.     Don't think that this Krsna consciousness movement is a new type ofreligion. Where is the religion which does not recognize God? One maycall God "Allah" or "Krsna" or something else, but where is thatreligion which does not recognize God? We are teaching that one shouldsimply try to love God. We are attracted by so many things, but if ourlove is reposed in God, then we will be happy. We don't have to learn tolove anything else; everything else is automatically included. Just tryto love God. Don't try to love just trees or plants or insects. Thiswill never satisfy. Learn to love God. That is Caitanya Mahaprabhu'smission; that is our mission.Chanting the Hare Krsna MantraAlthough "Hare Krsna" has become a househoid word, practically nobodyknows what it means. Is it merely a repetitious incantation designed tohypnotize its practitioners? Is it a form of escapism? Or is it agenuine meditation that can actually summon higher a wareness? In thisshort essay, recorded on his first LP in late 1966, Srila Prabhupadailluminates the inner meaning of the Hare Krsna mantra.
--- Page 101 ---
     The transcendental vibration established by the chanting of Hare
Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, RamaRama, Hare Hare is the sublime method for reviving our transcendentalconsciousness. As living spiritual souls, we are all originally Krsnaconscious entities, but due to our association with matter from timeimmemorial, our consciousness is now adulterated by the materialatmosphere. The material atmosphere, in which we are now living, iscalled maya, or illusion. Maya means "that which is not." And what isthis illusion? The illusion is that we are all trying to be lords ofmaterial nature, while actually we are under the grip of her stringentlaws. When a servant artificially tries to imitate the all-powerfulmaster, he is said to be in illusion. We are trying to exploit theresources of material nature, but actually we are becoming more and moreentangled in her complexities. Therefore, although we are engaged in ahard struggle to conquer nature, we are ever more dependent on her. Thisillusory struggle against material nature can be stopped at once byrevival of our eternal Krsna consciousness.     Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare is thetranscendental process for reviving this original, pure consciousness.By chanting this transcendental vibration, we can cleanse away allmisgivings within our hearts. The basic principle of all such misgivingsis the false consciousness that I am the lord of all I survey.     Krsna consciousness is not an artificial imposition on the mind.This consciousness is the original, natural energy of the living entity.When we hear this transcendental vibration, this consciousness isrevived. This simplest method of meditation is recommended for this age.By practical experience also, one can perceive that by chanting thismaha-mantra, or the Great Chanting for Deliverance, one can at once feela transcendental ecstasy coming through from the spiritual stratum. Inthe material concept of life we are busy in the matter of sensegratification, as if we were in the lower, animal stage. A littleelevated from this status of sense gratification, one is engaged inmental speculation for the purpose of getting out of the materialclutches. A little elevated from this speculative status, when one isintelligent enough, one tries to find out the supreme cause of allcauses--within and without. And when one is factually on the plane ofspiritual understanding, surpassing the stages of sense, mind, andintelligence, he is then on the transcendental plane. This chanting ofthe Hare Krsna mantra is enacted from the spiritual platform, and thusthis sound vibration surpasses all lower strata of consciousness--namelysensual, mental, and intellectual. There is no need, therefore, tounderstand the language of the mantra, nor is there any need for mentalspeculation nor any intellectual adjustment for chanting this maha-mantra. It is automatic, from the spiritual platform, and as such,anyone can take part in the chanting without any previous qualification.In a more advanced stage, of course, one is not expected to commitoffenses on the grounds of spiritual understanding.     In the beginning, there may not be the presence of alltranscendental ecstasies, which are eight in number. These are: (1)being stopped as though dumb, (2) perspiration, (3) standing up of hairson the body, (4) dislocation of voice, (5) trembling, (6) fading of thebody, (7) crying in ecstasy, and (8) trance. But there is no doubt thatchanting for a while takes one immediately to the spiritual platform,and one shows the first symptom of this in the urge to dance along with
--- Page 102 ---
the chanting of the mantra. We have seen this practically. Even a child
can take part in the chanting and dancing. Of course, for one who is tooentangled in material life, it takes a little more time to come to thestandard point, but even such a materially engrossed man is raised tothe spiritual platform very quickly. When the mantra is chanted by apure devotee of the Lord in love, it has the greatest efficacy onhearers, and as such this chanting should be heard from the lips of apure devotee of the Lord, so that immediate effects can be achieved. Asfar as possible, chanting from the lips of nondevotees should beavoided. Milk touched by the lips of a serpent has poisonous effects.     The word Hara is the form of addressing the energy of the Lord, andthe words Krsna and Rama are forms of addressing the Lord Himself. BothKrsna and Rama mean "the supreme pleasure," and Hara is the supremepleasure energy of the Lord, changed to Hare in the vocative. Thesupreme pleasure energy of the Lord helps us to reach the Lord.     The material energy, called maya, is also one of the multienergiesof the Lord. And we, the living entities, are also the energy, marginalenergy, of the Lord. The living entities are described as superior tomaterial energy. When the superior energy is in contact with theinferior energy, an incompatible situation arises; but when the superiormarginal energy is in contact with the superior energy, Hara, it isestablished in its happy, normal condition.     These three words, namely Hare, Krsna, and Rama, are thetranscendental seeds of the maha-mantra. The chanting is a spiritualcall for the Lord and His energy, to give protection to the conditionedsoul. This chanting is exactly like the genuine cry of a child for itsmother's presence. Mother Hara helps the devotee achieve the LordFather's grace, and the Lord reveals Himself to the devotee who chantsthis mantra sincerely.     No other means of spiritual realization is as effective in this ageof quarrel and hypocrisy as the chanting of the maha-mantra: Hare Krsna,Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama,Hare Hare.Krsna Consciousness--the Yoga for the Modern AgeNowadays, we find yoga being taught in numerous courses and touted inmass-market books as a means to achieve health, lose weight, developmental powers over others, achieve success in making money, or inceasesexual potency. But real yoga is something entirely different. Here,Srila Prabhupada lets us in on some ancient secrets about the realthing.
              ceto-darpana-marjanam bhava-mahadavagni-nirvapanam
            sreyah-kairava-candrika-vitaranam vidya-vadhu-jivanam             anandambudhi-vardhanam pratipadam purnamrtasvadanam            sarvatma-snapanam param vijayate sri-krsna-sankirtanam
     All glories to the sankirtana movement. Param vijayate sri-krsna-
sankirtanam. Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, when He was only a sixteen-year-old boy, introduced this sankirtana movement five hundred years ago inNavadvipa, India. It was not that He manufactured some religious system,just as nowadays so many religious systems are being manufactured.Actually, religion cannot be manufactured. Dharmam-tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam. Religion means the codes of God, the laws of God, that's all.Certainly we cannot live without obeying the state laws, and similarly
--- Page 103 ---
we cannot live without obeying the laws of God. And in the Bhagavad-gita
(4.7) the Lord says that whenever there are discrepancies in theprosecution of religious activities (yada yada hi dharmasya glanirbhavati bharata) and there is a predominance of irreligious activities(abhyutthanam adharmasya), at that time I (Krsna) appear (tadatmanamsrjamy aham). And in the material world we can see the same principledemonstrated, for whenever there is disobedience of state laws, there isthe advent of some particular state officer or policeman to "set thingsright."     Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu is worshiped by the Gosvamis. There weresix Gosvamis: Rupa Gosvami, Sanatana Gosvami, Raghunatha Bhatta Gosvami,Jiva Gosvami, Gopala Bhatta Gosvami, and Sri Raghunatha dasa Gosvami.There are three meanings of go. Go means "land," go means "cow,"and gomeans "senses." And svami means "master." So gosvami means that theywere masters of the senses. When one becomes master of the senses, orgosvami, he can make progress in spiritual life. That is the realmeaning of svami. Svami means that one is not servant of the senses, butmaster of them.     One of these six Gosvamis, Rupa Gosvami, was the head, and hecompiled a nice verse in honor of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. He says:
                 anarpita-carim cirat karunayavatirnah kalau
              samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasam sva-bhakti-sriyam                harih purata-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandipitah                sada hrdaya-kandare sphuratu vah saci-nandanah                        (Caitanya-caritamrta, Adi 1.4)
     Kalau means this age, this age of Kali, the Iron Age, which is very
much contaminated, an age of quarrel and disagreement. Rupa Gosvami saysthat in this age of Kali, when everything is disagreement and quarrel,"You have descended to offer the highest love of God." Samarpayitumunnatojjvala-rasam: and not only the topmost, but a very brilliant rasa,or transcendental humor. Purata-sundara-dyuti: Your complexion is justlike gold, like the luster of gold. "You are so kind that I blesseveryone [the Gosvamis can bless because they are masters of the senses]that this form of the Lord, Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, may always remaindancing in everyone's heart."     When Rupa Gosvami first met Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu at Prayaga,Lord Caitanya was chanting and dancing in the street, "Hare Krsna, HareKrsna." At that time also Rupa Gosvami offered one prayer. Namo maha-vadanyaya krsna-prema-pradaya te: "Oh, You are the most munificent ofall incarnations because You are distributing love of Godhead." Krsna-prema-pradaya te/ krsnaya krsna-caitanya-namne gaura-tvise namah: "Youare Krsna Himself, because if You were not Krsna You could notdistribute krsna-prema, or love of God, for love of Krsna is not soeasily acquired. But You are distributing this love freely to everyone."     In this way the sankirtana movement was inaugurated in Bengal,India, in Navadvipa. In this sense, the Bengalis are very fortunate thatin their country this movement was inaugurated by Lord Caitanya, whopredicted:
                      prthivite ache yata nagaradi grama
                       sarvatra pracara haibe mora nama
--- Page 104 ---
     "In all the villages and towns all over the world, everywhere, this
sankirtana movement will be preached." That is His prediction.     So by the grace of Lord Caitanya, this movement is alreadyintroduced in the Western countries, beginning from New York. Oursankirtana movement was first introduced in New York in 1966. At thattime I came and began to chant this Hare Krsna mantra in TompkinsSquare. I was chanting there for three hours with a small mrdanga(drum), and these American boys assembled and gradually joined, and soit is increasing. First of all it was started in a New York storefront,26 Second Avenue, then we started our branches in San Francisco,Montreal, Boston, Los Angeles, Buffalo, Columbus. We now [1970] havetwenty-four branches, including one in London and one in Hamburg. InLondon they are all American boys and girls, and they are preaching.They are not sannyasis, nor are they Vedantists, nor Hindus, norIndians, but they have taken this movement very seriously. Even in theLondon Times there was an article headlined, "Krsna Chant StartlesLondon." So we have many in the movement now. All my disciples, at leastin this country, are Americans and Europeans. They are chanting,dancing, and distributing a magazine, Back to Godhead. Now we havepublished many books--the Srimad-Bhaga vatam, Bhagavad-gita As It Is,Teachings of Lord Caitanya, and Isopanisad. It is not that this movementis simply a sentimental movement. Don't think that these boys aredancing out of some religious sentiment or fanaticism. No. We have thehighest philosophical and theosophical background.     As an illustration, let us consider Caitanya Mahaprabhu. While Hewas preaching, He went to Benares, the seat of Mayavadi sannyasis. Thefollowers of Sankaracarya are mostly seen in Benares. When CaitanyaMahaprabhu was there, He was chanting and dancing. Some of the peoplevery much appreciated this, and so He quickly became famous. Oneprominent sannyasi, Prakasananda Sarasvati, leader of many thousands ofMayavadi sannyasis, was informed: "Oh, from Bengal one young sannyasihas come. He is so nicely chanting and dancing." Prakasananda Sarasvatiwas a great Vedantist, and he did not like the idea. He said, "Oh, he isa pseudo sannyasi. He is chanting and dancing, and this is not thebusiness of a sannyasi. A sannyasi should always engage himself in thestudy of philosophy and the Vedanta."     Then one of the devotees who did not like the remarks ofPrakasananda Sarasvati came back and informed Lord Caitanya that He wasbeing criticized. So the devotee arranged a meeting of all thesannyasis, and there was a philosophical discussion on the Vedantabetween Prakasananda Sarasvati and Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Theseaccounts and philosophical discussions are given in our Teachings ofLord Caitanya. It is remarkable that Prakasananda himself with all hisdisciples became Vaisnavas.     Similarly, Caitanya Mahaprabhu had a great discussion withSarvabhauma Bhattacarya, the greatest logician of that time, who wasalso Mayavadi, impersonalist, and he was also converted. So CaitanyaMahaprabhu's movement is not mere sentimentalism. There is a very richbackground if one wants to understand this sankirtana movement throughphilosophy and logic. There is ample opportunity, for this movement isbased on science and on the authority of the Vedas. But it is allsimplified. That is the beauty of this movement. Whether one is a greatscholar or philosopher or a child, he can take part without anydifficulty. Other systems of self-realization, the jnana process or yoga
--- Page 105 ---
process, are also recognized, but it is not possible to practice them in
this age. That is the verdict of the Vedas:
                           krte yad dhyayato visnum
                           tretayam yajato makhaih                            dvapare paricaryayam.                           kalau tad dhari-kirtanat                         (Srimad-Bhagavatam 12.3.52)
     In the Satya-yuga, the Golden Age, it was possible to execute the
meditation process. For instance, Valmiki Muni meditated for sixtythousand years to get perfection. But where is our old age? Besidesthat, for the meditation process, as described in the Bhagavad-gita, onehas to select a secluded place, he has to execute it alone, he has tosit down in a rigid posture, he has to lead a life of complete celibacy,and so on. There are many rules and regulations. Thus astanga-yogameditation is not possible. If one is satisfied by imitating, that is adifferent thing, but if one wants perfection, then he has to execute allthe eight stages of astanga-yoga. If this is not possible, then it is awaste of time.     What is the ultimate goal of the yoga process or meditation?Contact with the Supreme, the Supersoul, the Supreme Lord, is the aimand object of all yoga processes. Similarly, philosophical research, thejnana process, also aims at understanding the Supreme Brahman. These arerecognized processes, undoubtedly, but according to authoritativedescription, they are not practical in this Iron Age of Kali. Thereforeone has to take to this process of hari-kirtana. Anyone can practicewithout prequalification. One doesn't have to study philosophy orVedanta. This was the purport of Lord Caitanya's meeting withPrakasananda Sarasvati.     When the Vedanta philosophy was thoroughly discussed between LordCaitanya and Prakasananda Sarasvati, Prakasananda Sarasvati first of allasked Caitanya Mahaprabhu, "I understand that You were a very goodscholar in Your early life. [Lord Caitanya was actually a very greatscholar. His name was Nimai Pandita, and at the age of sixteen Hedefeated a great scholar from Kashmir, Kesava Kasmiri.] And I understandthat You are a great Sanskrit scholar, and that especially in logic Youare a very learned scholar. You were also born in a brahmana family, andnow You are a sannyasi. How is it that You are chanting and dancing andnot reading the Vedanta?" This was the first question asked byPrakasananda Sarasvati, and Lord Caitanya replied, "Yes, the reason isthat when I was initiated by My spiritual master, he said that I am foolnumber one. `You don't discuss the Vedanta,' he told Me. `You willsimply spoil Your time. Just take to this chanting of Hare Krsna, andYou will be successful.' " That was his reply. Of course, CaitanyaMahaprabhu was not a fool, and certainly the Vedanta is not for fools.One needs sufficient education, and one must attain a certain statusbefore he can understand the Vedanta. In each and every word there arevolumes of meanings, and there are many commentaries by Sankaracarya andRamanujacarya, huge volumes in Sanskrit. But how can we understandVedanta? It is not possible. It may be possible for one person or twopersons to understand, but for the mass of people it is not possible.Nor is it possible to practice yoga. Therefore, if one takes to CaitanyaMahaprabhu's method, chanting Hare Krsna, the first installment of gain
--- Page 106 ---
will be ceto-darpana-marjanam: all the dirty things will be cleansed
from the heart simply by chanting. Chant. There is no expenditure andthere is no loss. If one simply chants for one week, he will see howmuch he will progress in spiritual knowledge.     We are attracting many students simply by chanting, and they areunderstanding the entire philosophy and becoming purified. ThisSociety's movement started only four years ago, in 1966, and we have somany branches already. The American boys and girls are taking it veryseriously, and they are happy. Ask any one of them. Ceto-darpana-marjanam. They are cleansing the dirty things from the heart, simply bychanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, HareRama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.     The next point is bhava-mahadavagni-nirvapanam: as soon as theheart is cleansed of all dirt y things, then all the problems ofmaterial existence are immediately solved. This world has been comparedto davagni, which means a blazing fire in the forest. In this materialexistence no one wants unhappiness, but it comes by force. That is thelaw of material nature. No one wants fire, but wherever we go in a citythe fire brigade is always active. There is always fire. Similarly,there are many things that no one wants. No one wants death--there isdeath. No one wants disease--there is disease. No one wants old age--there is old age. They are there, against our will, against our desire.     Thus we should consider the state of this material existence. Thishuman form of life is meant for understanding, not for wasting valuablelife like animals by eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. That isnot advancement of civilization. The Bhagavatam says that this body isnot meant for working hard simply for sense gratification.
                        nayam deho deha-bhajam nr-loke
                      kastan kaman arhate vid-bhujam ye                                 (SB. 5.5.1)
     To work very hard and satisfy oneself by sense gratification is the
business of hogs, not human beings. The human being should learntapasya. Especially in India, so many great sages, so many great kings,and so many brahmacaris and sannyasis have passed their lives in greattapasya in order not to go further to sleep. Lord Buddha was a princewho gave up everything and engaged himself in tapasya. This is life.When King Bharata, under whose name India was named Bharata-varsa, wastwenty-four years old, he gave up his kingdom, his young wife, and youngchildren and went away for tapasya. When Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu wasonly twenty-four, He gave up His young wife, mother, everything. Thereare many, many examples. India is the land of tapasya, but we areforgetting that. Now we are making it the land of technology. It issurprising that India is now no longer propagating this tapasya, forIndia is the land of dharma: dharma-ksetre kuru-ksetre.     But it is not only in India; everywhere in this age of ironeverything is degraded, degraded in this sense: prayenalpayusah sabhyakalav asmin yuge janah (SB. 1.1.10). In this age of Kali the duration oflife is diminished, and men are not moved to understand self-realization, and if they are, they are invariably misled by so manydeceitful leaders. The age is very corrupt. Therefore CaitanyaMahaprabhu's process of chanting Hare Krsna is the best and the simplestmethod.
--- Page 107 ---
                            harer nama harer nama
                            harer namaiva kevalam                          kalau nasty eva nasty eva                           nasty eva gatir anyatha
     "In this age of Kali there is no other religion than glorifying the
Lord by utterance of His holy name, and that is the injunction of allthe revealed scriptures. There is no other way, there is no other way,there is no other way." This verse appears in the Brhan-naradiya Purana.Harer nama harer nama harer namaiva kevalam. Simply chant Hare Krsna.There is no other alternative. Kalau nasty eva nasty eva nasty eva gatiranyatha. In this age, Kali, there is no other alternative for self-realization. So we have to accept it.     There is another similar verse in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. In theTwelfth Canto, Third Chapter, Pariksit Maharaja was informed by SukadevaGosvami of the faults of this age, and now all the symptoms of the ageof Kali are apparent. In the conclusive portion, however, SukadevaGosvami said, kaler dosa-nidhe rajann asti hy eko mahan gunah: "My dearking, this age, Kali, is full of faulty things, but there is one goodopportunity." What is that? Kirtanad eva krsnasya mukta-sangah paramvrajet: "Simply by chanting this Hare Krsna mantra one can becomeliberated and go back to Godhead."     This is practical and authorized, and one can also test himself tosee how he is advancing simply by chanting. This Krsna consciousnessmovement is not something new, something that we have introduced ormanufactured. It is authorized on the Vedic principles, authorized byacaryas like Caitanya Mahaprabhu and others. And the method is verysimple; there is no loss. We are not charging anything, we are notasking for fees and giving the people some secret mantra and promisingthem that within six months they will become God. No. This is open foreveryone--children, women, girls, boys, old people--everyone can chantand see the results.     To further this end we not only are establishing New Vrndavana, ourfarm project in West Virginia, but are establishing other spiritualcommunities, such as New Navadvipa and New Jagannatha Puri. We havealready started New Jagannatha Puri in San Francisco, and the Ratha-yatra festival is going on. This year there will be a great ceremony ofRatha-yatra in London also. There will be three cars, for Jagannatha,Subhadra, and Balarama, and they will be taken to the River Thames. AndAmerica has imported New England and New York, so why not New Vrndavana?We should especially establish this New Vrndavana, because Lord Caitanyarecommended, aradhyo bhagavan vrajesa-tanayas tad-dhama vrndavanam: "Krsna, the son of Nanda Maharaja, in the Vrndavana-dhama of Vrajabhumi,is the supreme worshipable Deity, and His place Vrndavana is alsoworshipable." The Western boys and girls are taking to Krsnaconsciousness, and they should have a place like Vrndavana. SwamiKirtanananda, who went to Vrndavana with me two years ago, knows whatVrndavana is like, so I have instructed him to construct at least seventemples. In Vrndavana, there are five thousand temples of Radha-Krsna,but the most important temples are seven, established by the Gosvamis.Our program is to live in New Vrndavana, depend on agriculture and cowsas an economic solution, and peacefully execute Krsna consciousness,chant Hare Krsna--that is the Vrndavana scheme. Yuktahara-viharasya...
--- Page 108 ---
yogo bhavati duhkha-ha (Bhagavad-gita 6.17). This human form of life
isn't meant for increasing artificial needs. We should be satisfied justto maintain the body and soul together, and the rest of the time weshould enhance our Krsna consciousness, so that after leaving this bodywe won't have to take another material body, but will be able to go backhome, back to Godhead. That should be the motto of human life.     Material life means eating, sleeping, mating, and defending, andspiritual life means something more than this. This is also thedifference between animal life and human life. In animal life, thecommon formula is eating, sleeping, mating, and defending. A dog eats, aman also eats. A man sleeps, and a dog also sleeps. A man has sex life,and the dog also has sex life. The dog defends in his own way, and manalso defends in his own way, maybe by atomic bombs. These fourprinciples are common to human beings and animals, and advancement ofthese four principles is not human civilization but animal civilization.Human civilization means athato brahma-jijnasa. In the Vedanta-sutra thefirst aphorism is athato brahma jijnasa: "Now is the time for inquiryabout Brahman." That is human life. As long as one is not spirituallyinquisitive, jijnasuh sreya uttamam, he is an animal, because he livesaccording to these four principles, that's all. He must be inquisitiveto know what he is and why he is put into these miseries of birth,death, old age, and disease. Is there any remedy? These matters shouldbe questioned. That is human life; that is spiritual life.     Spiritual life means human life, and material life means animallife. That's all. We have to make the adjustments that are recommendedin the Bhagavad-gita. Yuktahara-viharasya. For instance, because I amgoing to be a spiritual man does not mean that I shall give up eating.Rather, my eating should be adjusted. The Bhagavad-gita describes whatclass of food is first class, in goodness, and what class of food is inpassion, and third class, in ignorance. We have to raise ourselves tothe sattvic (goodness) platform of human civilization, then revive ourtranscendental consciousness, or Krsna consciousness. Everything isthere in the sastras. Unfortunately, we do not consult them.
                             evam prasanna-manaso
                           bhagavad-bhakti-yogatah                           bhagavat-tattva-vijnanam                            mukta-sangasya jayate                                 (SB. 1.2.20)
     Unless one is liberated from the clutches of these three modes of
material nature, he cannot understand God. Prasanna-manasah. One must bea Brahman-realized soul. Brahma-bhutah prasannatma na socati na kanksati(Bg. 18.54). These injunctions are there, so one should take advantageof these sastras and preach. That is the responsibility of intelligentmen. The mass of people know that God is great, but they do not know howgreat God actually is. That we will find in the Vedic literature. Thatis our duty in this iron age. That is hari-kirtana, param vijayate sri-krsna-sankirtanam: glorification of the Supreme.Meditation and the Self WithinCan meditation solve our everyday problems? Is there life after death?Can drugs heip us achieve self-realization? During a visit to SouthAfrica in 1976, Srila Prabhupada answered these and other questions forinterviewer Bill Faill of the Durban Natal Mercury.
--- Page 109 ---
Srila Prabhupada: Krsna is a name for God that means "all-attractive."
Unless one is all-attractive he cannot be God. So Krsna consciousnessmeans God consciousness. All of us are small particles of God, equal inquality with Him. Our position as living entities is like that of asmall particle of gold in relation to a large quantity of gold.Mr. Faill: Are we something like sparks in a fire?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Both the fire and the spark are fire, but one isbig, and the other is very small. Unlike the relationship between thespark and the fire, however, our relationship with God is eternal,although at the present moment we have forgotten that relationship dueto contact with the material energy. We are facing so many problems onlybecause of this forgetfulness. If we can revive our original Godconsciousness, then we shall become happy. This is the sum and substanceof Krsna consciousness. It is the best process by which to revive ouroriginal God consciousness. There are different processes of self-realization, but in the present age of Kali, people are very fallen, andthey require the simple process of Krsna consciousness. Now they arethinking that so-called material advancement is the solution to theirproblems, but this is not a fact. The real solution is to get out of thematerial condition entirely by becoming Krsna conscious. Because God iseternal, we are also eternal, but in the material condition we arethinking, "I am this body," and therefore we must repeatedly change frombody to body. This is due to ignorance. Actually we are not our bodiesbut spiritual sparks, parts and parcels of God.Mr. Faill: Then the body is just like a vehicle for the soul?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. It is just like a motorcar. Just as you go fromone place to another in a car, so due to mental concoction in thematerial condition of life, we are going from one position to another,trying to become happy. But nothing will make us happy unless we come toour real position, which is that we are all parts and parcels of God andthat our real business is to associate with God and help all livingentities by cooperating with Him. Civilized human life species of life.So if we don't take advantage of this civilized human life to understandwho God is, who we are, and what our relationship is, but instead simplywaste our life like cats and dogs, going here and there looking forsense gratification, then we will have missed a great opportunity. TheKrsna consciousness movement is meant to teach people how to take fulladvantage of the human form of life by trying to understand God and ourrelationship with Him.Mr. Faill: If we don't make the most of this life, do we get a secondchance, in another life?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. According to your desires at the time of death,you get another body. That body is not guaranteed to be a human body,however. As I've already explained, there are 8,400,000 different formsof life. You can enter any of them, according to your mental conditionat death. What we think of at the time of death depends on how we actduring our life. As long as we are in material consciousness, ouractions are under the control of the material nature, which is beingconducted in three modes: goodness, passion, and ignorance. These modesare like the three basic colors--yellow, red, and blue. Just as one canmix red, yellow, and blue to produce millions of colors, the modes ofnature are being mixed to produce many varieties of life. To stop therepetition of birth and death in different forms of life, we musttranscend the covering of material nature and come to the platform of
--- Page 110 ---
pure consciousness. But if we do not learn the transcendental science of
Krsna consciousness, then at death we must transfer to another body,either better or worse than our present one. If we cultivate the mode ofgoodness, then we are promoted to the higher planetary system, wherethere is a better standard of life. If we cultivate the mode of passion,then we will remain at the present stage. But if out of ignorance wecommit sinful activities and violate nature's laws, then we will bedegraded to animal or plant life. Then again we must evolve to the humanform, a process that may take millions of years. Therefore a human beingmust be responsible. He must take advantage of the rare opportunity ofhuman life by understanding his relationship with God and actingaccordingly. Then he can get out of the cycle of birth and death indifferent forms of life and go back home, back to Godhead.Mr. Faill: Do you think transcendental meditation is helping people?Srila Prabhupada: They do not know what real meditation is. Theirmeditation is simply a farce--another cheating process by the so-calledsvamis and yogis. You're asking me if meditation is helping people, butdo you know what meditation is?Mr. Faill: A stilling of the mind--trying to sit in the center withoutswinging either way.Srila Prabhupada: And what is the center?Mr. Faill: I don't know.Srila Prabhupada: So everyone is talking very much about meditation, butno one knows what meditation actually is. These bluffers use the word"meditation," but they do not know the proper subject for meditation.They're simply talking bogus propaganda.Mr. Faill: Isn't meditation valuable just to get people thinking right?Srila Prabhupada: No. Real meditation means to achieve a state in whichthe mind is saturated with God consciousness. But if you do not knowwhat God is, how can you meditate? Besides, in this age people's mindsare so agitated that they cannot concentrate. I have seen this so-calledmeditation; they are simply sleeping and snoring. Unfortunately, in thename of God consciousness or "self-realization," many bluffers arepresenting nonstandard methods of meditation without referring to theauthorized books of Vedic knowledge. They are simply practicing anothertype of exploitation.Mr. Faill: What about some of the other teachers, like Ouspensky andGurdjieff? In the past they brought to the West a message similar toyours.Srila Prabhupada: We would have to study the particulars of theirteachings to know whether they meet the Vedic standard. Godconsciousness is a science, just like medical science or any otherscience. It cannot be different because it is spoken by different men.Two plus two equals four everywhere, never five, or three. That isscience.Mr. Faill: Do you feel that others may have possibly taught the genuinemethod of God consciousness?Srila Prabhupada: Unless I study their teachings in detail, it would bevery difficult to say. There are so many bluffers.Mr. Faill: Just doing it for money.Srila Prabhupada: That's all. They have no standard method. Therefore weare presenting the Bhagavad-gita as it is, without any personalinterpretation. This is standard.
--- Page 111 ---
Mr. Faill: Yes, if you begin dressing things up, you inevitably change
them.Srila Prabhupada: Krsna consciousness is not a new process. It is very,very old--and standard. It cannot be changed. As soon as you try tochange it, then the potency is lost. This potency is just likeelectricity. If you want to generate electricity, you must follow thestandard regulations, arranging all the negative and positive polesproperly. You cannot construct the generator whimsically and stillproduce electricity. Similarly, there is a standard method ofunderstanding Krsna conscious philosophy from proper authorities. If wefollow their instructions, then the process will act. Unfortunately, oneof the dangerous diseases of modern man is that everyone wants to dothings according to his own whims. No one wants to follow the standardway. Therefore everyone is failing, both spiritually and materially.Mr. Faill: Is the Krsna consciousness movement growing?Srila Prabhupada: Oh, yes, very much. You may be surprised to know thatwe are selling books in the tens of thousands. We have about fiftybooks, and many librarians and college professors are very appreciativeof them, because until their publication there was no such literature inexistence. It is a new contribution to the world.Mr. Faill: Krsna consciousness seems to involve shaving the head andwearing saffron robes. How can an ordinary man caught up in family lifepractice Krsna consciousness?Srila Prabhupada: The saffron robes and the shaven head are notessential, although they create a good mental situation, just as when amilitary man is dressed properly he gets energy--he feels like amilitary man. Does that mean that unless he is in uniform he cannotfight? No. In the same way, God consciousness cannot be checked--it canbe revived in any circumstances--but certain conditions are helpful.Therefore we prescribe that you live in a certain way, dress in acertain way, eat in a certain way, and so on. These things are helpfulfor practicing Krsna consciousness, but they are not essential.Mr. Faill: Then one can be a student of Krsna consciousness while goingabout normal daily life?Srila Prabhupada: Yes.Mr. Faill: How about drugs? Can they help in the process of Godrealization?Srila Prabhupada: If drugs could help God realization, then drugs wouldbe more powerful than God. How can we accept that? Drugs are chemicalsubstances, which are material. How can something material help onerealize God, who is all-spiritual? It is impossible. What oneexperiences from taking drugs is simply a kind of intoxication orhallucination; it is not God realization.Mr. Faill: Do you think the great mystics down through the ages haveactually seen the spiritual spark you mentioned earlier?Srila Prabhupada: What do you mean by "mystic"?Mr. Faill: It's just a name given to people who have had an experienceof another level of reality.Srila Prabhupada: We don't use the word mystic. Our reality is Godrealization, which occurs when we come to the spiritual platform. Aslong as we have a bodily concept of life, our understanding is sensegratification, because the body is made of senses. When we progress fromthe bodily platform and we see the mind as the center of sense activity,we take the mind as the final stage of realization. That is the mental
--- Page 112 ---
platform. From the mental platform we may come to the intellectual
platform, and from the intellectual platform we can rise to thetranscendental platform. Finally we can rise above even thetranscendental platform and come to the mature, spiritual platform.These are the stages of God realization. However, in this age, becausepeople are so fallen, the sastras [scriptures] give the specialrecommendation that people come directly to the spiritual platform bychanting the holy names of God: Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna,Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare. If we cultivatethis practice on the spiritual platform, then immediately we can realizeour spiritual identity. Then the process of God realization becomessuccessful very quickly.Mr. Faill: Today a lot of people are saying that we must look inward forthe truth rather than outward into the world of the senses.Srila Prabhupada: Looking inward means knowing that you are a spiritsoul. Unless you understand that you are not the body but a soul, thereis no question of looking inward.     First we have to study, "Am I this body, or am I something withinthis body?" Unfortunately, this subject is not taught in any school,college, or university. Everyone is thinking, "I am this body." Forexample, in this country people everywhere are thinking, "I am SouthAfrican, they are Indian, they are Greek," and so on. Actually, everyonein the whole world is in the bodily conception of life. Krsnaconsciousness starts when one is above this bodily conception.Mr. Faill: So the recognition of the spiritual spark comes first?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Recognizing the existence of the spirit soulwithin the body is the first step. Unless one understands this simplefact, there is no question of spiritual advancement.Mr. Faill: Is it a question of just understanding it intellectually?Srila Prabhupada: in the beginning, yes. There are two departments ofknowledge: theoretical and practical. First one must learn spiritualscience theoretically; then, by working on that spiritual platform, onecomes to the point of practical realization.     Unfortunately, today almost everyone is in the darkness of thebodily conception of life. Therefore this movement is very important,because it can lift civilized men out of that darkness. As long as theyare in the bodily conception of life, they are no better than animals."I am a dog," "I am a cat," "I am a cow." Animals think like this. Assoon as someone passes, a dog will bark, thinking, "I am a dog. I havebeen appointed here as watchdog." Similarly, if I adopt the dog'smentality and challenge foreigners--"Why have you come to this country?Why have you come to my jurisdiction?"--then what is the differencebetween the dog and me?Mr. Faill: There is none. To change the subject a little, is itnecessary to follow certain eating habits to practice spiritual life?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, the whole process is meant to purify us, andeating is part of that purification. I think you have a saying, "You arewhat you eat," and that's a fact. Our bodily constitution and mentalatmosphere are determined according to how and what we eat. Thereforethe sastras recommend that to become Krsna conscious, you should eatremnants of food left by Krsna. If a tuberculosis patient eats somethingand you eat the remnants, you will be infected with tuberculosis.Similarly, if you eat krsna-prasadam, then you will be infected withKrsna consciousness. Thus our process is that we don't eat anything
--- Page 113 ---
immediately. First we offer the food to Krsna, then we eat it. This
helps us advance in Krsna consciousness.Mr. Faill: You are all vegetarians?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, because Krsna is a vegetarian. Krsna can eatanything because He is God, but in the Bhagavad-gita (9.26) He says, "Ifone offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit, or water,I will accept it." He never says, "Give Me meat and wine."Mr. Faill: How about the tobacco question?Srila Prabhupada: Tobacco is also an intoxicant. We are alreadyintoxicated by being in the bodily conception of life, and if weincrease the intoxication, then we are lost.Mr. Faill: You mean things like meat, alcohol, and tobacco justreinforce bodily consciousness?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Suppose you have a disease and you want to becured. You have to follow the instructions of a physician. if he says,"Don't eat this; eat only this," you have to follow his prescription.Similarly, we also have a prescription for being cured of the bodilyconception of life: chanting Hare Krsna, hearing about Krsna'sactivities, and eating krsna-prasadam. This treatment is the process ofKrsna consciousness.