
                                 Chapter Six
               Finding Spiritual Solutions to Material ProblemsCrime: Why and What to Do?
Every year the world spends more money on crime prevention and control.Yet despite these efforts crime rates are soaring, and notably inAmerican public schools, crime has reached almost uncontrollable levels.In this July 1975 discussion with Lieutenant David Mozee, mediarelations offcer for the Chicago Police Department, Srila Prabhupadaproposed an amazingly simple yet practical solution to the seeminglyinsurmountable problem of crime.Lieutenant Mozee: I understand you have some ideas that could help us inour efforts to prevent crime. I'd be very interested to hear them.Srila Prabhupada: The difference between a pious man and a criminal isthat one is pure in heart and the other is dirty. This dirt is like adisease in the form of uncontrollable lust and greed in the heart of thecriminal. Today people in general are in this diseased condition, andthus crime is very widespread. When the people become purified of thesedirty things, crime will disappear. The simplest process of purificationis to assemble in congregation and chant the holy names of God. This iscalled sankirtana and is the basis of our Krsna consciousness movement.So, if you want to stop crime, then you must gather as many people aspossible for mass sankirtana. This congregational chanting of the holyname of God will dissipate all the dirty things in everyone's heart.Then there will be no more crime.Lieutenant Mozee: Do you have any feelings about crime here in theUnited States as opposed to the crime in your own country of India?Srila Prabhupada: What is your definition of crime?Lieutenant Mozee: Any trampling on the rights of one person by anotherperson.
--- Page 114 ---
Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Our definition is the same. In the Upanisads it
is said, isavasyam idam sarvam: " Everything belongs to God." So,everyone has the right to utilize whatever is allotted to him by God,but one may not encroach upon others' property. if one does so, hebecomes a criminal. Actually the first crime is that you Americans arethinking this land of America is yours. Although two hundred years agoit was not yours, you have come from other parts of the world andclaimed it as your land. Actually it is God's land, and therefore itbelongs to everyone, since everyone is a child of God. But the vastmajority of people have no conception of God. Practically speaking,everyone is godless. Therefore they should be educated to love God. InAmerica, your government has a slogan: "in God we trust." Is thatcorrect?Lieutenant Mozee: Yes.Srila Prabhupada: But where is the education about God? To trust is verygood, but simple trust will not endure unless it is backed up withscientific knowledge of God. One may know that he has a father, butunless he knows who his father is, his knowledge is imperfect. And thateducation in the science of God is lacking.Lieutenant Mozee: Do you feel that it's lacking only here in the UnitedStates?Srila Prabhupada: No. Everywhere. The age we live in is called Kali-yuga, the age of forgetting God. It is an age of misunderstanding andquarrel, and the people's hearts are filled with dirty things. But Godis so powerful that if we chant His holy name we become purified, justas my disciples have become purified of their bad habits. Our movementis based on this principle of chanting the holy name of God. We giveeveryone the opportunity, without any distinction. They can come to ourtemple, chant the Hare Krsna mantra, take a little prasadam asrefreshment, and gradually become purified. So if the governmentalauthorities give us some facilities, then we can hold mass sankirtana.Then, without a doubt, the whole society will change.Lieutenant Mozee: If I understand you correctly, sir, you are sayingthat we should emphasize a return to religious principles.Srila Prabhupada: Certainly. Without religious principles what is thedifference between a dog and a man? Man can understand religion, but adog cannot. That is the difference. So if human society remains on thelevel of dogs and cats, how can you expect a peaceful society? If youbring a dozen dogs and put them together in a room, will it be possibleto keep them peaceful? Similarly, if human society is filled with menwhose mentality is on the level of dogs, how can you expect peace?Lieutenant Mozee: If some of my questions sound disrespectful, it isonly because I do not completely understand your religious beliefs. Imean no disrespect whatsoever.Srila Prabhupada: No, it is not a question of my religious beliefs. I amsimply pointing out the distinction between human life and animal life.Animals cannot possibly learn anything about God, but human beings can.However, if human beings are not given the facility to learn about God,then they remain on the level of cats and dogs. You cannot have peace ina society of cats and dogs. Therefore, it is the duty of thegovernmental authorities to see that people are taught how to become Godconscious. Otherwise, there will be trouble, because without Godconsciousness there is no difference between a dog and a man: the dogeats, we eat; the dog sleeps, we sleep; a dog has sex, we have sex; a
--- Page 115 ---
dog tries to defend itself, and we also try to defend ourselves. These
are the common factors. The only difference is that a dog cannot beinstructed about his relationship with God, but a man can.Lieutenant Mozee: Wouldn't peace be a precursor to a return to religion?Must we not first have peace?Srila Prabhupada: No, no, that is the difficulty. At the present moment,no one actually knows the meaning of religion. Religion means to abideby the laws of God, just as good citizenship means to abide by the lawsof the government. Because no one has any understanding of God, no oneknows the laws of God or the meaning of religion. This is the presentstatus of people in today's society. They are forgetting religion,taking it to be a kind of faith. Faith may be blind faith. Faith is notthe real description of religion. Religion means the laws given by God,and anyone who follows those laws is religious, whether a Christian, aHindu, or a Muslim.Lieutenant Mozee: With all due respect, isn't it true that in India,where religious customs have been followed for centuries upon centuries,we are seeing not a return to but a drawing away from spiritual life?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, but it is due only to bad leadership. Otherwise,the vast majority of the Indian people are fully conscious of God, andthey try to follow the laws of God. Here in the West, even big collegeprofessors do not believe in God or in life after death. But in India,even the poorest man believes in God and in a next life. He knows thatif he commits sins he will suffer and if he acts piously he will enjoy.To this day, if there is a disagreement between two villagers, they willgo to the temple to settle it, because everyone knows that the oppositeparties will hesitate to speak lies before the Deities. So in mostrespects, India is still eighty-percent religious. That is the specialprivilege of taking birth in India, and the special responsibility also.Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has said,
                   bharata-bhumite haila manusya janma yara
                    janma sarthaka kari 'kara para-upakara                       (Caitanya-caritamrta, Adi 9.41)
     Anyone who has taken birth in India should make his life perfect by
becoming Krsna conscious. Then he should distribute Krsna consciousnessall over the world.Lieutenant Mozee: Sir, there is a Christian parable that says it iseasier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich manto come before the throne of God. Do you think the wealth of the UnitedStates and other Western countries is a block to spiritual faith?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Too much wealth is a block. Krsna states in theBhagavad-gita (2.44):
                           bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam
                              tayapahrta-cetasam                            vyavasayatmika buddhih                            samadhau na vidhiyate
     If one is materially very opulent, he forgets God. Therefore too
much material wealth is a disqualification for understanding God.Although there is no absolute law that only the poor man can understandGod, generally if one is extraordinarily rich, his only ambition is to
--- Page 116 ---
acquire money, and it is difficult for him to understand spiritual
teachings.Lieutenant Mozee: In America, those who belong to the Christian faithalso believe these things. I don't see any vast differences between thespiritual beliefs of one religious group and another.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, the essence of all religion is the same. Ourproposal is that whatever religious system one follows, he should try tounderstand God and love Him. If you are a Christian, we do not say,"That is no good; you must become like us." Our proposition is thatwhether you are a Christian, Muslim, or Hindu, simply try to understandGod and love Him.Lieutenant Mozee: If I could return to my original purpose for coming,might I ask what advice you could give to assist us in reducing crime? Irecognize that the first and foremost way would be a return to God, asyou say--there's no doubt about that--but is there something that wecould immediately do to diminish this spreading criminal mentality?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. As I've already outlined in the beginning of ourtalk, you should give us the facility to chant the holy name of God anddistribute prasada. Then there will be a tremendous change in thepopulation. I came alone from India, and now I have many followers. Whatdid I do? I asked them to sit down and chant the Hare Krsna mantra, andaftemard I distributed a little prasadam. If this is done on a massscale, the entire society will become very pleasing. This is a fact.Lieutenant Mozee: Would you want to start the program in an area ofaffluence or an area of poverty?Srila Prabhupada: We do not draw such distinctions. Any place easilyavailable to all kinds of men would be very suitable to hold sankirtana.There is no restriction that only the poor men need the benefit but therich do not. Everyone needs to be purified. Do you think criminalityexists only in the poorer section of society?Lieutenant Mozee: No. But I meant to ask whether there would be more ofa beneficial influence--more of a strengthening of the community--if theprogram were held in a poorer area rather than an affluent area.Srila Prabhupada: Our treatment is for the spiritually diseased person.When a person is afflicted with a disease, there are no distinctionsbetween a poor man and a rich man. They are both admitted to the samehospital. Just as the hospital should be in a place where both the poorman and the rich man can easily come, the location of the sankirtanafacility should be easily accessible to all. Since everyone ismaterially infected, everyone should be able to take advantage.     The difficulty is that the rich man thinks he's perfectly healthy,although he's the most diseased of all. But as a policeman, you wellknow that there's criminality among rich men and poor men alike. So ourchanting process is for everyone, because it cleanses the heart,regardless of the man's opulence or poverty. The only way to permanentlychange the criminal habit is to change the heart of the criminal. As youwell know, many thieves are arrested numerous times and put into jail.Although they know that if they commit theft they will go to jail, stillthey are forced to steal, because of their unclean hearts. Thereforewithout cleansing the heart of the criminal, you cannot stop crimesimply by more stringent law enforcement. The thief and the murdereralready know the law, yet they still commit violent crimes, due to theirunclean hearts. So our process is to cleanse the heart. Then all thetroubles of this material world will be solved.
--- Page 117 ---
Lieutenant Mozee: That's a very difficult task, sir.
Srila Prabhupada: It is not difficult. Simply invite everyone: "Come,chant Hare Krsna, dance, and take sumptuous prasadam." What is thedifficulty? We are doing this at our centers, and people are coming. Butbecause we have very little money, we can hold sankirtana only on asmall scale. We invite everyone, and gradually people are coming to ourcenters and becoming devotees. If the government would give us a largefacility, however, we could expand unlimitedly. And the problem is big;otherwise why are there national news articles asking what to do? Nocivil state wants this criminality. That's a fact. But the leaders donot know how to stop it. If they listen to us, however, we can give themthe answer. Why crime? Because people are godless. And what to do? ChantHare Krsna and take prasadam. If you like, you can adopt this process ofsankirtana. Otherwise, we will continue conducting it on a small scale.We are just like a poor medical man with a small private practice whocould open a big hospital if he were given the facility. The governmentis the executor. If they take our advice and adopt the process ofsankirtana, then the problem of crime will be solved.Lieutenant Mozee: There are many Christian organizations in the UnitedStates that give the holy communion. Why doesn't this work? Why is thisnot cleansing the heart?Srila Prabhupada: To speak frankly, I find it difficult to find even onereal Christian. The so-called Christians do not abide by the Bible'sorder. One of the ten commandments in the Bible is, "Thou shalt notkill." But where is that Christian who does not kill by eating the fleshof the cow? The process of chanting the Lord's holy name anddistributing prasadam will be effective if carried out by persons whoare actually practicing religion. My disciples are trained to strictlyfollow religious principles, and therefore their chanting of the holyname of God is different from others'. Theirs is not simply a rubber-stamped position. They have realized the purifying power of the holyname through practice.Lieutenant Mozee: Sir, isn't the difficulty that although a small circleof priests and devotees may follow the religious principles, those onthe fringe deviate and cause trouble? For example, assume that the HareKrsna movement grows to gigantic proportions, as Christianity has.Wouldn't you then have a problem with people on the fringe of themovement who professed to be followers but were actually not?Srila Prabhupada: That possibility is always there, but all I am sayingis that if you are not a true Christian, then your preaching will not beeffective. And because we are strictly following religious principles,our preaching will be effective in spreading God consciousness andalleviating the problem of crime.Lieutenant Mozee: Sir, let me thank you for your time. I will deliverthis tape recording to my superiors. Hopefully, it will be effective, asyou are effective.Srila Prabhupada: Thank you very much.Human Society or Animal Society?In an interview with India's Bhavan's Journal in August 1976, SrilaPrabhupada asked, "How can there be happiness or peace in animalsociety? They want to keep people like animals, and they are making aUnited Nations.... simply a dog's race. The dog is running on four legs,and you are running on four wheels--that's all. And you think that thefour-wheel race is advancement of civilization!"
--- Page 118 ---
Interviewer: The first question is this: Is the influence of religion on
the wane? And if so, does this factor account for the increase incorruption and the widespread deterioration of moral values?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, religion is on the wane. This is predicted in theSrimad-Bhagavatam (12.2.1):
                           tatas canudinam dharmah
                           satyam saucam ksama daya                             kalena balina rajan                         nanksyaty ayur balam smrtih
     "In the Kali-yuga [the present age of quarrel and hypocrisy] the
following things will diminish: religion, truthfulness, cleanliness,mercy, duration of life, bodily strength, and memory."     These are human assets, which make the human being distinct fromthe animal. But these things will decline. There will be no mercy, therewill be no truthfulness, memory will be short, and the duration of lifewill be cut short. Similarly, religion will vanish. That means thatgradually we will come to the platform of animals.Interviewer: Religion will vanish? We'll become animals?Srila Prabhupada: Especially when there is no religion, it is simplyanimal life. Any common man can distinguish that the dog does notunderstand what religion is. The dog is also a living being, but he isnot interested in understanding the Bhagavad-gita or the Srimad-Bhagavatam. He is not interested. That is the distinction between manand dog: the animal is not interested.     So when the human beings become uninterested in religious things,then they are animals. And how can there be happiness or peace in animalsociety? They want to keep people like animals, and they are making aUnited Nations. How is it possible? United animals, society for unitedanimals? These things are going on.Interviewer: Do you see any hopeful signs?Srila Prabhupada: At least they have detected that religion isdeclining. That is good. "Declining" means they are going to be animals.In logic it is said that man is a rational animal. When the rationalityis missing, then he is simply an animal, not a human being. In humansociety either you become Christian, Muhammadan, Hindu, or Buddhist; itdoesn't matter. There must be some system of religion. Human societywithout religion is animal society. This is a plain fact. Why are peopleso unhappy now? Because there is no religion. They are neglectingreligion.     One gentleman has written me that Tolstoy once said, "Unlessdynamite is put underneath the church, there cannot be any peace." Evennow the Russian government is very strictly against God consciousness,because they think that religion has spoiled the whole socialatmosphere.Interviewer: It seems there could be some truth in that.Srila Prabhupada: The religious system might have been misused, but thatdoes not mean that religion should be avoided. Real religion should betaken. It does not mean that because religion has not been properlyexecuted by the so-called priests, religion should be rejected. If myeye is giving me some trouble on account of a cataract, it does not meanthat the eye should be plucked out. The cataract should be removed. Thatis Krsna consciousness.
--- Page 119 ---
Interviewer: I think history shows that many people have misused
religion. Isn't that a fact?Srila Prabhupada: These people have no conception of God, and they arepreaching religion. What is religion? Dharmam tu saksad bhagavat-pranitam: "The path of religion is directly enunciated by the SupremeLord." They have no conception of God--they do not know what God is--andthey are professing some religion. How long can it go on artificially?It will deteriorate.     That has become the present condition. They have no idea of God, sohow will they know what is the order of God? Religion means the order ofGod. For example, law means the order of the state. If there is nostate, then where is the order? We have a clear conception of God--Krsna. He is giving His order, and we accept it. It is clear religion.If there is no God, no conception of God, no order of God, then where isreligion? If there is no government, then where is the law?Interviewer: Well, there wouldn't be any law. It would be an outlawsociety.Srila Prabhupada: Outlaw--everyone is an outlaw, manufacturing his ownconcocted system of religion. That is going on.     Just ask--in any religious system, what is their conception of God?Can anyone tell clearly? No one can tell. But we shall immediately say,
                    venum kvanantam ara vinda-dalayataksam
                     barhavatamsam asitambuda-sundarangam                     kandarpa-koti-kamaniya-visesa-sobham                    govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami
     "I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who is adept in playing on
His flute, whose blooming eyes are like lotus petals, whose head isbedecked with a peacock's feather, whose figure of beauty is tinged withthe hue of blue clouds, and whose unique loveliness charms millions ofCupids." (Brahma-samhita 5.30) Immediately, we can give a description ofGod.     If there is no idea of God, then what kind of religion is that?Interviewer: I don't know.Srila Prabhupada: It is bogus. People have no conception of God, andtherefore they have no understanding of religion. That is the decline,and because religion is declining, the human beings are becoming moreand more like animals.     "Animal" means that one has no memory. A dog comes when there aresome eatables; I say "Hut!" and he goes away. But again he comes--he hasno memory. So when our memory of God is reducing, that means that ourhuman qualities are reducing. In the Kali-yuga these human qualitieswill be reduced. That means that people are becoming like cats and dogs.Interviewer: Here's the second question: "The traditional charge againstVedic culture is that it is fatalistic, that it makes people slaves tothe belief in predestination, and that it therefore inhibits progress.How far is this charge true?"Srila Prabhupada: What is that progress? Is a dog's jumping progress? Isthat progress? A dog is running here and there on four legs, and you arerunning here and there on the four wheels of the automobile. Is thatprogress? That is not the Vedic system. According to the Vedic system,the human being has a certain amount of energy, and since the human
--- Page 120 ---
being has better consciousness than the animals, the energy of the human
beings is more valuable than the energy of the animals.Interviewer: Probably no one would dispute that the human being has morefreedom or, I suppose, responsibility than the animals.Srila Prabhupada: So human energy should be utilized for spiritualadvancement, not that the energy should be employed to compete with thedog. The saintly person is not busy like the dog. Today people thinkthat "dog-ness" is life, but actual life is spiritual progress.Therefore, the Vedic literature says,
                       tasyaiva hetoh prayateta kovido
                    na labhyate yad bhramatam upary adhah                    tal labhyate duhkha vad anyatah sukham                       kalena sarvatra gabhira-ramhasa
     "Persons who are actually intelligent and philosophically inclined
should endeavor only for that purposeful end which is not obtainableeven by wandering from the topmost planet [Brahmaloka] down to thelowest planet [Patala]. As far as happiness derived from sense enjoymentis concerned, it can be obtained automatically in the course of time,just as in the course of time we obtain miseries, even though we do notdesire them." (Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.5.18)Interviewer: Could you explain that a little further?Srila Prabhupada: The human being should exert his energy for that thingwhich he did not get in many, many lives. In many, many lives the soulhas been in the forms of dogs, or demigods, or cats, birds, beasts, andmany others. There are 8,400,000 different types of bodies. So thistransmigration of the soul is going on. The business in every case issense gratification.Interviewer: Which means?Srila Prabhupada: For example, the dog is busy for sense gratification:where is food, where is shelter, where is a female, where is defense?The man is also doing the same business, in different ways. Thisbusiness is going on, life after life. Even a small insect is trying forthe same thing. Birds, beasts, fish--everywhere the same struggle isgoing on. Where is food, where is sex, where is shelter, and how todefend? The Vedic literature says that these things we have done formany, many lives, and that if we don't get out of this struggle forexistence, we will have to do them again for many, many lives.Interviewer: I'm beginning to see.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, so these things should be stopped. Therefore,Prahlada Maharaja makes this statement:
                          sukham aindriyakam daitya
                             deha-yogena dehinam                           sarvatra labhyate daivad                           yatha duhkham ayatnatah
     "My dear friends born of demoniac families, the happiness perceived
with reference to the sense objects by contact with the body can beobtained in any form of life, according to one's past fruitiveactivities. Such happiness is automatically obtained without endeavor,just as we obtain distress." (SB. 7.6.3)
--- Page 121 ---
     A dog has a body, and I have a body. So, my sex pleasure and the
dog's sex pleasure--there is no difference. The pleasure derived out ofsex is the same. A dog is not afraid of having sex pleasure on thestreet before everyone, and we hide it. That's all. People are thinkingthat to have sex pleasure in a nice apartment is advanced. However, thatis not advanced. And they are making a dog's race for this so-calledadvancement. People do not know that according to whatever kind of bodyone has acquired, the pleasure is already stored up.Interviewer: What do you mean, "the pleasure is already stored up"?Srila Prabhupada: That is called destiny. A pig has got a certain typeof body, and his eatable is the stool. You cannot change it. The pigwill not like to eat halvah [a dessert made of sweetened, butterytoasted grains]. It is not possible. Because he has a particular type ofbody, he must eat like that. Can any scientist improve the standard ofliving of the pig?Interviewer: I doubt it.Srila Prabhupada: Therefore, Prahlada Maharaja says that it is alreadystored up. The pleasure is basically the same, but a little differentaccording to the body. The uncivilized man in the jungle is having thesame thing.     Now people are thinking that civilization means constructingskyscraper buildings. But Vedic civilization says, No, that is notadvancement. The real advancement of human life is self-realization, howmuch you have realized your self. Not that you have constructedskyscraper buildings.Interviewer: But wouldn't what you're saying make sense to most people?Srila Prabhupada: Sometimes people misunderstand. In a high court, ajudge is sitting soberly, apparently doing nothing, and he is getting ahigh salary. Someone else is thinking, "I am working so hard in the samecourt, rubber-stamping--and not getting one tenth the salary of thejudge." He is thinking, "I am so busy, working so hard, and I am notgetting as good a salary as the man who is just sitting on the bench."The situation is like that: the Vedic civilization is meant for self-realization, not for a dog's race.Interviewer: Still, isn't it usually considered honorable to work hard,to struggle, and eventually "get ahead" in life?Srila Prabhupada: The karmis, fruitive workers, have been described inthe Bhagavad-gita as mudhas, asses. Why are they compared to the asses?Because the ass works very hard with loads on his back, and in returnhis master gives him only a little morsel of grass. He stands at thedoor of the washerman and eats grass while again the washerman loads hisback. He doesn't have the sense to think, "If I go out of the cottage ofthe washerman, I can get grass anywhere. Why am I carrying so much?"Interviewer: That brings to mind some people I know.Srila Prabhupada: The fruitive worker is like that. He is very busy inthe office, and if you want to see him he will say, "I am very busy." Sowhat is the result of your being so busy? He takes two pieces of toastand one cup of tea. And for this purpose you are so busy? He does notknow why he is busy. In the account books he will find that the balancewas one million dollars and now it has become two million. He issatisfied with that, but he will take only two pieces of toast and onecup of tea, and still he will work very hard. That is what is meant bykarmi. Asses--they work like asses, without any aim in life.
--- Page 122 ---
     But Vedic civilization is different. The accusation is not correct-
-people in Vedic civilization are not at all lazy. They are busy for ahigher subject matter. Prahlada Maharaja stresses that this busy-ness isso important that it should begin from one's very childhood. Kaumaraacaret prajnah: one should not lose a second's time. That is Vediccivilization. The asses see, "These men are not working like I am"--likedogs and asses--and they consider that we are escaping. Yes, escapingyour fruitless endeavor. The Vedic civilization is meant for self-realization.Interviewer: Could you give us more of an idea what the Vediccivilization is like?Srila Prabhupada: The Vedic civilization begins from the varnasramasystem. In the varnasrama system there is this arrangement: brahmanas[intellectuals, advisors], ksatriyas [administrators], vaisyas[merchants, farmers], sudras [workers], brahmacaris [celibate students],grhasthas [householders], vanaprasthas [retired married people], andsannyasis [renounced monks].     The ultimate goal is that Krsna, the Supreme Lord, should beworshiped. So if you worship Krsna, then you fulfill all youroccupational duties, either as a brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, sudra,brahmacari, anything. Take to it immediately--take to Krsnaconsciousness. This is so important.Interviewer: If people really knew about a life-style that was morenatural, more fulfilling, what would be the problem? They actuallywould, as you say, take to it.Srila Prabhupada: But they do not know, and therefore there is noreligion, simply a dog's race. The dog is running on four legs, and youare running on four wheels--that's all. And you think that the four-wheel race is the advancement of civilization.     Therefore, modern civilization is practically said to do nothing.Whatever is obtainable by destiny you will get, wherever you are.Rather, take to Krsna consciousness. The example is given by PrahladaMaharaja that you do not want anything distasteful and yet it comes uponyou. Similarly, even if you do not want happiness which you aredestined, it will come upon you. You should not waste your energy formaterial happiness. You cannot get more material happiness than you aredestined.Interviewer: How can you be so sure of that?Srila Prabhupada: How shall I believe it? Because you get somedistressful condition, although you do not want it. For instance,President Kennedy died by the hand of his own countryman. Who wanted it,and why did it come? He was a great man, he was protected by so many,and still he was destined to be killed. Who can protect you?     So if the distressful condition comes upon me by destiny, then theopposite position--happiness--will also come. Why shall I waste my timefor this rectification? Let me use my energy for Krsna consciousness.That is intelligent. You cannot check your destiny. Everyone willexperience a certain amount of happiness and a certain amount ofdistress. No one is enjoying uninterrupted happiness. That is notpossible.     Just as you cannot check your distress, so you cannot check yourhappiness. It will come automatically. So don't waste your time forthese things. Rather, you should utilize your time for advancing inKrsna consciousness.
--- Page 123 ---
Interviewer: Would a Krsna conscious person not try for progress?
Srila Prabhupada: The thing is that if you try for progress vainly, thenwhat is the use of that? If it is a fact that you cannot change yourdestiny, then what is the use of trying? We will be satisfied with theamount of happiness and distress we are destined.     Vedic civilization is meant for realization of God. That is thepoint. You'll still find in India that during important festivals manymillions of people are coming to take bath in the Ganges, because theyare interested in how to become liberated. They are not lazy. They aregoing thousands of miles, two thousand miles away to take bath in theGanges. They are not lazy, but they are not busy in the dog's race.Rather, they are busy right from their childhood trying to become self-realized. Kaumara acaret prajno dharman bhagavatan iha. They are so busythat they want to begin the business from their very childhood. So it isthe wrong conception to think that they are lazy.Interviewer: Then the question may be raised that if destiny cannot bechecked, then why not let every newborn child simply run around like ananimal, and whatever is destined to happen to him will happen?Srila Prabhupada: No, the advantage is that you can train himspiritually. Therefore it is said, tasyaiva hetoh prayateta kovidah: youshould engage your energy for self-realization. Ahaituky apratihata:devotional service, Krsna consciousness, cannot be checked. Just asmaterial destiny cannot be checked, your advancement in spiritual lifecannot be checked if you endeavor for it.     Actually, Krsna will change destiny--but only for His devotee. Hesays, aham tvam sarva-papebhyo moksayisyami: "I shall give you allprotection from all reactions of sinful activities." (Bhagavad-gita18.66)     For instance, if one is condemned by the law court to be hanged, noone can check it. Even the same judge who has given this verdict cannotcheck it. But if the defendant begs for the mercy of the king, who isabove all the laws, then the king can check it.     Therefore, our business is to surrender to Krsna. If weartificially want to be more happy by economic development, that is notpossible. So many men are working so hard, but does it mean thateveryone will become a Henry Ford or a Rockefeller? Everyone is tryinghis best. Mr. Ford's destiny was to become a rich man, but does it meanthat every other man who has worked as hard as Ford will become a richman like Ford? No. This is practical. You cannot change your destinysimply by working hard like an ass or a dog. But you can utilize thatenergy for improving your Krsna consciousness.Interviewer: Exactly what is Krsna consciousness? Could you tell usmore?Srila Prabhupada: Love of God--that is Krsna consciousness. If you havenot learned to love God, then what is the meaning of your religion? Whenyou are actually on the platform of love of God, you understand yourrelationship with God--"I am part and parcel of God." Then you extendyour love to the animal, also. If you actually love God, then your lovefor the insect is also there. You understand, "This insect has adifferent body, but he is also part and parcel of my father; therefore,he is my brother." Then you cannot maintain a slaughterhouse. If youmaintain a slaughterhouse and disobey the order of Christ, "Thou shaltnot kill," and you proclaim yourself Christian or Hindu, that is notreligion. Then it is simply a waste of time--because you do not
--- Page 124 ---
understand God; you have no love for God, and you are labeling yourself
under some sect, but there is no real religion. That is going on allover the world.Interviewer: How can we cure the situation?Srila Prabhupada: Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. If you donot accept that Krsna is the supreme entity, then try to understand.That is education: there is someone supreme; Krsna is not Indian; He isGod. The sun rises first in India, but that does not mean that the sunis Indian; similarly, although Krsna appeared in India, now He has cometo the Western countries, through this Krsna consciousness movement.Altruism: Temporary and EternalIn 1972, the South Indian state of Andhra Pradesh was stricken by asevere drought that affected millions. Hoping that the InternationalSociety for Krishna Consciousness would provide assistance, T. L.Katidia, Secretary of the Andhra Pradesh Relief Fund Committee, wrote toSrila Prabhupada. Srila Prabhupada responded with this surprising andedifying letter.Revered Swamiji,     The residents of the twin cities are happy to have this opportunityto meet you and your esteemed followers. You may be aware that due toinadequate rainfall during the last two years and its complete failurethis year, more than half of our state [Andhra Pradesh, a state insouthern India] is in the grip of a serious drought. With a view tosupplement governmental efforts to combat this evil, a Central VoluntaryOrganization of citizens drawn from various walks of life has been setup. The members of this organization surveyed the areas affected bydrought. The situation is pathetic. There are villages where drinkingwater is not available for miles. Due to scarcity of fodder, the cattleowners are parting with their cattle for a nominal price. Many of thestray cattle are dying away due to unavailability of fodder and water.The food problem is also very serious. Due to high prices of food grainson the open market, purchase of grains at market prices is beyond thereach of poor villagers, with the result that at least five to sixmillion people are hardly having one meal a day. There are many who areon the verge of starvation. The entire situation is most pathetic andheartrending.     We therefore appeal to your revered self to consider how yourSociety could best come to the rescue of these millions of souls who arein unimaginable distress. The Committee would like to suggest thatmembers of your Society appeal to the bhaktas [devotees] attending yourdiscourses to contribute their mite to the Andhra Pradesh Relief Fund.     The Committee is prepared to send some of its representatives alongwith members of your Society wherever you wish to distribute prasada tothe hungry millions in the state.     As manava-seva is madhava-seva ["Service to man is service toGod"], the Committee is confident that even a little effort by yourgracious Society will go a long way in mitigating the sufferings ofhundreds and thousands of people.     Yours ever in the service of the Lord,     T. L. Katidia, Secretary     Andhra Pradesh Relief fund Committee     Hyderabad, IndiaMy dear Mr. Katidia,
--- Page 125 ---
     Please accept my greetings. With reference to your letter and your
personal interview, I beg to inform you that without pleasing theSupreme Personality of Godhead, no one can become happy. Unfortunatelypeople do not know who God is and how to make Him happy. Our Krsnaconsciousness movement is therefore meant to present the SupremePersonality of Godhead directly to the people. As stated in the Srimad-Bhaga vatam, Seventh Canto, Sixth Chapter: tuste ca tatra kim alabhyamananta adye/ kim tair guna-vyatikarad iha ye sva-siddhah.     The idea stated in this verse is that by pleasing the SupremePersonality of Godhead, we please everyone, and there is no question ofscarcity. Because people do not know this secret of success, they aremaking their own independent plans to be happy. However, it is notpossible to achieve happiness in this way. On your letterhead I findmany important men in this country who are interested in relieving thesufferings of the people, but they should know for certain that withoutpleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead all their attempts will befutile. A diseased man cannot live simply on the strength of the help ofan expert physician and medicine. If this were so, then no rich manwould ever die. One must be favored by Krsna, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.     Therefore if you want to perform relief work simply by collectingfunds, I think that it will not be successful. You have to please thesupreme authority, and that is the way to success. For example, due tothe performance of sankirtana here, the rain has begun to fall after adrought of two years. The last time we performed a Hare Krsna Festivalin Delhi, there was imminent danger of Pakistan's declaring war, andwhen a newspaper man approached me for my opinion, I said there must befighting because the other party was aggressive. However, because of oursankirtana movement, India emerged victorious. Similarly, when we held afestival in Calcutta, the Naxalite [Communist] movement stopped. Theseare facts. Through the sankirtana movement we can not only get allfacilities for living, but also at the end can go back home, back toGodhead. Those who are of a demoniac nature cannot understand this, butit is a fact.     I therefore request you, as leading members of society, to jointhis movement. There is no loss on anyone's part for chanting the HareKrsna mantra, but the gain is great. According to Bhagavad-gita (3.21),what is accepted by leading men is also accepted by common men:
                           yad yad acarati sresthas
                            tat tad evetaro janah                            sa yat pramanam kurute                             lokas tad anuvartate
     "Whatever action a great man performs, common men follow in his
footsteps. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts, all theworld pursues."     The sankirtana movement of Krsna consciousness is very important.Therefore, through you I wish to appeal to all the leading men of Indiato accept this movement very seriously and give us all facility tospread this movement throughout the world. Then there will be a veryhappy condition, not only in India but all over the world.     Hoping this will meet you in good health,     Your ever well-wisher,
--- Page 126 ---
     A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Declaring Our Dependence on GodFor many, the American bicentennial was a great occasion forcelebration. In March 1976, in Mayapur, India, the editors of Back toGodhead conducted a special interview with Srila Prabhupada, who took ahard look at American slogans such as "All men are created equal," "InGod we trust," and "One nation under God."Back to Godhead: Thomas Jefferson put the basic philosophy of theAmerican Revolution into the Declaration of Independence. The importantmen of the day who signed this document agreed that there are certainvery obvious or self-evident truths, the first of which is that all menare created equal. By this they meant that all men are equal before thelaw and have an equal opportunity to be protected by the law.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, in that sense men are, as you say, created equal.BTG: Another point in the Declaration of Independence is that all menare endowed by God with certain natural rights that cannot be taken awayfrom them. These are the rights of life, liberty, and...Srila Prabhupada: But animals also have the right to life. Why don'tanimals also have the right to live? The rabbits, for instance, areliving in their own way in the forest. Why does the government allowhunters to go and shoot them?BTG: They were simply talking about human beings.Srila Prabhupada: Then they have no real philosophy. The narrow ideathat my family or my brother is good, and that I can kill all others, iscriminal. Suppose that for my family's sake I kill your father. Is thatphilosophy? Real philosophy is suhrdam sarva-bhutanam: friendliness toall living entities. Certainly this applies to human beings, but even ifyou unnecessarily kill one animal, I shall immediately protest, "Whatnonsense are you doing?"BTG: The founders of America said that another natural right is theright to liberty, or freedom--freedom in the sense that the governmentdoesn't have the right to tell you what kind of job you have to do.Srila Prabhupada: If the government is not perfect, it should not beallowed to tell people what to do. But if the government is perfect,then it can.BTG: The third natural right they mentioned was that every human beinghas the right to pursue happiness.Srila Prabhupada: Yes. But your standard of happiness may be differentfrom my standard. You may like to eat meat; I hate it. How can yourstandard of happiness be equal to mine?BTG: So should everyone be free to try to achieve whatever standard ofhappiness he wants?Srila Prabhupada: No, the standard of happiness should be prescribedaccording to the qualities of the person. You must divide the wholesociety into four groups: those with brahmana qualities, those withksatriya qualities, those with vaisya qualities, and those with sudraqualities. Everyone should have good facility to work according to hisnatural qualities.     You cannot engage a bull in the business of a horse, nor can youengage a horse in the business of a bull. Today practically everyone isgetting a college education. But what is taught at these colleges?Mostly technical knowledge, which is sudra education. Real highereducation means learning Vedic wisdom. This is meant for the brahmanas.Alone, sudra education leads to a chaotic condition. Everyone should be
--- Page 127 ---
tested to find out which education he is suited for. Some sudras may be
given technical education, but most sudras should work on the farms.Because everyone is coming to the cities to get an education, thinking,"We can get more money," the agriculture is being neglected. Now thereis scarcity because no one is engaged in producing nice foodstuffs. Allthese anomalies have been caused by bad government. It is the duty ofthe government to see that everyone is engaged according to his naturalqualities. Then people will be happy.BTG: So if the government artificially puts all men into one class, thenthere can't be happiness.Srila Prabhupada: No, that is unnatural and will cause chaos.BTG: America's founding fathers didn't like classes, because they'd hadsuch bad experience with them. Before the revolution, Americans had beenruled by monarchs, but the monarchs would always become tyrannical andunjust.Srila Prabhupada: Because they weren't trained to be saintly monarchs.In Vedic civilization, boys were trained from the very beginning of lifeas first-class brahmacaris [celibate students]. They went to thegurukula, the school of the spiritual master, and learned self-control,cleanliness, truthfulness, and many other saintly qualities. The best ofthem were later fit to rule the country.     The American Revolution has no special significance. The point isthat when people become unhappy, they revolt. That was done in America,that was done in France, and that was done in Russia.BTG: The American revolutionaries said that if a government fails torule the people properly, then the people have the right to dissolvethat government.Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Just as in Nixon's case: they pulled him down.But if they replace Nixon with another Nixon, then what is the value?They must know how to replace Nixon with a saintly leader. Becausepeople do not have that training and that culture, they will go onelecting one Nixon after another and never become happy. People can behappy. The formula for happiness is there in the Bhagavad-gita. Thefirst thing they must know is that the land belongs to God. Why doAmericans claim that the land belongs to them? When the first settlerswent to America, they said, "This land belongs to God; therefore we havea right to live here." So why are they now not allowing others to settleon the land? What is their philosophy? There are so many overpopulatedcountries. The American government should let those people go to Americaand should give them facility to cultivate the land and produce grains.Why are they not doing that? They have taken others' property by force,and by force they are checking others from going there. What is thephilosophy behind this?BTG: There is no philosophy.Srila Prabhupada: Roguism is their philosophy. They take the property byforce, and then they make a law that no one can take another's propertyby force. So they are thieves. They cannot restrict God's property frombeing occupied by God's sons. America and the other countries in theUnited Nations should agree that wherever there is enough land, it maybe utilized by the human society for producing food. The government cansay, "All right, you are overpopulated. Your people can come here. Wewill give them land, and they can produce food." We would see awonderful result. But will they do that? No. Then what is their
--- Page 128 ---
philosophy? Roguism. "I will take the land by force, and then I won't
allow others to come here."BTG: One American motto is "One nation under God."Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that is Krsna consciousness. There should be onenation under God, and one world government under God as well. Everythingbelongs to God, and we are all His sons. That philosophy is wanted.BTG: But in America people are very much afraid of a central governmentbecause they think that whenever there's a strong government there willalways be tyranny.Srila Prabhupada: If the leaders are properly trained, there cannot betyranny.BTG: But one of the premises of the American system of government isthat if a leader has too much power, he will inevitably become corrupt.Srila Prabhupada: You have to train him in such a way that he cannotbecome corrupt!BTG: What is that training process?Srila Prabhupada: That training is the varnasrama-dharma. Divide thesociety according to quality and train people in the principle thateverything belongs to God and should be used in the service of God. Thenthere really can be "one nation under God."BTG: But if society is divided into different groups, won't there beenvy?Srila Prabhupada: No, no. Just as in my body there are different partsthat work together, so the society can have different parts working forthe same goal. My hand is different from my leg. But when I tell thehand, "Bring a glass of water," the leg will help. The leg is required,and the hand is required.BTG: But in the Western world we have a working class and a capitalistclass, and there is always warfare going on between the two.Srila Prabhupada: Yes. The capitalist class is required, and the workingclass is also required.BTG: But they are fighting.Srila Prabhupada: Because they are not trained up; they have no commoncause. The hand and the leg work differently, but the common cause is tomaintain the body. So if you find out the common cause for both thecapitalists and the workers, then there will be no fighting. But if youdo not know the common cause, then there will always be fighting.BTG: Revolution?Srila Prabhupada: Yes.BTG: Then the most important thing is to find the common cause thatpeople can unite on?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, just like in our Krsna conscious society you cometo consult me about every activity, because I can give you the commoncause. Otherwise, there will be fighting. The government should be veryexpert to know the aim of life--the common cause--and they should trainthe people to work for the common cause. Then they will be happy andpeaceful. But if people simply elect rascals like Nixon, they will neverfind a common cause. Any rascal can secure votes by some arrangement,and then he becomes the head of the government. The candidates arebribing, they are cheating, they are making propaganda to win votes.Somehow or other they get votes and capture the prime post. This systemis bad.BTG: So if we don't choose our leaders by popular election, how willsociety be governed?
--- Page 129 ---
Srila Prabhupada: You require brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas, and sudras.
Just as when you want to construct a building, you require engineers.You don't want sweepers. Isn't that so? What will the sweeper do? No,there must be engineers. So if you follow the division of varnasrama,only ksatriyas are allowed to govern. And for the legislative assembly--the senators--only qualified brahmanas. Now the butcher is in thelegislative assembly. What does he know about making laws? He is abutcher, but by winning votes he becomes a senator. At the presentmoment, by the principle of vox populi, a butcher goes to thelegislature. So everything depends on training. In our Krsna conscioussociety, we're actually doing that, but in the case of politics, theyforget it. There cannot be just one class. That is foolishness, becausewe have to engage different classes of men in different activities. Ifwe do not know the art, then we will fail, because unless there is adivision of work, there will be havoc. We have discussed all theresponsibilities of the king in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. The differentclasses in society should cooperate exactly as the different parts ofthe body do. Although each part is meant for a different purpose, theyall work for one cause: to maintain the body properly.BTG: What is the actual duty of the government?Srila Prabhupada: To understand what God wants and to see that societyworks toward that aim. Then people will be happy. But if the people workin the wrong direction, how can they be happy? The government's duty isto see that they are working in the right direction. The right directionis to know God and to act according to His instructions. But if theleaders themselves do not believe in the supremacy of God, and if theydo not know what God wants to do, or what He wants us to do, then howcan there be good government? The leaders are misled, and they aremisleading others. That is the chaotic condition in the world today.BTG: In the United States there has traditionally been the separation ofchurch and state.Srila Prabhupada: I am not talking about the church. Church or nochurch--that is not the point. The main thing is that the leaders haveto accept that there is a supreme controller. How can they deny it?Everything in nature is going on under the Supreme Lord's control. Theleaders cannot control nature, so why don't they accept a supremecontroller? That is the defect in society. In every respect, the leadersare feeling that there must be a supreme controller, and yet they arestill denying Him.BTG: But suppose the government is atheistic...Srila Prabhupada: Then there cannot be good government. The Americanssay they trust in God. But without the science of God, that trust issimply fictitious. First take the science of God very seriously, thenput your trust in Him. They do not know what God is, but we do. Weactually trust in God.     They're manufacturing their own way of governing. And that is theirdefect. They will never be successful. They are imperfect, and if theygo on manufacturing their own ways and means, they will remainimperfect. There will always be revolutions--one after another. Therewill be no peace.BTG: Who determines the regulative principles of religion that peopleshould follow?Srila Prabhupada: God. God is perfect. He does that. According to theVedic version, God is the leader of all living entities (nityo nityanam
--- Page 130 ---
cetanas cetananam). We are different from Him because He is all-perfect
and we are not. We are very small. We have the qualities of God, but invery small quantity. Therefore we have only a little knowledge--that'sairplane, but you cannot manufacture a mosquito. God has created themosquito's body, which is also an "airplane." And that is the differencebetween God and us: we have knowledge, but it is not as perfect asGod's. So the leaders of the government have to consult God; then theywill rule perfectly.BTG: Has God also devised the most perfect government?Srila Prabhupada: Oh, yes. The ksatriyas ruled the government in Vedictimes. When there was a war, the king was the first to fight. Just likeyour George Washington: he fought when there was a war. But what kind ofpresident is ruling now? When there is a war, he sits very securely andtelephones orders. He's not fit to be president. When there is war, thepresident should be the first to come forward and lead the battle.BTG: But if man is small and imperfect, how can he execute God's perfectorders for a perfect government?Srila Prabhupada: Although you may be imperfect, because you arecarrying out my order, you're becoming perfect. You have accepted me asyour leader, and I accept God as my leader. In this way society can begoverned perfectly.BTG: So good government means first of all to accept the Supreme Beingas the real ruler of the government?Srila Prabhupada: You cannot directly accept the Supreme Being. You mustaccept the servants of the Supreme Being--the brahmanas or Vaisnavas[devotees of the Lord]--as your guides. The government men areksatriyas--the second class. The ksatriyas should take advice from thebrahmanas or Vaisnavas and make laws accordingly. The vaisyas shouldcarry out the ksatriyas' orders in practice. And the sudras should workunder these three orders. Then society will be perfect.The Peace FormulaAmid the antiwar protests of late 1966, Srila Prabhupada put out amimeographed leaflet (among the very first of his publications inAmerica) from his small storefront temple on New York's Second Avenue.Srila Prabhupada's followers and sympathizers handed this leaflet out bythe thousands on the streets of New York, and later in San Francisco,Montreal, and other cities. His "Peace Formula" was an entirely newapproach to the antiwar question, and for thousands of Americans, itprovided the perfect solution.     The great mistake of modern civilization is to encroach uponothers' property as though it were one's own and to thereby create anunnecessary disturbance of the laws of nature. These laws are verystrong. No living entity can violate them. Only one who is Krsnaconscious can easily overcome the stringency of the laws of nature andthus become happy and peaceful in the world.     As a state is protected by the department of law and order, so thestate of Universe, of which this earth is only an insignificantfragment, is protected by the laws of nature. This material nature isone of the different potencies of God, who is the ultimate proprietor ofeverything that be. This earth is, therefore, the property of God, butwe, the living entities, especially the so-called civilized humanbeings, are claiming God's property as our own, under both an individualand collective false conception. If you want peace, you have to removethis false conception from your mind and from the world. This false
--- Page 131 ---
claim of proprietorship by the human race on earth is partly or wholly
the cause of all disturbances of peace on earth.     Foolish and so-called civilized men are claiming proprietary rightson the property of God because they have now become godless. You cannotbe happy and peaceful in a godless society. In the Bhagavad-gita LordKrsna says that He is the factual enjoyer of all activities of theliving entities, that He is the Supreme Lord of all universes, and thatHe is the well-wishing friend of all beings. When the people of theworld know this as the formula for peace, it is then and there thatpeace will prevail.     Therefore, if you want peace at all, you will have to change yourconsciousness into Krsna consciousness, both individually andcollectively, by the simple process of chanting the holy name of God.This is a standard and recognized process for achieving peace in theworld. We therefore recommend that everyone become Krsna conscious bychanting Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare/ Hare Rama, HareRama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.     This is practical, simple, and sublime. Four hundred and eightyyears ago this formula was introduced in India by Lord Sri Caitanya, andnow it is available in your country. Take to this simple process ofchanting as above mentioned, realize your factual position by readingthe Bhagavad-gita As It Is, and reestablish your lost relationship withKrsna, God. Peace and prosperity will be the immediate worldwide result.Spiritual CommunismIn 1971, during his historic visit to the Soviet Union, Srila Prabhupadawas introduced to Professor Grigoriy Kotovsky, head of the IndiaDepartment at the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences and chairman of theIndian studies department at the University of Moscow. As they satinformally in Dr. Kotovsky's office, the spiritual leader and thecommunist scholar vigorously discussed topics of mutual concern, andSrila Prabhupada proposed a radical reformation within modern communism.Srila Prabhupada: The other day I was reading the paper, Moscow News.There was a Communist congress, and the President declared, "We areready to take others' experience to improve." So I think the Vedicconcept of socialism or communism will much improve the idea ofcommunism. For example, in a socialistic state the idea is that no oneshould starve; everyone must have his food. Similarly, in the Vedicconcept of grhastha [householder] life it is recommended that ahouseholder see that even a lizard or a snake living in his house shouldnot starve. Even these lower creatures should be given food, andcertainly all humans should. It is recommended that the grhastha, beforetaking his lunch, stand on the road and declare, "If anyone is stillhungry, please come! Food is ready!" If there is no response, then theproprietor of the household takes his lunch. Modern society takes thepeople as a whole as the proprietor of a certain state, but the Vedicconception is isavasyam idam sarvam--everything is owned by isa, thesupreme controller. Tena tyaktena bhunjithah--you may enjoy what isallotted to you by Him. Ma grdhah kasya svid dhanam: but do not encroachupon others' property. This is the Isopanisad--Veda. The same idea isexplained in the different Puranas. There are many good concepts in theVedic literature about communism. So I thought that these ideas shouldbe distributed to your most thoughtful men. Therefore I was anxious tospeak.
--- Page 132 ---
Prof. Kotovsky: It is interesting that here in our country there is now
great interest in the history of old, old thought. From this point ofview, our Institute translated into Russian and published many literarymonuments of great Indian culture. You will be interested to discoverthat we published some of the Puranas and parts of the Ramayana. Thereare volumes in Russian of Mahabharata and also a second edition ofMahabharata, translated in full. We have also published the fulltranslation of Manu-smrti with Sanskrit commentaries. Interest in thesepublications was so great that they sold out in a week. They are nowcompletely out of stock. It was impossible to get them in the bookmarket after a month. There is great interest among reading people herein Moscow and the U.S.S.R. toward ancient Vedic culture, and from thispoint of view we published many such books.Srila Prabhupada: Among these Puranas, the Srimad-Bhagavatam is calledthe Maha-Purana.Prof. Kotovsky: Maha-Purana.Srila Prabhupada: Yes. We have translated the full text--first wepresent the original Sanskrit text, its transliteration, the Englishequivalent for each word, then the translation, and then a purport, orexplanation of the verse. In this way, there are eighteen thousandverses in Srimad-Bhagavatam. We are translating everything literally.You can see. Each and every verse is being done like that for the wholeBhagavata Purana. The opinion of the acaryas, the great saintly sageswho are the preachers of the Bhagavata philosophy, is nigama-kaipatarorgalitam phalam: this is the ripened fruit of the Vedic desire tree(Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.1.3). It is accepted by all the Indian scholars,and Lord Caitanya especially preached this Bhagavatam. So we have thecomplete Bhagavatam in its English translation. If you want to see it, Ican show you.Prof. Kotovsky: It seems to me that in the Moscow and Leningradlibraries we have nearly all the major texts of ancient Indian culture,beginning from the Vedas, the original texts in Sanskrit. For instance,in the Leningrad branch of our Institute there are six or eight editionsof Manu-smrti. This Institute was founded in Imperial Russia inLeningrad, so in Leningrad we now have a branch of our Institute dealingmainly with the history of Asiatic culture. You will find here anaccount of what is being translated and what studies are being done onthe history of Indian religion and also the state of Indian religion,Hinduism, in Hindu India today.Srila Prabhupada: Hinduism is a very complex topic.Prof. Kotovsky: Oh, yes. [They laugh.] Really, to my understanding, itis not a religion, from the European point of view; it is a way of life--religion, philosophy, a way of life, whatever you want.Srila Prabhupada: This word Hindu is not a Sanskrit word. It was givenby the Muhammadans. You know that there is a river, Indus, which inSanskrit is called Sindhu. The Muhammadans pronounce s as h. Instead ofSindhu, they made it Hindu. So Hindu is a term that is not found in theSanskrit dictionary, but it has come into use. But the real culturalinstitution is called varnasrama. There are four varnas (socialdivisions)--brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, and sudra--and four asramas(spiritual divisions)--brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprastha, and sannyasa.According to the Vedic concept of life, unless people take to thissystem or institution of four varnas and four asramas, actually they donot become civilized human beings. One has to take this process of four
--- Page 133 ---
divisions of social orders and four divisions of spiritual orders; that
is called varnasrama. India's culture is based on this age-old Vedicsystem.Prof. Kotovsky: Varnasrama.Srila Prabhupada: Varnasrama. And in the Bhagavad-gita--perhaps you haveread the Bhagavad-gita?Prof. Kotovsky: Yes.Srila Prabhupada: There, in the Bhagavad-gita (4.13), is the statementcatur-varnyam maya srstam: this system was created by Visnu [God]. Sosince varnasrama is a creation of the Supreme, it cannot be changed. Itis prevalent everywhere. It is like the sun. The sun is a creation ofthe Supreme. The sunshine is there in America, in Russia, and in India--everywhere. Similarly, this varnasrama system is prevalent everywhere insome form or another. Take, for example, the brahmanas, the mostintelligent class of men. They are the brains of the society. Theksatriyas are the administrative class; then the vaisyas are theproductive class, and the sudras are the worker class. These fourclasses of men are prevalent everywhere under different names. Becauseit is created by the original creator, so it is prevalent everywhere,varnasrama-dharma.Prof. Kotovsky: It is interesting that in the opinion of some Europeanand old Russian scholars, this varnasrama system is a later creation,and if you would read the old texts of Vedic literature, you would finda much more simple and agrarian society. It is the opinion of thesescholars that the varnasrama system was introduced in Indian society inthe late age of the Vedic era but not from the beginning. And if youwould analyze the old texts, you would find that in the old classicalIndia it was not so prevalent.Srila Prabhupada: As far as we are concerned, it is mentioned in theBhagavad-gita. Catur-varnyam maya srstam. The Bhagavad-gita was spokenfive thousand years ago, and in the Bhagavad-gita it is said, "Thissystem of the Bhagavad-gita was spoken by Me to the sun-god." So if youtake an estimation of that period, it comes to forty million years ago.Can the European scholars trace back history five thousand years? Canthey go back forty million years? We have evidence that this varnasramasystem has been current at least five thousand years. The varnasramasystem is also mentioned in the Visnu Purana (3.8.9). Varnasramacara-vata purusena parah puman. That is stated in the Visnu Purana.Varnasrama-dharma is not a phenomenon of a historical period calculatedin the modern age. It is natural. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam thecomparison is given that just as in the body there are four divisions--the brain division, the arms division, the belly division, and the legdivision--so by nature's way these four divisions are existing in thesocial body. There exist a class of men who are considered the brain, aclass of men who are considered the arms of the state, a class of menwho are called the productive class, and so on. There is no need oftracing history; it is naturally existing from the day of creation.Prof. Kotovsky: You have said that in any society there are fourdivisions, but they are not so easy to distinguish. For instance, onecan group together different social classes and professional groups intofour divisions in any society; there is no difficulty. The onlydifficulty is, for instance, in the socialistic society--in our countryand other socialist societies--how you can distinguish the productivegroup from the workers.
--- Page 134 ---
Srila Prabhupada: For example, we belong to the intellectual class of
men. This is a division.Prof. Kotovsky: Intelligent class, brahmanas. And you can also puttogether all the intelligentsia in that department.Srila Prabhupada: Yes.Prof. Kotovsky: And then the administrative class.Srila Prabhupada: Yes.Prof. Kotovsky: But who are the vaisyas and sudras? That is thedifficulty. Because all others are workers--factory workers, collectivefarm workers, and so on. So from this point of view there is a greatdistinction, in my opinion, between socialist society and all societiespreceding socialism, because in modern Western society you can group allsocial and professional classes in these particular class divisions--brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas, and sudras: intellectuals, productiveclass, owners of the productive system (factory owners, for instance),and menial workers. But here you have no vaisyas because you haveadministrative staffs in factories, and you can call them ksatriyas, andthen there are the sudras, the workers themselves, but no intermediateclass.Srila Prabhupada: That is stated. Kalau sudra-sambha vah. In this agepractically all men are sudras. But if there are simply sudras, thesocial order will be disturbed. In spite of your state of sudras, thebrahmana is found here, and that is necessary. If you do not divide thesocial order in such a way, there will be chaos. That is the scientificestimation of the Vedas. You may belong to the sudra class, but tomaintain social order you have to train some of the sudras to becomebrahmanas. Society cannot depend on sudras. Nor can you depend on thebrahmanas. To fulfill the necessities of your body, there must be abrain, arms, a stomach, and legs. The legs, the brain, and the arms areall required for cooperation to fulfill the mission of the whole body.So in any society you can see that unless there are these fourdivisions, there will be chaos. It will not work properly. It will bemaya, and there will be disturbances. The brain must be there, but atthe present moment there is a scarcity of brains. I am not talking ofyour state or my state; I am taking the world as a whole. Formerly theIndian administration was a monarchy. For example, Maharaja Pariksit wasa ksatriya king. Just before his death, he renounced his royal order. Hecame to the forest to hear about self-realization. If you want tomaintain the peace and prosperity of the whole world society, you mustcreate a very intelligent class of men, a class of men expert inadministration, a class of men expert in production, and a class of mento work. That is required; you cannot avoid it. That is the Vedicconception, mukha-bahuru-pada jah (Srimad-Bhagavatam 11.17.13). Mukhameans "the face," bahu means "the arms," uru means "the waist," andpada, "the legs." Whether you take this state or that state, unlessthere is a smooth, systematic establishment of these four orders oflife, the state or society will not run very smoothly.Prof. Kotovsky: Generally it seems to me that this whole varnasramasystem to some extent created a natural division of labor in the ancientsociety. But now division of labor among people in any society is muchmore complicated and sophisticated. So it is very confusing to groupthem into four classes.Srila Prabhupada: Confusion has come to exist because in India, at alater day, the son of a brahmana, without having the brahminical
--- Page 135 ---
qualifications, claimed to be a brahmana; and others, out of
superstition or a traditional way, accepted him as a brahmana. Thereforethe Indian social order was disrupted. But in our Krsna consciousnessmovement we are training brahmanas everywhere, because the world needsthe brain of a brahmana. Although Maharaja Pariksit was a monarch, hehad a body of brahmanas and learned sages to consult, an advisory body.It is not that the monarchs were independent. In history it is foundthat if some of the monarchs were not in order, they were dethroned bythe brahminical advisory council. Although the brahmanas did not takepart in politics, they would advise the monarch how to execute the royalfunction. This is not too far in the past. How long ago was Asoka?Prof. Kotovsky: That would be equal to what we call, in our terminology,ancient and medieval India.Srila Prabhupada: Yes.Prof. Kotovsky: In old and feudal India--you are right--it was veryopen, and the major part of the high administrative staff in thelegislative department were brahmanas. Even in the Mogul era there werebrahmanas to advise the Muslim emperors and administrators.Srila Prabhupada: That is a fact--the brahmanas were accepted. Theyformed the advisory committee of the king. For example, Candragupta, theHindu king, was in the age of Alexander the Great. Just beforeCandragupta, Alexander the Great went from Greece into India andconquered a portion. When Candragupta became emperor, he had Canakya ashis prime minister. Perhaps you have heard this name Canakya?Prof. Kotovsky: Yes.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, he was a great brahmana politician, and it is byhis name that the quarter of New Delhi where all the foreign embassiesare grouped together is called Canakya Puri. Canakya Pandita was a greatpolitician and brahmana. He was vastly learned. His moral instructionsare still valuable. In India, schoolchildren are taught CanakyaPandita's instructions. Although he was the prime minister, CanakyaPandita maintained his brahmana spirit; he did not accept any salary. Ifa brahmana accepts a salary, it is understood that he has become a dog.That is stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam. He can advise, but he cannotaccept employment. So Canakya Pandita was living in a cottage, but hewas actually the prime minister. This brahminical culture and thebrahminical brain is the standard of Vedic civilization. The Manu-smrtiis an example of the standard of brahminical culture. You cannot traceout from history when the Manu-smrti was written, but it is consideredso perfect that it is the Hindu law. There is no need for thelegislature to pass a new law daily to adjust social order. The lawgiven by Manu is so perfect that it can be applicable for all time. Itis stated in Sanskrit to be tri-kaladau, which means "good for the past,present, and future."Prof. Kotovsky: I am sorry to interrupt you, but to my knowledge all ofIndian society in the second half of the eighteenth century was, byorder of the British administration, under a law divergent from Hindulaw. There was a lot of change. The actual Hindu law that was used bythe Hindus was quite different from the original Manu-smrti.Srila Prabhupada: They have now made changes. Even our late PanditJawaharlal Nehru introduced his own Hindu code. He introduced the rightof divorce in marriage, but this was not in the Manu-samhita. There areso many things they have changed, but before this modern age the whole
--- Page 136 ---
human society was governed by the Manu-smrti. Strictly speaking, modern
Hindus are not strictly following the Hindu scriptures.     But our point is not to try to bring back the old type of Hindusociety. That is impossible. Our idea is to take the best ideas from theoriginal idea. For example, in the Srimad-Bhagavatam there is adescription of the communist idea. It is described to MaharajaYudhisthira. If there is something good, a good experience, whyshouldn't you adopt it? That is our point of view. Besides that, moderncivilization is missing one all-important point--the aim of human life.Scientifically, the aim of human life is self-realization, atma-tattva.It is said that unless the members of human society come to the point ofself-realization, they are defeated in whatever they do. Actually it ishappening in modern society, despite all economic advancement and otheradvancement: instead of keeping peace and tranquillity, they arefighting--individually, socially, politically, and nationally. If wethink about it in a cool-headed way, we can see that in spite of muchimprovement in many branches of knowledge, we are keeping the samementality that is visible in the lower animal society. Our conclusion,according to the Srimad-Bhagavatam, is that this human body is not meantfor working hard for sense gratification. But people do not knowanything beyond that. They do not know about the next life. There is noscientific department of knowledge to study what happens after this bodyis finished. That is a great department of knowledge.     In the Bhagavad-gita (2.13) it is said, dehino 'smin yatha-dehe.Deha means "this body." Dehinah means "the one who owns this body."Dehino 'smin yatha dehe kaumaram yauvanamjara. The dehi, the owner ofthe body, is within, and the body is changing from one form to another.The child has a certain type of body that changes to another type whenhe is older. But the owner of the body still exists throughout.Similarly, when this body is completely changed, we accept another body.People do not understand this. We are accepting different bodies, evenin this life, from babyhood to childhood to boyhood to youth. That is afact--everyone knows it. I was a child, but that childhood body is nomore. I have a different body now. What is the difficulty inunderstanding that when this body will be no more, then I will have toaccept another body? It is a great science.Prof. Kotovsky: As you know, there are two quite opposite approaches tothis problem. The approach is slightly different according to differentreligions, but at the same time, any religion recognizes and searchesfor the change-of-place experience, or transmigration of spirit. InChristian religion, in Judaism, in...Srila Prabhupada: I am not talking religions with you. I am talkingscience and philosophy. One religion may accept one way; that is not ourconcern. We are concerned with the point that if the owner of the bodyis permanent in spite of different changes of body, there should be nodifficulty in understanding that when this body changes entirely, theowner of the body will have another body.Prof. Kotovsky: Another approach is that there is no separation. Thereare no two phenomena--the body and the owner of the body are the same.Srila Prabhupada [emphatically]: No.Prof. Kotovsky: When the body dies, the owner also dies.Srila Prabhupada: No, no. But why is there no department of knowledge inthe university to study this fact scientifically? That is myproposition--they are lacking. It may be as you say or it may be as I
--- Page 137 ---
say, but there must be a department of knowledge to study this. Recently
a cardiologist in Toronto, a doctor, has accepted that there is a soul.I had some correspondence with him, and he strongly believes that thereis a soul. So there is another point of view, but our process is toaccept knowledge from authority. We have Krsna's statement on thissubject, and He is authoritative. Krsna is accepted as the authority byall the acaryas. The Bhagavad-gita is accepted by scholarly andphilosophical circles all over the world. Krsna says:
                           dehino 'smin yatha dehe
                           kaumaram yau vanam jara                           tatha dehantara-praptir                           dhiras tatra na muhyati
     "Just as the soul gives up the childhood body and comes to the
boyhood body and then to youth, the soul also gives up this body andaccepts another body." (Bg. 2.13) This statement is given by Krsna, thegreatest authority according to our tradition of knowledge. We acceptsuch a statement without argument. That is the way of Vedicunderstanding.Prof. Kotovsky: The difficulty is that our approach is that we do notbelieve in anything without argument. We can believe only things basedon argument.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that is allowed. That is stated in the Bhagavad-gita (4.34). Tad viddhi pranipatena pariprasnena sevaya. Pariprasna,argument, is allowed--but not in the challenging spirit, but rather withthe spirit to understand. Argument is not denied. But as far as Vedicstatements are concerned, they are infallible, and the scholars of theVedas accept them in that way. For example, cow dung is the stool of ananimal. Now, the Vedic statement is that as soon as you touch the stoolof any animal--even if you touch your own stool--you are impure and haveto purify yourself by taking a bath. According to the Hindu system,after evacuating one has to take a bath.Prof. Kotovsky: That is quite understandable hygienic knowledge.Srila Prabhupada: Yes.Prof. Kotovsky: Yes, that is right.Srila Prabhupada: But in another place it is stated that cow dung,although the stool of an animal, is pure. Even if you apply it to animpure place, that place becomes purified. This is superficiallycontradictory. In one place it is said that the stool of an animal isimpure and as soon as you touch it you have to be purified, and inanother place it says that cow dung is pure. According to our knowledge,it is contradictory--but still it is accepted by those who are followersof the Vedas. And the fact is that if you analyze cow dung, you willfind that it contains all antiseptic properties.Prof. Kotovsky: This I don't know.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, one professor in a medical college analyzed it,and he found it full of antiseptic properties. So Vedic statements, evenif found contradictory, if analyzed scrutinizingly will prove correct.There may be an exception. But it is accepted, and when scientificallyanalyzed and examined, it is found to be correct.Prof. Kotovsky: Yes, if you analyze from the scientific point of view,that is right.
--- Page 138 ---
Srila Prabhupada: There are other instances--for example, the
conchshell. The conchshell is the bone of an animal, and according toVedic instruction if you touch the bone of an animal you become impureand have to take a bath. But this conchshell is kept in the Deity room,because it is accepted as pure by the Vedas. My point is that we acceptVedic laws without argument. That is the principle followed by scholars.If you can substantiate your statements by quotations from the Vedas,then they are accepted. You are not required to substantiate them inother ways. There are different kinds of pramanas, or evidences. Proofby Vedic quotation is called sruti-pramana. As in the legal court if youcan give statements from the law book your statement is accepted, so allstatements you give, if supported by sruti-pramanas, are accepted byscholars. I think you know the Vedas are known as srutis.Prof. Kotovsky: Yes.Srila Prabhupada:
                            sruti-smrti-puranadi-
                           pancaratra- vidhim vina                           aikantiki harer bhaktir                             utpatayaiva kaipate                               (Brahma-yamala)
     Any system we accept must be supported by evidences of sruti,
smrti, the Puranas, and Pancaratra. That which is not proved by thesepramanas is a disturbance.Prof. Kotovsky: Could I just say one thing? What is in the Vedas couldalso have been proved in a scientific way. Today, suppose there is ascientific laboratory. What is said by that lab is true. That it is trueyou accept, without going into the propriety of it. Suppose you have ascientific workshop or institution; if this workshop or scientificinstitution says, "This is not good," the general body will take it forgranted: "Yes. The scientific body has said so, so it is understood."Srila Prabhupada: Similarly, Vedic authoritative statements are acceptedby the acaryas [great teachers]. India is governed by the acaryas--Ramanujacarya, Madhvacarya, Sankaracarya. They accept the Vedas, andtheir followers accept them. The benefit is that I do not waste my timeto research whether cow dung is pure or impure; rather, because it isstated in the Vedas to be pure, I accept it. I save my time by acceptingthe sruti-pramana. In that way there are different statements in theVedas for sociology and politics or anything, for veda means"knowledge."
                        sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto
                       mattah smrtirjnanam apohanam ca                       vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo                        vedanta-krd veda-vid eva caham                                  (Bg.15.15)
     Prof. Kotovsky: May I put one question to you? Have you many
branches of your society in the world?Srila Prabhupada: Yes.Prof. Kotovsky: Where is your main center, and where are the branches ofthe Krsna consciousness society?
--- Page 139 ---
Srila Prabhupada: Of course, I have over sixty-five branches. accepted
the principles. Just like these boys. [Srila Prabhupada points to histwo secretaries.]Prof. Kotovsky: But does that mean that these students abstain fromnormal Western, European universities? For instance, can a normalstudent from one of the various universities who is attending lecturesin the normal way also be initiated and admitted to your community?Srila Prabhupada: If you want to live in our community and be initiated,we welcome you. If not, come try to understand our philosophy, read ourbooks--there are so many books, magazines, questions, and answers. Tryto understand the philosophy. It is not that all of a sudden a studentcomes and becomes our disciple. He first of all comes, associates, andtries to understand. We do not canvass. He voluntarily says that hewants to be a disciple.Prof. Kotovsky: What happens if, for instance, one is not a student buta young worker or the young son of a farmer? Would he renounce his wholelife and join your community in a given center? How would he maintainhimself in his day-to-day life, in material life?Srila Prabhupada: As I told you, this propaganda is meant for creatingbrahmanas all over the world, because the brahmana element is lacking.One who seriously comes to us has to become a brahmana, so he shouldadopt the occupation of a brahmana and give up the occupation of aksatriya or sudra. But if one wants to keep his profession and also atthe same time understand our movement, that is allowed. We have manyprofessors following our movement. There is Howard Wheeler, a professorat Ohio State University. He is my disciple. He is continuing with hisprofessorship, but almost all the money he is getting he is spending forthis Krsna consciousness. Grhasthas, those who are in householder lifeoutside, are expected to contribute fifty percent of their income forour society, keep twenty-five percent for family, and keep twenty-fivepercent for personal emergencies. But Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu teachesthat it does not matter whether one is a grhastha (householder), or inthe renounced order, or a brahmana, or a sudra. Lord Caitanya says,"Anyone who understands the science of Krsna becomes My spiritualmaster." The actual words in Bengali are kiba vipra, kiba nyasi, sudrakene naya. Do you understand a little Bengali?Prof. Kotovsky: A little.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, as a vibration. Yei krsna-tattva-vetta, sei`guru' haya. "Anyone who understands the science of Krsna can become aspiritual master." (Caitanya-caritamrta, Madhya 8.128)Prof. Kotovsky: But by creating brahmanas from different social classesof society, you deny the old prescription of the Hindu scriptures.Srila Prabhupada: No, I establish it.Prof. Kotovsky: According to all scriptures--the Puranas, etc.--everymember of one of these four classes of varnas has to be born within it.Srila Prabhupada: No, no, no, no.Prof. Kotovsky: That is the foundation of all the varnas...Srila Prabhupada: No, no. I am sorry.Prof. Kotovsky: The foundation of all the varnas...Srila Prabhupada: You have spoken incorrectly. With great respect I begto submit that you are not speaking correctly. In the Bhagavad-gita(4.13) it is stated, catur-varnyam maya-srstam guna-karma-vibhagasah."These four orders of brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas, and sudras were
--- Page 140 ---
created by Me according to quality and work." There is no mention of
birth.Prof. Kotovsky: I agree with you that this is the addition of laterbrahmanas who tried to perpetuate these qualities.Srila Prabhupada: That has killed the Indian culture. Otherwise therewould have been no necessity of the division of part of India intoPakistan. Not only that, but from the historical point of view thiswhole planet was Bharata-varsa, and it was controlled by one flag up tothe time of Maharaja Pariksit. Then it gradually separated. This ishistory. Lately they have separated Pakistan. So Bharata-varsa is nowcrippled into a small piece of land. Otherwise, according to Vedicscripture, this whole planet is called Bharata-varsa. Formerly it wasnamed Ilavrta-varsa. But since Emperor Bharata ruled this planet, it iscalled Bharata-varsa. So this culture, Krsna consciousness, was alwaysexistent. Consider any religion--Christian, Muhammadan, Jewish. They areat most two to three thousand years old. But you cannot trace out thebeginning of this Vedic scripture. It is therefore called sanatana,eternal. This culture is for this whole human society. It is not areligious faith. Religious faith you can change, but real dharma youcannot change. Try to understand Krsna. In the Bhagavad-gita (18.66) Hesays, sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam saranam vraja: "Give up allother forms of religion and just surrender to Me." That is realknowledge--to surrender to the Supreme. You or I--anyone--is surrenderedto someone. That is a fact. Our life is by surrender, is it not? Do youdisagree with this point?Prof. Kotovsky: To some extent you surrender.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, to the full extent.Prof. Kotovsky: You have to surrender to the society, for instance. Tothe whole people.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, to the whole people, or to the state or to theking or the government or whatever you say. This surrender must bethere.Prof. Kotovsky: The only difficulty is that we cannot half surrender toa government or a king. The principal difference is of surrender to aking, to a person, or to the society.Srila Prabhupada: No, that is only a change of color. But the principleof surrender is there. Whether you surrender to monarchy, democracy,aristocracy, or dictatorship, you have to surrender; that is a fact.Without surrender there is no life. It is not possible. So we areeducating people to surrender to the Supreme, wherefrom you get allprotection, just as Krsna says (sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekamsaranam vraja). No one can say, "No, I am not surrendered to anyone."Not a single person. The difference is where he surrenders. The ultimatesurrendering object is Krsna. Therefore in the Bhagavad-gita (7.19)Krsna says, bahunam janmanam ante jnanavan mam prapadyate: "Aftersurrendering to so many things birth after birth, when one is factuallywise he surrenders unto Me." Vasudevah sarvam iti sa mahatmasudurlabhah: "Such a mahatma is very rare."Prof. Kotovsky: But at the same time it seems to me that surrender is tobe accompanied by revolt. The history of mankind has proved that mankindhas developed only by revolt against some kind of surrender. In themedieval age there was the French Revolution. It was revolt againstsurrender. But this revolution itself was surrender to the rank and fileof the people. You are agreed?
--- Page 141 ---
Srila Prabhupada: Yes.
Prof. Kotovsky: So it is not enough to come to a full stop. Surrender isto be accompanied with revolt against some and surrender to otherpeople.Srila Prabhupada: But the surrender will be fully stopped when it issurrender to Krsna.Prof. Kotovsky: Ah, ah.Srila Prabhupada: That is full stop--no more surrender. Any othersurrender you have to change by revolution. But when you come to Krsna,then it is sufficient. You are satisfied. I'll give you an example: achild is crying, and people move him from one lap to another. Oh, hedoes not stop. But as soon as the baby comes to the lap of his mother...Prof. Kotovsky: It stops.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, full satisfaction. So this surrender, thesechanges, will go on in different categories. But the sum total of allthis surrender is surrender to maya. Therefore, in the Bhagavad-gita itis said that this surrender, neglecting Krsna, is all maya. Either yousurrender to this or to that, but final surrender is surrender to Krsna;then you will be happy. The process of surrender is there, but surrenderto Krsna keeps one quite satisfied, transcendentally.Prof. Kotovsky: Haven't you come across hostile attitudes to yourteachings from orthodox Hindus or brahmanas in India?Srila Prabhupada: We have subdued them.Prof. Kotovsky: Ah.Srila Prabhupada: Any orthodox Hindu may come and challenge, but we haveour weapons--the Vedic literatures. So no one has come. Even Christianpriests in America love me. They say, "These boys are American,Christian, Jewish, and now they are so much after God. But we could notdeliver them." They are admitting it. Their fathers and their parentscome to me, offer their obeisances, and say, "Swamiji, it is our greatfortune that you have come here to teach God consciousness." So on thecontrary, I have been well received. In India also, since you inquiredof India, all other sects are admitting that before me many kinds ofsvamis went to the Western countries, but they could not convert even asingle person to Krsna consciousness. They are admitting that. As far asI am concerned, I don't take any credit, but I am confident that becauseI am presenting the Vedic knowledge as it is, without adulteration, itis being effective. That is my confidence. If you have the rightmedicine and you administer it to a patient, you must be sure that hewill be cured.Prof. Kotovsky: How many out of your one thousand disciples do you havein India itself? How many of your community do you have in India?Srila Prabhupada: In India?Prof. Kotovsky: Yes.Srila Prabhupada: In India there are many Krsna conscious persons--hundreds, thousands, millions. In India there is no question. There isnot a single Hindu who is not Krsna conscious.Prof. Kotovsky: Yes, I understand.Srila Prabhupada: Vaisnavas. This is called the Vaisnava cult. You havebeen in India, so as it is commonly known, there are many millions ofVaisnavas. For example, this gentleman [an Indian gentleman present] isthe commander of Air India airlines. He is not my disciple, but he is aVaisnava, Krsna conscious. Similarly, in India there are millions ofKrsna conscious persons. There are even Muhammadans who are Krsna
--- Page 142 ---
conscious. At Gorakhpur University there is a Muhammadan professor who
is a great devotee of Lord Krsna. So this is natural. It is said in theCaitanya-caritamrta that Krsna consciousness is everywhere, ineveryone's heart. It simply has to be awakened by this process. That isall. It is there in your heart also. It is not that it is foreign toyou. In everyone's heart there is Krsna consciousness. By this processwe have to awaken it. It is just like the way the sun rises. It is notthat all of a sudden the sun comes from nowhere. It is there, but itrises in the morning. Similarly, this Krsna consciousness is everywhere,but some way or another it is now covered. By this process it isreawakened and aroused by association.Prof. Kotovsky: You came yesterday to Moscow. Have you seen somethinghere in Moscow?Srila Prabhupada: No, I am not very much interested in sight-seeing.Prof. Kotovsky: But in any case, just to stay in an old-style hotel isnot interesting--not many people to see. And you are leaving the dayafter tomorrow?Srila Prabhupada: That is my program.Prof. Kotovsky: You are leaving for the United States or for Europe?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, for Europe. Paris. And we have two very bigceremonies in London and San Francisco. They are making arrangements forthe Ratha-yatra Car Festival. This car festival is observed inJagannatha Puri. You have been to Jagannatha Puri?Prof. Kotovsky: Yes, the car festival has been held from immemorialtimes. A very old tradition. Huge cars.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, and it has now been introduced in the Westerncountries in London and San Francisco, and gradually maybe we willintroduce it in other countries also.Prof. Kotovsky: In London there is a large Indian community.Srila Prabhupada: No, no. This is organized by the Englishmen andAmericans. The Indian communities in London and San Francisco are tryingto become--you know the word? Sahib?Prof. Kotovsky: [Laughs.] Westernized. [They both laugh.] A very greatsocial anthropologist at the university has written something veryinteresting. He says there are two processes--the process ofWesternization among brahmanas, mainly the upper class, and the processcalled Sanskritization, which is the process of adopting brahmanarituals, etc., by so-called lower classes, even untouchables. It is avery interesting process in India just now. But India's position,unfortunately, is problematic.Srila Prabhupada: The difficulty is that India is nowhere. They aretrying to imitate Western life, but from a materialistic or technicalpoint of view, they are one hundred years back.Prof. Kotovsky: Yes, that is right. But what to do for India?Srila Prabhupada: There is one thing I am experiencing. If India'sspiritual asset is distributed, that will increase India's honor.Because everywhere I go, people still adore Indian culture. If thistreasure-house of India's spiritual knowledge is properly distributed,at least people outside of India will understand that they are gettingsomething from India.Prof. Kotovsky: Of course, you're right. The Indian cultural heritage isto be made known everywhere. But at the same time, in what way wouldthis benefit the Indian masses themselves? They are sitting in India,and they have nothing to gain from the spreading of the Indian cultural
--- Page 143 ---
heritage all over the world. Indian villages have to have fertilizers,
tractors, etc.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, we do not object to that.Prof. Kotovsky: Yes, I don't think you can object, but at the same time,something has to be done in India. One may call it Westernization, butthis introduction to an industrial technological revolution is needed inall fields of Indian life--agriculture, industry, etc.Srila Prabhupada: Arjuna, before understanding the Bhagavad-gita, was afighter, and after understanding the Bhagavad-gita he remained afighter. So we don't want to change the position. For example, you are arespectable professor, a teacher. We don't say that you must change yourposition. We have come to convince you about our philosophy. That isall. Arjuna was refusing to fight. "Krsna, I don't want to kill myrelatives. I do not want this kingdom." But he was taught the Bhagavad-gita, and at the end when Krsna inquired, "What is your decision now?"he said, karisye vacanam ta va--"Yes, I shall act as You say."(Bg.18.72) That means that his consciousness changed. He was a fighter,and he remained a fighter, but he changed his consciousness. We wantthat. We don't want to disturb the present condition of society. We arenot against technology. No, but we try to make one understand this Krsnaconsciousness. That is our program.Prof. Kotovsky: Of course, at the same time the final goal of anyconsciousness is to change the society--to make it a better society.Srila Prabhupada: That is automatic.Prof. Kotovsky: I am not really so happy that the ultimate goal is notto disturb society, because in modern society there are many things tobe changed through consciousness.Srila Prabhupada: That preliminary change is to follow rules andregulations of austerity. For example, don't take intoxicants.Prof. Kotovsky: No indulging in intoxicants--simplicity, etc.Srila Prabhupada: So if one takes to this process...Prof. Kotovsky: Then the others will come automatically.Srila Prabhupada: One's whole life will change, because these fourthings--illicit sex life, intoxicants, meat-eating and gambling--arevery great impediments to social improvement.Prof. Kotovsky: That will automatically make life simpler, because aperson who does not indulge in illicit sex, intoxicants, and such otherthings has to lead a comparatively simple life.Srila Prabhupada: The other day I was speaking in Bombay with arespectable gentleman. I was telling him that Krsna says:
                          mam hi partha vyapasritya
                           ye 'pi syuh papa-yonayah                         striyo vaisyas tatha sudras                           te 'pi yanti param gatim
     "Even those who are lowborn [papa-yonayah]--stri, vaisyas, and
sudras--are also included by accepting Me. By accepting My shelter theyare also elevated to the transcendental position." (Bg. 9.32) Now whyhave the higher classes of Hindu society neglected this injunction ofthe Bhagavad-gita? Suppose one is papa-yonayah, lowborn. Krsna says thathe can be "elevated to the transcendental position if he accepts Me."Why wasn't this message propagated by the higher class of people so thatthe so-called lowborn could be elevated? Why did they reject them? The
--- Page 144 ---
result was that instead of accepting the Muhammadans, the Indians
rejected them, and now they are partitioned off. They have becomeeternal enemies of India. So for the first time we are trying to elevatepersons to the higher position of Krsna consciousness, even if one islowborn. Because the soul is pure. In the Vedas it is said that the soulis untouched by any material contamination; it is simply temporarilycovered. This covering should be removed. Then one becomes pure. That isthe mission of human life--to uncover ourselves from this materialenvironment, come to spiritual understanding, and surrender to Krsna.Then life is perfect.The Tiny World of Modern ScienceIn April 1973, during a long morning walk at Venice Beach, in LosAngeles, Srila Prabhupada turned to the subject of modern science andscientists. With philosophical rigor, profound common sense, anddisarming frankness, he exposed the narrowmindedness and illogic behindthe scientists' commonly accepted theories about the origin of life. Thestudents on hand included Dr. Thoudam Singh, an organic chemist, whocaptured the dialogue on tape.Srila Prabhupada: The whole world of science and technology is runningon the false idea that life is born from matter. We cannot allow thisnonsensical theory to go unchallenged. Life does not come from matter.Matter is generated from life. This is not theory; it is fact. Scienceis based on an incorrect theory; therefore all its calculations andconclusions are wrong, and people are suffering because of this. Whenall these mistaken modern scientific theories are corrected, people willbecome happy. So we must challenge the scientists and defeat them.Otherwise they will mislead the entire society.     Matter changes in six phases: birth, growth, maintenance,production of by-products, dwindling, and death. But the life withinmatter, the spirit soul, is eternal; it goes through no such changes.Life appears to be developing and decaying, but actually it is simplypassing through each of these six phases until the material body can nolonger be maintained. Then the old body dies, and the soul enters a newbody. When our clothing is old and worn, we change it. Similarly, oneday our bodies become old and useless, and we pass on to a new body.     As Krsna says in the Bhagavad-gita (2.13), dehino 'smin yatha dehekaumaram yau vanam jara/ tatha dehantara-praptih: "As the embodied soulcontinually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age, thesoul similarly passes into another body at death." And a little later(2.18): antavanta ime deha nityasyoktah saririnah. This means that onlythe material body of the indestructible and eternal entity is subject todestruction. This material body is perishable, but the life within thebody is nitya, eternal.     According to the Vedas, the measurement of the soul within the bodyis one ten-thousandth part of the tip of a hair. This is very small; infact, it is atomic. Yet because of that atomic spiritual energy, my bodyis working. Is it so difficult to understand? Suppose a man thinkshimself very stout and strong. Why is he stout and strong? Only becausewithin his body is a small spiritual spark. But as soon as the spiritualspark is gone, his body dies, and his strength and vigor become void. Ifscientists say that matter is the cause and origin of life, then letthem bring just one dead man back to life by injecting him withchemicals. But this they cannot do.
--- Page 145 ---
Dr. Singh: Since scientists cannot see the spirit soul, they say its
existence is very doubtful.Srila Prabhupada: How can they see it? It is too small to see. Where issuch seeing power?Dr. Singh: Still, they want to sense it by some means.Srila Prabhupada: If you inject just one grain of deadly poison intosomeone, he immediately dies. No one can see the poison or how it acts.But the poison is acting nevertheless. In the same way, the Vedas saythat because the minute particle called the soul is within the body, thewhole body is working nicely. If I pinch myself, I immediately feel it,because I am conscious all over my skin. But as soon as the soul isabsent, which is the case when my body dies, you can take this same skinand cut it and chop it, and no one will protest. Why is this simplething so hard to understand? ls this not detecting spirit?Dr. Singh: That is the soul. But what about God?Srila Prabhupada: First of all let us understand the soul. The soul is asmall God. If you understand the sample, then you can understand thewhole.     Now here is matter. [Srila Prabhupada points at a dead tree withhis cane.] Formerly leaves and twigs were growing from this tree. Whyare they not growing now? Can the scientists answer this question?Karandhara dasa: They would say the chemical composition has changed.Srila Prabhupada: All right, then if they are so advanced in knowledgeof chemistry, they must supply the proper chemicals to make branches andleaves grow again.Brahmananda Swami: Knowledge means that one must be able to demonstratehis theory. They should be able to show in their laboratories that lifeis caused by a combination of chemicals.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, the scientific method means first observation,then hypothesis, and then demonstration. But these scientists cannotdemonstrate their hypothesis. They simply observe and then speaknonsense.     Scientists say that the chemicals are the cause of life. But allthe chemicals that were there when the tree was living are stillpresent. And life energy is also there. There are thousands of microbesin the tree, and they are all living entities. No one can claim thatlife energy is lacking in the body of this tree.Dr. Singh: But what about the life energy of the tree itself?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that is the difference. The living force isindividual, and the particular individual living entity which was thetree has left. This must be the case, since all the chemicals that arenecessary to support life are still there yet the tree is dead.     Here is another example: suppose I am living in an apartment, andthen I leave it. I am gone, but many other living entities remain there--ants, spiders, and so forth. It is not true that simply because I haveleft the apartment, it can no longer accommodate life. Other livingentities are still living there. It is simply that I--an individualliving being--have left. The chemicals in the tree are like theapartment; they are simply the environment for the individual livingforce--the soul--to act through. Thus the scientists will never be ableto produce life in the chemical laboratory.     The so-called scientists say that life begins from chemicals. Butthe real question is, "Where have the chemicals come from?" Thechemicals come from life, and this means that life has mystic power. For
--- Page 146 ---
example, an orange tree contains many oranges, and each orange contains
chemicals--citric acid and others. So where have these chemicals comefrom? Obviously they have come from the life within the tree. Thescientists are missing the origin of the chemicals. They have startedtheir investigation from the chemicals, but they cannot identify theorigin of the chemicals. Chemicals come from the supreme life--God. Justas the living body of a man produces many chemicals, the supreme life(the Supreme Lord) is producing all the chemicals found in theatmosphere, in the water, in humans, in animals, and in the earth. Andthat is called mystic power. Unless the mystic power of the Supreme Lordis accepted, there is no solution to the problem of the origin of life.Dr. Singh: The scientists will reply that they cannot believe in mysticpower.Srila Prabhupada: But they must explain the origin of the chemicals.Anyone can see that an ordinary tree is producing many chemicals; theycannot deny it. But how does it produce them? Since they cannot answerthis, they must accept that the living force has mystic power. I cannotexplain how my fingernail is growing out of my finger; it is beyond thepower of my brain. In other words, it is growing by inconceivablepotency, or acintya-sakti. So if acintya-sakti exists in an ordinarybeing, imagine how much acintya-sakti God possesses.     The difference between God and me is that although I have the samepotencies as God, I can produce only a small quantity of chemicals,whereas He can produce enormous quantities. I can produce a little waterin the form of perspiration, but God can produce the seas. Analysis ofone drop of seawater gives you the qualitative analysis of the sea,without any mistake. Similarly, the ordinary living being is part andparcel of God, so by analyzing the living beings we can begin tounderstand God. In God there is great mystic potency. God's mysticpotency is working swiftly, exactly like an electric machine. Machinesoperate by certain energy, and they are so nicely made that all the workis done simply by pushing a button. Similarly, God said, "Let there becreation," and there was creation. Considered in this way, the workingsof nature are not very difficult to understand. God has such wonderfulpotencies that the creation, on His order alone, immediately takesplace.Brahmananda Swami: Scientists don't accept God or acintya-sakti.Srila Prabhupada: That is their rascaldom. God exists, and His acintya-sakti also exists.Karandhara dasa: Scientists say that life was created biochemically.Srila Prabhupada: And I say to them: "Why don't you create life? Yourbiology and chemistry are very advanced, so why don't you create life?"Karandhara dasa: They say they will create life in the future.Srila Prabhupada: When in the future? If the scientists know thecreative process, why can't they create life now? If life has abiochemical origin, and if biologists and chemists are so advanced, thenwhy can't they create life in their laboratories? When this crucialpoint is raised, they say, "We shall do it in the future." Why in thefuture? That is nonsense. Trust no future, however pleasant. What is themeaning of their advancement? They are talking nonsense.Karandhara dasa: They say that they are right on the verge of creatinglife.Srila Prabhupada: But that is also the future, in a different way. Theymust accept that they still do not know the truth about the origin of
--- Page 147 ---
life. Since they are expecting to be able to create life in the future,
presently their knowledge must be imperfect. Their proposal is somethinglike giving someone a postdated check. Suppose I owe you ten thousanddollars and I say, "Yes, I will pay you the entire sum with thispostdated check. Is that all right?" If you are intelligent, you willcan see something tangible." Similarly, the scientists cannot produceeven a single blade of grass by biochemistry, yet still they claim thatlife is produced from matter. What is this nonsense? Is no onequestioning this? We can prove that life began from life. Here is theproof: when a father begets a child, the father is living, and the childis living. But where is the scientist's proof that life comes frommatter? We can prove that life begins from life, and we can also provethat the original life is Krsna. But what evidence exists that a childis ever born out of a dead stone? The scientists cannot prove that lifecomes from matter. They are leaving that aside for the future.Karandhara dasa: The basis of what the scientists call "scientificintegrity" is that they talk only about what they can experience throughtheir senses.Srila Prabhupada: Then they are suffering from what we call "DoctorFrog's philosophy." There was once a frog who had lived all his life ina well. One day a friend visited him and informed him of the existenceof the Atlantic Ocean.     "Oh, what is this Atlantic Ocean?" asked the frog in the well.     "It is a vast body of water," his friend replied.     "How vast? ls it double the size of this well?"     "Oh, no, much larger," his friend replied.     "How much larger? Ten times the size?"     In this way the frog went on calculating. But what was thepossibility of his ever understanding the depths and fur reaches of thegreat ocean? Our faculties, experience, and powers of speculation arealways limited. The frog was always thinking in terms relative to hiswell. He had no power to think otherwise. Similarly, the scientists areestimating the Absolute Truth, the cause of all causes, with theirimperfect senses and minds, and thus they are bound to be bewildered.The essential fault of the so-called scientists is that they haveadopted the inductive process to arrive at their conclusions. Forexample, if a scientist wants to determine whether or not man is mortalby the inductive process, he must study every man to try to discover ifsome or one of them may be immortal. The scientist says, "I cannotaccept the proposition that all men are mortal. There may be some menwho are immortal. I have not yet seen every man. Therefore how can Iaccept that man is mortal?" This is called the inductive process. Andthe deductive process means that your father, your teacher, or your gurusays that man is mortal, and you accept it.Dr. Singh: So there is an ascending process of gaining knowledge and adescending process?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. The ascending process will never be successful,because it relies on information gathered through the senses, and thesenses are imperfect. So we accept the descending process.     God cannot be known by the inductive process. Therefore He iscalled adhoksaja, which means "unknowable by direct perception." Thescientists say there is no God, because they are trying to understand bydirect perception. But He is adhoksaja; therefore the scientists areignorant of God because they are missing the method of knowing Him. In
--- Page 148 ---
order to understand transcendental science, one must approach a bona
fide spiritual master, hear from him submissively, and render service tohim. Lord Krsna explains this in the Bhagavad-gita (4.34): tad viddhipranipatena pariprasnena sevaya.Dr. Singh: There is a scientific journal called Nature. It containsarticles concerning natural products like plants and animals, but itdoes not mention God--only nature.Srila Prabhupada: We may correctly observe that plants are beingproduced by nature, but we must ask, "What has produced nature?" To askthis question is intelligence.Dr. Singh: The scientists don't think about that. Srila Prabhupada: Sothey are fools. As soon as we speak of nature, the next question shouldbe, "Whose nature?" For instance, I speak of my nature, and you speak ofyour nature. Therefore, as soon as nature is mentioned, the next inquiryshould be, "Whose nature?"     Nature means energy, and as soon as you speak of energy, you mustaccept that there is a source of that energy. For example, the source ofelectric energy is the electric powerhouse. Electricity is not producedautomatically. We must install a powerhouse and a generator. Similarly,in the Vedas it is said that material nature is working under Krsna'sdirection.Dr. Singh: So do you mean to say that science has started from anintermediate point--not from the original point?Srila Prabhupada: Yes, that is it exactly. They are ignorant of theorigin. The scientists start from one point--but where does that pointcome from? That they do not know, in spite of vast research. One has toaccept that the original source is God, who is full of all mystic powersand from whom everything emanates. He Himself says in the Bhagavad-gita(10.8): aham sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam pravartate, "I am thesource of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates fromMe." Our conclusions are not based on blind faith; they are mostscientific. Matter comes from life. In life--in the origin--there areunlimited material resources; that is the great mystery of creation.     Modern scientific research is just like Sankhya philosophy, whichanalyzes material elements. Sankhya means "to count." We are alsoSankhya philosophers to some extent, because we count and analyze thematerial elements; this is land, this is water, this is air, this issunshine, this is fire. Furthermore, I can count my mind, myintelligence, and my ego. Beyond my ego, however, I cannot count. ButKrsna says that there is existence beyond the ego, and that existence isthe living force--the spirit soul. This is what the scientists do notknow. They think that life is merely a combination of material elements,but Krsna denies this in the Bhagavad-gita (7.5). Apareyam itas tv anyamprakrtim viddhi me param: "Besides this inferior nature there is asuperior energy of Mine." The inferior energy is the material elements,and the superior energy is the living entity.
                            bhumir apo 'nalo vayuh
                           kham mano buddhir eva ca                              ahankara itiyam me                           bhinna prakrtir astadha
     "Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence, and false ego-
-all together these eight comprise My separated material energies." (Bg.
--- Page 149 ---
7.4) Krsna explains here in the Bhagavad-gita that vayu (gas) comes from
Him, and that finer than the gases is kham (ether). Finer than ether isthe mind, finer than the mind is intelligence, and finer than theintelligence is the soul. But the scientists do not know this. They canperceive only gross things. They mention vayu, but where does the vayucome from? Where does the gas come from?Dr. Singh: That they cannot answer.Srila Prabhupada: But we can answer. We have the knowledge that gascomes from kham, or ether, and ether comes from mind, mind comes fromintelligence, and intelligence comes from Krsna's superior energy, thespirit soul.Dr. Singh: Are both inferior and superior energies studied in Sankhyaphilosophy?Srila Prabhupada: No. Sankhya philosophers do not know of superiorenergy. They simply analyze the material elements, just as thescientists do. Neither the scientists nor the Sankhya philosophers knowanything of the spirit soul. They are simply analyzing Krsna's materialenergy.Dr. Singh: They are analyzing the creative material elements?Srila Prabhupada: Material elements are not creative! The soul iscreative. No one can create life with only matter, and matter cannotcreate itself. You, a living entity, can mix hydrogen and oxygen tocreate water. But matter itself has no creative energy. If you place abottle of hydrogen near a bottle of oxygen, will they automaticallycombine, without your help?Dr. Singh: No. They must be mixed.Srila Prabhupada: Yes, the superior energy--the living entity--isrequired. Oxygen and hydrogen are inferior energy, but when the superiorenergy mixes them, then they can become water.     Inferior energy has no power unless superior energy is involved.This sea [indicating the Pacific Ocean] is calm and quiet. But whensuperior force--air--pushes it, high waves are created. The sea has nopower without the superior force. Similarly, there is another forcesuperior to the air, and another, and another, until we arrive at Krsna,the most superior force. This is real research. Suppose a railroad trainis just starting to move. The engine pushes one car, which pushesanother, and so on, until the entire train is moving. And the wholemotion originates with the engineer, a living entity. Similarly, in thecosmic creation, Krsna gives the first push, and then, by means of manysuccessive pushes, the entire cosmic manifestation comes into being.This is explained in the Bhagavad-gita (9.10): mayadhyaksena prakrtihsuyate sa-caracaram. "This material nature is working under Mydirection, O son of Kunti, and is producing all moving and unmovingbeings." And a little later:
                            sarva-yonisu kaunteya
                          murtayah sambha vanti yah                           tasam brahma mahad yonir                            aham bija-pradah pita
     "All species of life are made possible by birth in material nature,
and I am the seed-giving father." (Bg. 14.4) For example, if we sow abanyan seed, a huge tree eventually grows up and produces millions ofnew seeds. Each of these seeds, in turn, produces another tree with
--- Page 150 ---
millions of new seeds, and so on. So Krsna is the original seed-giving
father.     Unfortunately, the scientists only observe the immediate cause;they do not perceive the remote cause. There are two causes--theimmediate cause and the remote cause. Krsna is described in the Vedas assarva-karana-karanam, the cause of all causes. If you understand thecause of all causes, then you understand everything. Yasmin vijnatesarvam evam vijnatam bhavati: "If you know the original cause, thelater, subordinate causes are automatically known." Although thescientists are searching after the original cause, when the Vedas, whichcontain perfect knowledge, give the original cause, they won't accept.They keep to their partial, imperfect knowledge.Dr. Singh: Scientists are worried about energy sources, and now they areworking to utilize solar energy for cooking, lighting, and various otherpurposes. They are hoping that when they exhaust all other energysources, they will be able to use solar energy.Srila Prabhupada: This is not a very new theory. Everyone knows thatbecause the roots of trees store the sun's energy, it is possible to getfire from a tree. These scientists are tiny creatures, but they are veryproud. We don't give them credit, because they are simply stating whateveryone knows. As soon as you cut a tree, you cannot get fire from it.It has to be dried in the sun. When the energy is gathered from the sun,the tree can be utilized for fire. Actually everything is beingmaintained by the sun's energy, but the scientists don't know where thesun's energy comes from. In the Bhagavad-gita (15.12) Krsna says:
                            yad aditya-gatam tejo
                           jagad bhasayate 'khilam                          yac candramasi yac cagnau                           tat tejo viddhi mamakam
     "The splendor of the sun, which dissipates the darkness of this
whole world, comes from Me. And the splendor of the moon and thesplendor of fire are also from Me."     Again, Krsna says, jyotisam ra vir amsuman: "Of lights I am theradiant sun." (Bg. 10.21) Also, in the Eleventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gita Arjuna tells Krsna, sasi-surya-netram: "The sun and moon are amongYour great, unlimited eyes." This knowledge is contained in theBhagavad-gita, but scientists cannot attain this knowledge by theirspeculation. Can they?Dr. Singh: It is not possible.Srila Prabhupada: And what is their knowledge? The scriptures say thateven if you counted all the grains of sand on earth, you still would notbe able to understand God. All this material counting does not mean thatyou have the capacity to understand the unlimited. But it is even beyondtheir capacity to count all the material things. Why are the scientistsso proud of their energy and capacities? They do not even know of thematerial things, and what to speak of the spiritual. As far asscientists and other living entities are concerned, their knowledge islimited. But this is not so for Krsna. If we receive knowledge fromKrsna, that knowledge is perfect. In the scriptures we receiveinformation that there are nine hundred thousand species of lifeexisting within the ocean. The information given in the scriptures isexact, because it comes from Krsna, and as Krsna Himself says: "As the
--- Page 151 ---
Supreme Personality of Godhead, I know everything that has happened in
the past, all that is happening in the present, and all things that areyet to come." (Bg. 7.26)Dr. Singh: We have to take knowledge from the supreme knower.Srila Prabhupada: for perfect knowledge we have to approach a superiorperson, a guru. One may try to learn a subject by reading books at home,but he can learn much better by going to college and approaching aprofessor. In the same way, we have to approach a guru. Of course, if weencounter a false guru, our knowledge is false. But if our guru isperfect, our knowledge is perfect. We accept Krsna as our guru. If He isperfect in knowledge, our knowledge is also perfect. As far as we'reconcerned, we do not have to be perfect in ourselves, but if we receiveknowledge from the perfect, our knowledge is perfect. We cannot say thatwe understand that there are nine hundred thousand species of life inthe ocean because we have studied the entire ocean. Rather, we say thatwe take this information from scriptures, and therefore it is perfect.This is the Vedic process.     Scientists may carry out much research work, but however great ascientist may be, his senses are imperfect. Therefore he cannot haveperfect knowledge. What is the value of our eyes? We cannot see withoutsunlight, nor can we see small things without a microscope. Our eyes areimperfect, and the instruments our eyes have discovered are alsoimperfect. How, then, is it possible to get perfect knowledge? Becausethe living entity is limited, his knowledge is limited. A child may knowthat two plus two equals four, but when he speaks of higher mathematics,we do not take him seriously. The senses through which a scientistacquires knowledge are limited and imperfect; therefore his knowledge islimited and imperfect. In his ignorance he may claim to know everything,but that is simply nonsense.     A blind man may lead another blind man, but what does it avail themwhen they both fall into a ditch? The laws of nature bind us hand andfoot, yet we think we are free to speculate. This is illusion. Althoughconditioned by so many of nature's laws, the rascals think they arefree. Yet if there is a cloud, they cannot see the sun. What power havewe to see? Only when nature's laws give us some facility are we able tosee. Indeed, we can only experiment under certain conditions, and if theconditions are not favorable, our experiments fail. Why then are we soproud of experimental knowledge?     Why experiment? Things are already there. The sun's energy isthere, given by God for us to use. What else is there to know? So manyapples fall from trees. What further need is there to explain the law ofgravity? Actually the scientists are lacking in common sense. They aresimply concerned with "scientific" explanations. They say the law ofgravity works only under certain conditions, but who has made theseconditions? When Krsna appeared as Lord Ramacandra, He threw stones onthe water, and the stones floated. The law of gravity did not work inthat case. Therefore the law of gravity works only under the directionof the Supreme Lord. The law in itself is not final. A king may give alaw, but he can change that law immediately. The ultimate law-giver isKrsna, and a law will only work by His will. Scientists try to explainGod's will in so many ways, but because they are conditioned by maya,illusion, they can only talk like a person haunted by ghosts. Tell me,what is the scientific explanation that accounts for all the varietiesof trees?
--- Page 152 ---
Karandhara dasa: They say that nature mutates and makes these varieties.
Srila Prabhupada: Then it must be nature's will. And what is that will?Does the land have any will?Karandhara dasa: Well, they are very vague on that point.Srila Prabhupada: That means that they do not have perfect knowledge.They do not know that behind nature is the will of Krsna.Dr. Singh: They explain that the chemical composition of these differentplants is different.Srila Prabhupada: That's all right, but who made these chemicalcompositions? As soon as you say "chemical composition," you immediatelyrequire a God.Karandhara dasa: They say there is no need for a God, because if you mixtwo chemicals together...Srila Prabhupada: God or not, there must be some will. There must besome consciousness. Two chemicals mix and produce such and such. Whomixes them? Consciousness is there. Well, that consciousness is Krsna.There is consciousness everywhere, and as soon as you accept thatconsciousness, you must accept consciousness as a person. Therefore, wespeak of Krsna consciousness. In the Bhagavad-gita it is stated thatconsciousness is all-pervading. You may have consciousness, and I mayhave consciousness, but there is another consciousness, which is all-pervading. My consciousness is limited to my body, and yourconsciousness is limited to yours, but there is another consciousness,which is within you, me, and everyone. That is Krsna consciousness.     Actually everything in the world is relative. That is a scientificfact. Our bodies, lives, intelligence, and everything else are allrelative. To us an ant may seem to have a very short life, but for theant his life is about a hundred years in duration. That hundred years isrelative to the body. Similarly, Brahma, who lives fantastically longfrom our point of view, only lives a hundred years from his point ofview. This is relativity.Karandhara dasa: Then the relativity is based upon our individualsituation.Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Therefore it is said that what is food for one ispoison for another. People are thinking that because they cannot surviveon the moon, no other living entities can. Everyone thinks of things ina relative way, in his own terms. This is the meaning of "frogphilosophy." The frog is always thinking of things in relation to hiswell. He has no power to conceive of the Atlantic Ocean, because hiswell is his only experience. God is great, but we are thinking of God'sgreatness in our own terms, in terms of relative greatness. Some insectsare born at night; they grow at night, have their children at night, anddie at night. They never see the sun; therefore they conclude that thereis no such thing as day. If you asked the insect about the morning, hewould say, "There cannot be any morning." Similarly, when people hear ofBrahma's long duration of life from the scriptures, they do not believeit. They say, "How can anyone live for such a long time?" In theBhagavad-gita (8.17) Krsna states:
                            sahasra-yuga-paryantam
                           ahar yad brahmano viduh                           ratrim yuga-sahasrantam                           te 'ho-ratra-vido janah
--- Page 153 ---
     "By human calculation, a thousand ages taken together is the
duration of Brahma's one day. And such also is the duration of hisnight."     Thus Brahma, by these calculations, lives for so many millions andtrillions of years. We cannot believe this, although evidence is givenin the scriptures. In other words, we conclude that Krsna talksnonsensically, while we speak as authorities. Even great scholars saythat these scriptural statements are all mental speculations. Althoughthese men are nothing but rascals, they pass for reputable scholars.They place themselves above God's position by attempting to refute ordeny the statements of God in the revealed scriptures. In this way somany fools in the guise of scholars, scientists, and philosophers aremisguiding the whole world.Dr. Singh: Of course, so much is being written about Darwin's theory. Inany library there are hundreds of books on his theories.Srila Prabhupada: Do they accept or reject them?Dr. Singh: Generally they accept him, but there are some who are verycritical.Srila Prabhupada: Darwin speaks about the evolution of the species oflife, but he has no real information about spiritual evolution. Be knowsnothing about the progress of the spirit soul from lower forms of lifeto higher forms. He claims that man has evolved from monkeys, but we cansee that the monkey is not extinct. If the monkey is the immediateforefather of man, why is the monkey still existing?Dr. Singh: Darwin says that the species are not created independentlybut are descended from one another.Srila Prabhupada: If there is no question of independence, how can heabruptly begin with a certain species? He must explain how the originalspecies came into existence.Karandhara dasa: Scientists claim that the earth was created bybiological chemistry, and they refuse to teach that God created theearth, because they think everyone will consider them fools.Srila Prabhupada: If their biology and chemistry are so advanced, whydon't they create something? They claim they may be able to create lifein the future, but why in the future? Life is already created. Isscience based on the future? We should trust no future, however pleasantwe may think it will be. Everyone is thinking the future will be verypleasant, but what assurance do we have of this? They have to acceptthat they do not know what the truth actually is. They cannot evenproduce a spear of grass through their biological or chemicalexperiments. Nonetheless they are claiming that the creation is producedby some chemical or biological method. Why does no one question all thisnonsense?Dr. Singh: In the ultimate analysis, when they consider the origin oflife, they say that everything started from matter. In other words,living matter comes from nonliving matter.Srila Prabhupada: From where is this living matter coming now? Did itcome from nonliving matter in the past and not at the present? How isthe ant coming? Is it materializing from dirt? Even an ant does not comefrom inert matter. What proof do they have of such a theory? Darwinclaims that in the distant past no really intelligent man existed, thatman simply evolved from the apes. If there was no intelligent brain inthe past, how is it that these Vedic scriptures were written thousandsand thousands of years ago? How do they explain a sage like Vyasadeva?
--- Page 154 ---
Dr. Singh: They have no explanation. They simply say these are unknown
forest sages.Srila Prabhupada: Vyasadeva may be unknown to them, but nonetheless hewas there. How is it he got such a brain? He may be unknown to you or tome, but nonetheless his brain-work is there, his philosophy is there,his language, linguistics, poetic arrangements, and verbal strength. Youmay not know the person, but you can understand the brain.Dr. Singh: Weren't all the varieties of animals existing from thebeginning?Srila Prabhupada: Yes. Simultaneous creation is verified by theBhagavad-gita. All the varieties of animals and men as well as demigodswere existing from the beginning. A living entity wants a certain typeof body, and Krsna gives it to him. Because he desires things in acertain way, he associates with certain qualities of nature in matter.According to his association, he receives a particular type of body. Thepsychological forces, the mind, thinking, feeling, and willing determinethe particular type of situation and body the living entity receives.The evolutionary process is there, but it is not an evolution ofspecies. It is not that one species of life develops from another, for,as Krsna states:
                          avyaktad vyaktayah sarvah
                           prabha vanty ahar-agame                            ratry-agame praliyante                           tatraivavyakta-samjnake
     "When Brahma's day is manifest, this multitude of living entities
comes into being, and at the arrival of Brahma's night they are allannihilated." (Bg. 8.18)     The evolution is the spiritual evolution of the individual livingentity through the various species of life. If one enters into the bodyof a fish, he has to undergo the evolutionary process step by step. Ifone is on the top of the stairs and somehow falls down, he again has togo up the evolutionary staircase step by step. Of course, the scientistsare busy making so much research that they cannot understand this. Ifyou tell them they are going to be trees in their next life, they thinkyou are speaking nonsense. After all, what can we learn by research?When the cause of all causes is known, then everything knowable becomesknown, and nothing remains unknown. As the Vedas state: yasmin vijnatesarvam evam vijnatam bhavati. If we know the Absolute Truth, all othertruths become known, but if we don't know the Absolute Truth, we are inignorance. One may not be an official scientist or philosopher, but hemay challenge anyone and talk boldly if he only knows one thing--Krsna.     This contemporary civilization is so proud of its independence, butactually it is so much dependent on oil. If the oil supply is stopped,then what will these rascal scientists do? They cannot do anything. Letthem try to manufacture oil in their test tubes, enough oil to run theircivilization on. At present there is a scarcity of water in India. Whatcan the scientists do about this? They may know the chemical compositionof water, but they cannot produce it when there is a great scarcity.They require the help of clouds, and all that is God's manipulation.Actually they cannot do anything. They have gone to the moon, but forall their labor they have simply taken away some dust and rocks. Therascal government exacts taxes and spends money unnecessarily. This is
--- Page 155 ---
their intelligence. It is a state of asses, that's all. The politicians
have no sympathy or compassion. They do not consider that the hard-earned money is coming from the public and that they are spending it byshooting big rockets off to other planets. All they do is promise tobring back more dust. First they may get a handful of dust, then theypromise to bring back tons of dust. What is the meaning of all this?Karandhara dasa: They believe that there may be life on Mars.Srila Prabhupada: They may believe or not believe--what is the gain?What we do know is that life is here. They know this, yet they areengaged in fighting and in killing life. Here is life. Here is a humanbeing. Life is here undoubtedly. But they are busy trying to destroy itwith their big bombs. This is their scientific advancement.Dr. Singh: They are very curious to know what is going on, on otherplanets.Srila Prabhupada: That means that for their childish curiosity they arespending so much money. They can spend so much to satisfy theircuriosity, but when so many poverty-stricken countries ask them forhelp, they say there is no money. They are very proud to go to the moon,but why don't they take information how to go to Krsna's GolokaVrndavana? If they go there, all their curiosity will be satisfied. Theywill learn that beyond this inferior energy there is indeed a superior,spiritual energy. This material energy cannot work independently. Thespiritual energy has to join it. Material elements are not created ofthemselves. It is the soul that is creative. We may try to makesomething with matter, but matter does not create itself. Hydrogen andoxygen will come in contact only when moved by the superior energy. Onlyfools can expect the entire cosmic manifestation, which is only matter,to come into being automatically. We may have a nice car, but if thereis no driver, what is its use? Unless a man knows how to work a machine,unless a man pushes a button, the machine does not work. Similarly,without the superior energy, the material energy cannot act. Behind thiswonderful cosmic manifestation is the direction of a superior energy.All this information is given in the scriptures, but still people willnot believe it.     Actually everything is God's property, but people are claiming thisproperty to be theirs or their country's. Now they are talking about theproblem of overpopulation, but the fact is that God has supplied enough.Actually there is enough land and enough food if it is properly used.People are artificially creating problems, and the scientists arehelping them by giving them so many destructive devices. They simplyencourage the rascals and rogues who are trying to use up God'sproperty. If you help a murderer or a thief, you also become a criminal.Is that not so? There is so much trouble in the world because thescientists are helping all the thieves and rogues. Thus they are allcriminals. Stena eva sah. One who does not recognize the proprietorshipof the Supreme Lord is a thief.     Our mission is to bring these rascals to their senses. Now one mustfind out the means to do this. The rascals are suffering, but becausethey are sons of God they should not suffer. They do not know that thereis God or that there is happiness. They know nothing of bliss or ofeternal life. They are carrying on so much research and living forfifty, sixty, or seventy years. After that they do not know what isgoing to happen. They have no knowledge that life is eternal. Actuallytheir position is like that of an animal. An animal does not know what
--- Page 156 ---
is after death, nor does he actually contemplate death. He does not know
why he is here, nor does he know the value of life. Under the influenceof maya, the animal simply goes on eating, sleeping, defending, mating,and dying. That's all. People are endeavoring so hard, but for whatpurpose? They say that they are struggling so hard to make provisionsfor the next generation, but what are the provisions for? They cannotreply to that. This Krsna consciousness movement is meant to give realpurpose to life by establishing Krsna, God, as the center of everything.It is therefore to the scientist's benefit to understand this importantmovement.
“Science of Self-Realization”  by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta
Swami Prabhupada.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of
this book, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended forpersonal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelinesestablished by international copyright laws. You may use this electronicfile to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your own privateuse, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, studentpapers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluationcopy to others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyrightinformation intact. You may not reproduce more than ten percent (10%) ofthis book in any media without the express written permission from thecopyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Science of Self-Realization” by A.C. BhaktivedantaSwami, courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International,
www.Krishna.com    .”
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1977-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book
Trust International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or toevaluate dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website ofthe publishers, 
   www.Krishna.com    .