II
FIRST LOVE
Self-worth cannot be verified by others. You are
worthy because you say it is so. If you depend on
others for your value it is other-worth.
You may have a social disease, one that will not go away with a
simple injection. You are quite possibly infected with the sepsis of
low-esteem, and the only known cure is a massive dose of self-love.
But perhaps, like many in our society, you’ve grown up with the
idea that loving yourself is wrong. Think of others, society tells us.
Love thy neighbor, the church admonishes. What nobody seems to
remember is love thyself, and yet that is precisely what you’re going
to have to learn to do if you are to achieve present-moment happi-
ness.
You learned as a child that loving yourself, which was a natural
thing for you then, was akin to being selfish or conceited. You learned
to put others ahead of you, to think of others first because that
showed you were a “good” person. You learned self-effacement and
were nurtured on instructions like “share your things with your
cousins.” It didn’t matter that they were
28
--- PAGE 37 ---
your treasures, your prized possessions, or that mommy or daddy
might not be sharing their big-people toys with others. You may
even have been told that you were to “be seen and not heard” and
that “you ought to know your place.”
Children just naturally think of themselves as beautiful and terribly
important, but by adolescence society’s messages have taken root.
Self-doubt is in full bloom. And the reinforcements continue as the
years pass. After all, you’re not supposed to go around loving
yourself. What will others think of you!
The hints are subtle and not malicious in intent, but they do keep
the individual in line. From parents and immediate family members
to schools, churches and friends, the child learns all those fine social
amenities that are the hallmarks of the adult world. Kids never acted
that way with each other, except to please older folks. Always say
please and thank you, curtsy, stand up when an adult enters, ask
permission to leave the table, tolerate the endless cheek pinching
and head patting. The message was clear: adults are important; kids
don’t count. Others are significant; you are insignificant. Don’t trust
your own judgment was corollary number one, and there was a full
cargo of reinforcers that came under the subheading of “politeness.”
These rules, disguised under the word manners,  helped you to intern-
alize the judgments of others at the expense of your own values. It’s
not surprising that those same question marks and self-denying
definitions persist into adulthood. And how do these self-doubts
get in the way? In the important area of loving others you may be
having a difficult time. Giving love to others is directly related to
how much love you have for yourself.
Love: A Suggested Definition
Love is a word that has as many definitions as there are people
to define it. Try this one on for size. The ability and willingness to allow
those that you care for to be what they chooseFIRST LOVE  / 29
--- PAGE 38 ---
for themselves, without any insistence that they satisfy you.  This may be
a workable definition, but the fact remains that so few are able to
adopt it for themselves. How can you reach the point of being able
to let others be what they choose without insisting they meet your
expectations? Very simple. By loving yourself. By feeling that you
are important, worthy and beautiful. Once you recognize just how
good you are, you won’t have to have others reinforce your value
or values by making their behavior conform to your dictates. If
you’re secure in yourself, you neither want nor need others to be
like you. For one thing, you’re unique. For another, that would rob
them of their own uniqueness, and what you love in them are just
those traits that make them special and separate. It begins to fit. You
get good at loving yourself, and suddenly you’re able to love others,
to give to others, and do for others by giving and doing for yourself
first. Then there are no gimmicks to your giving. You’re not doing
it for the thanks or the payoffs but because of the genuine pleasure
you get from being a helper or a lover.
If the you is someone unworthy, or unloved by you, then giving
becomes impossible. How can you give love if you’re worthless?
What would your love be worth? And if you can’t give love, neither
can you receive it. After all what can the love be worth if it’s be-
stowed on a worthless person. The entire business of being in love,
giving and receiving, starts with a self that is totally loved.
Take Noah, a middle-aged man who claimed to love his wife and
children dearly. To show his affections he bought them expensive
gifts, took them on luxurious holidays, and was always careful when
away on business trips to sign his letters “love.” Yet Noah could
never bring himself to tell his wife or children that he loved them.
He had the same problem with his parents of whom he was tremend-
ously fond. Noah wanted to say the words; they ran through his
head repeatedly, yet every time he tried to say “I love you,” he got
all choked up.
In Noah’s head the words “I love you” meant he was putting
himself on the line. If he said “I love you,” someone must an-30 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 39 ---
swer “I love you, too, Noah.” His statement of love must be met
with an affirmation of his own self-worth. Saying those words was
taking too much of a chance for Noah, for they might not be
answered and then his entire value would be in question. If, on the
other hand, Noah could start with the premise that he was lovable,
he would experience no difficulty in the “I love you.” If he didn’t
get the desired, “I love you, too, Noah,” then he would see that as
having nothing to do with his own self-worth, since that was intact
before he ever started. Whether or not he was loved in return would
be his wife’s problem, or whomever Noah was loving at the moment.
He might want the other person’s love, but it would not be essential
to his self-worth.
You can challenge all of your self-feelings in terms of your ability
to love yourself. Remember, at no time, under no circumstance is
self-hate healthier than self-love. Even if you have behaved in a way
that you dislike, loathing yourself will only lead to immobilization
and damage. Instead of hating yourself, develop positive feelings.
Learn from the error, and resolve not to repeat it but don’t associate
it with your self-worth.
Here is the guts of both self-and other-directed love. Never confuse
your self-worth (which is a given) with your behavior, or the beha-
vior of others toward you. Once again, it isn’t easy. The messages
of society are overpowering. “You’re a bad boy,” rather than “You’ve
behaved badly.” “Mommy doesn’t like you when you behave that
way” as opposed to “Mommy doesn’t like the way you behave.”
The conclusions that you may have adopted from these messages
are, “She doesn’t like me, I must be a nerd” instead of, “She doesn’t
like me. That’s her decision, and while I don’t like it, I’m still import-
ant.” R. D. Laing’s Knots  sums up the process of internalizing others’
thoughts and equating them with one’s self-worth.
My mother loves me.
I feel good.
I feel good because she loves me.FIRST LOVE  / 31
--- PAGE 40 ---
My mother does not love me.
I feel bad.
I feel bad because she does not love me.
I am bad because I feel bad.
I feel bad because I am bad.
I am bad because she does not love me.
She does not love me because I am bad.*
The habits of thought of childhood are not easily outgrown. Your
own self-image may still be based upon others’ perceptions of you.
While it is true that your original self-profiles were learned from the
opinions of adults, it is not true that you must carry them around
with you forever. Yes, it is tough to shed those old shackles and
wipe clean those unhealed scars, but hanging onto them is even
tougher when you consider the consequences. With mental practice
you can make some self-loving choices that will amaze you.
Who are the folks who are good at loving? Are they self-demolish-
ing in their behavior? Never. Do they put themselves down and hide
in the corner? Not so. Getting good at giving and receiving love
starts at home, with you, with a vow to end any low self-esteem
behaviors that have become a way of life.
Tuning into Self-Acceptance
First you must destroy the myth that you have one single self-
concept, and that it is either positive or negative all of the time. You
have many self-images, and they vary from moment to moment. If
you were asked, “Do you like yourself?” you might be inclined to
lump all of your negative self-thoughts together into a collective
“No.” Breaking down the areas of dislike into specifics will give you
definite goals to work on.
*R. D. Laing, Knots  (New York: Vintage Books, 1970), p. 9.32 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 41 ---
You have feelings about yourself physically, intellectually, socially
and emotionally. You have an opinion about your abilities in music,
athletics, art, mechanical undertakings, writing and on and on. Your
self-portraits are as numerous as your activities, and through all of
these behaviors there is always YOU, the person that you either ac-
cept or reject. Your self-worth, that friendly ever-present shadow,
your consultant for personal happiness and personal mastery, must
be unrelated to your self-assessments. You exist. You are human.
That is all you need. Your worth is determined by you, and with no
need for an explanation to anyone. And your worthiness, a given,
has nothing to do with your behavior and feelings. You may not like
your behavior in a given instance, but that has nothing to do with
your self-worth. You can choose to be worthy to yourself forever,
and then get on with the task of working on your self-images.
Loving Your Body
It all begins with the physical you. Do you like your body? If you
answered no, try breaking it down into its component parts. Make
a list of the items that you find objectionable. Starting at the top:
your hair, your forehead, eyes, eyelids, cheeks. Do you like your
mouth, nose, teeth and neck? How about your arms, fingers, breasts
and stomach? Make a long list. Include the innards as well. Your
kidneys, spleen, arteries and femurs. Now go to the obscure ingredi-
ents that make up you. How about your Rolandic fissure, cochlea,
pinna, adrenal glands and uvula? You’ve got to make a very long
list to check yourself out thoroughly. You don’t have a nice body;
you are your body; and disliking it means not accepting yourself as
a human being.
Perhaps you do have some physical attributes you dislike. If they
are parts of your body which can be changed, make changing them
one of your goals. If your stomach is too big or yourFIRST LOVE  / 33
--- PAGE 42 ---
hair the wrong color for you, you can see them as choices you made
in an earlier present moment, and make new present-moment de-
cisions about them. Those parts which you disapprove and which
cannot be changed (legs too long, eyes too narrow, breasts too small
or too large) can be viewed in a new light. Nothing is too anything,
and long legs are no better or worse than hair or non-hair. What you
have done is bought contemporary society’s definition of beauty.
Don’t let others dictate what will be attractive to you. Decide to like
the physical you and declare it as worthy and attractive to you,
thereby rejecting the comparisons and opinions of others. You can
decide what is pleasing and make nonacceptance of yourself a thing
of the past.
You are a human being. Human beings have certain odors, make
certain sounds and have certain growths of hair. But society and
industry send out certain messages about the human physical con-
dition. Be ashamed of these human characteristics, they say. Learn
masking behavior—especially if you mask the real you with our
product. Don’t accept yourself; hide the real you.
You can’t get through an hour of television without getting the
message. The advertisements that bombard you daily tell you to be
contemptuous of the way your mouth, underarms, feet, skin and
even genitals smell. “Change to our product and feel real and natural
again.” As if the way you are is unnatural and you should go around
sending out cosmetic odors in order to like yourself better. So you
deodorize each orifice with the right smelling stuff, because you
don’t accept a part of yourself that exists in all human beings.
I know of a thirty-two-year-old man, Frank, who has learned to
reject all of his bodily functions labeling them as disgusting and
unmentionable. Frank is compulsively clean about his body to the
point of being uncomfortable whenever he sweats, and he expects
the same kind of starchy-clean behavior from his wife and children.
He rushes for the shower to rid himself of any of-34 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 43 ---
fensive odors after mowing the lawn or playing a set of tennis.
Moreover, he cannot have sex unless both he and his wife shower
before and after. He cannot tolerate his own normal body odors, nor
can he live with anyone who is more accepting of himself. Frank
sprays his bathroom, uses a multitude of cosmetic products to keep
himself smelling good, and he is concerned about anyone else dis-
liking him when he becomes human and begins smelling like one.
Frank has learned to reject his natural body functions and odors. He
has adopted attitudes that reflect personal self-rejection, by either
being embarrassed or apologetic whenever he allows his body to be
natural. But being human means having many natural odors, and
the person who is working at self-love and self-acceptance is in no
way offended by his natural self. In fact, if Frank were to be totally
honest about himself, and wiped out the learned messages of self-
rejection, he might even be able to admit to enjoying his own body
and all of the glorious odors it is capable of producing. While he
might not wish to share those odors with others, he would at least
be able to accept them in himself, tell himself that he, in fact, likes
them, and experience no shame around others.
Self-acceptance means liking the entire physical you, and elimin-
ating those cultural impositions to be proper or to merely tolerate
your body when it behaves other than in a cosmetic fashion. This
doesn’t mean you have to go around flaunting yourself, but it does
mean that you can learn to take private pleasure in being you.
Many women have accepted the cultural dispatches and behave
in ways that they are supposed to when it comes to their own bodies.
Shave your legs and underarms, deodorize yourself everywhere,
perfume your body with foreign odors, sterilize your mouth, make
up your eyes, lips, cheeks, pad your bra, spray your genitals with
the appropriate bouquet and falsify your fingernails. The implication
is that there is something unpleasant about the natural you, the es-
sentially human you, andFIRST LOVE  / 35
--- PAGE 44 ---
only by becoming artificial can you become attractive. That’s the
saddest part, that the end product is a fraudulent you that takes the
place of the natural self you carry around with you for most of your
life. You are being encouraged to reject that beautiful you. That ad-
vertisers would encourage you to do this is understandable in light
of profits to be made, but that you would buy the products is less
easy to understand in view of the fact that you’re choosing to throw
away the real you. You can stop hiding the beautiful, natural you.
Thus if you choose to use cosmetic aids of any kind, it will not be
based on disliking what you are covering up, but for reasons of
novelty or personal fulfillment. Being honest with yourself in this
realm is not easy, and it takes time to learn to distinguish what
pleases us from what the advertising business says should please
us.
Choosing More Positive Self-Images
It is possible to make the same kind of choices with all of your
self-images. You can choose to think of yourself as intelligent by
applying your very own standards to yourself. In fact, the happier
you make yourself, the more intelligent you are. If you are deficient
in any areas such as algebra, spelling or writing, it is simply the
natural result of choices you have been making up until now. Should
you decide to devote enough practice time to any of these tasks, you
would undoubtedly be more proficient in them. If your image of
yourself is of someone who is not too intelligent, remember what
we said about intelligence in Chapter I. If you underestimate your-
self, it is because you have bought that notion, and you compare
yourself to others on certain school-related variables.
It may surprise you to hear this, but you can choose to be as bright
as you desire. Aptitude is really a function of time, rather than some
inborn quality. One support for this belief can be found in the grade
norms for standardized achievement tests. These norms demonstrate
that scores achieved by the top stu-36 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 45 ---
dents at one grade level are achieved by the majority of students at
a later grade level. Further studies show that although most students
eventually reach mastery on each learning task, some students
achieve mastery much sooner than do others. * Yet the label “defi-
cient” or even “retarded” is often attached to those who move more
slowly toward absolute mastery of a skill. Listen to John Carroll as
he talks on this point in his article, “A Model for School Learning,”
which appeared in Teachers College Record:
Aptitude is the amount of time required by the learner to attain
mastery of a learning task. Implicit in this formulation is the
assumption that, given enough time, all students can conceiv-
ably attain mastery of a learning task.
With enough time and effort you could, if you so chose, master
almost any academic skill. But you don’t make that choice, for very
good reasons. Why should you put that kind of present-moment
energy into solving obscure problems or learning something that
doesn’t interest you. Being happy, living effectively and loving are
far greater goals. The point is that intelligence is not something that
you inherited or had otherwise bestowed upon you. You are as smart
as you choose to be. Not liking how smart you’ve chosen to be is
mere self-contempt, which can lead only to injurious consequences
in your own life.
The logic of being able to choose your self-pictures applies to all
of the photographs of you that are lodged in your brain. You are as
socially adept as you choose to be. If you dislike the way you behave
socially, you can work at changing the behavior and not confusing
it with your own self-worth. Similarly, your artistic, mechanical,
athletic, musical and other abilities are largely the result of choices
and should not be confused with your worthiness. (See Chapter IV
for a full treatment of your self-descriptions and why you’ve chosen
them for yourself.) In
*Benjamin S. Bloom, et al., Handbook on Formative and Summative Evaluation of
Student Learning  (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1971).FIRST LOVE  / 37
--- PAGE 46 ---
the same light, the preceding chapter made a case for your emotional
life being the product of your own choices. Self-acceptance based
upon what you believe to be appropriate for you is something you
can make a decision about now. Repairing those things that don’t
measure up can be a delightful undertaking, and there’s no reason
to choose to feel unworthy, just because there are things about
yourself that you’re going to improve.
Self-dislike can take many forms, and perhaps you engage in some
putting-down-of-yourself behavior. Here is a brief list of some typ-
ically recurring behavior that falls into this category of the self-veto.
• Rejecting compliments directed at you. (“Oh, this old thing….
I’m really not smart, just lucky I guess”…)
• Making up excuses for why you look nice. (“It’s my hairdresser,
she could make a toad look good”…“Believe me, it’s the wardrobe
that does it”…“Green is my color”…)
• Giving credit to others when it rightfully belongs to you. (“Thank
God for Michael, without him I would be nothing”…“Marie did all
the work, I just stood around and supervised”…)
• Using other-directed references when speaking. (“My husband
says”…“My mother feels”…“George always tells me that”…)
• Having your opinions verified by others. (“Isn’t that right
dear?”…“That’s what I said, didn’t I, Martha?”…“Just ask my hus-
band, he’ll tell you”…)
• Refusing to order something you want, not because you can’t
afford it (although this may be your stated reason) but because you
don’t feel that you’re worth it.
• Not having orgasms.
• Not buying yourself something because you think you have to
buy it for someone else, although sacrificing is not necessary;38 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 47 ---
or not treating yourself to the things you would like to own, because
you’re not worth it.
• Avoiding indulgences such as flowers, wine or whatever, which
you love because that would be wasteful.
• In a crowded room, someone yells out, “Hey, Stupid,” and you
turn around.
• Using pet names for yourself (and having others use them as
well) that are really put-downs, including Dum-dum, Silly, Sweetie-
pie or Baby (for an adult), Funny-face, Shorty, Fatty, or Baldy.
• A friend or lover gives you a gift of jewelry. The thought in your
head goes something like this…“You must have a drawer full of
jewelry at home for other girls.”
• Someone tells you that you look good. The sentence in your
head is, “You’re practically blind or you must be trying to make me
feel good.”
• Someone takes you to a restaurant or theater. You think, “This
is how it is in the beginning, but how long will it last once he finds
out what kind of a person I really am?”
• A girlfriend accepts a date and you feel that she is going along
just to be charitable.
I once worked with a young woman who was quite attractive and
obviously much sought after by men. Shirley insisted, however, that
all her relationships ended badly and that, though she wanted des-
perately to marry, she had never had the opportunity. It came out
in counseling that Shirley was ruining each of her relationships
without realizing it. If a young man told her he cared for her or loved
her, Shirley’s head contradicted with “He’s only saying that because
he knows it’s what I want to hear.” Shirley was always searching
for a sentence that would repudiate her worth. There was no self-
love and so she rejected efforts by others to love her. She didn’t be-
lieve that anyone could find her appealing. Why? Because she didn’t
believe that she was worth being loved in the first place, and so the
intermi-FIRST LOVE  / 39
--- PAGE 48 ---
nable cycle of renunciation was her way of reinforcing her notions
of her lack of worth.
While many of the items in the list above may appear to be petty,
they nevertheless are tiny indicators of self-rejection. If you sacrifice
or refuse to be extravagant with yourself, which often turns out to
be choosing hamburger-helper over lamb chops, it is because you
don’t feel you’re worth the better cut. Perhaps you’ve been taught
that common courtesy calls for denial of a compliment or that you
really aren’t attractive. These are the lessons you’ve learned and the
self-denying behavior is now second nature. There are numerous
examples of self-repudiation behavior that surface in conversations
and in everyday behavior. And each time you engage in any kind
of a self-put-down, you reinforce that old bugaboo that others have
laid on you and reduce your own opportunities for any kind of love
in your life, be it self or other-directed love. Surely you are too
worthy to go around putting yourself down.
Accepting Yourself Without Complaint
Self-love means accepting yourself as a worthy person because
you choose to do so. Acceptance also means an absence of complaint.
Fully functioning people never complain, and particularly they don’t
complain about the rocks being rough, or the sky being cloudy or
the ice being too cold. Acceptance means no complaining, and hap-
piness means no complaining about the things over which you can
do nothing. Complaining is the refuge of those who have no self-
reliance. Telling others about the things you dislike in yourself helps
you to continue the dissatisfaction since they are almost always
powerless to do anything about it except deny it and then you don’t
believe them. Just as complaining to others accomplishes nothing,
so permitting others to abuse you with their own tote bags full of
self-pity and misery helps no one. A simple question to ask will
generally end this useless and unpleasant behavior. “Why are40 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 49 ---
you telling me this?” or “Is there anything I can do to help you with
this?” By asking yourself the same questions, you will begin to re-
cognize your complaining behavior as ultimate folly. It is time spent
in a wasteful manner, time which might be put to better use in
practicing self-loving kinds of activities, such as silent self-praise,
or helping someone else to achieve fulfillment.
There are two occasions when complaining is least appreciated
in the world: (1) Whenever you tell someone else that you are tired.
(2) Whenever you tell someone else that you don’t feel well. If you
are tired, you can exercise several options, but complaining to even
one poor soul, let alone a loved one, is abusing that person. And it
won’t make you less tired. The same kind of logic applies to your
“not feeling well.”
Nothing is being said here about informing others of how you
feel when they can help you in any small way. What is being chal-
lenged is complaining to others who can do nothing but endure the
grumbling. Additionally, if you are truly working on self-love, and
you are experiencing any pain or discomfort, you will want to work
on this yourself, rather than choosing someone to lean on and have
them share your burden.
Complaining about yourself is a useless activity, and one which
keeps you from effectively living your life. It encourages self-pity
and immobilizes you in your efforts at giving and receiving love.
Moreover it reduces your opportunities for improved love relation-
ships and increased social intercourse. While it may get you attention,
the noticing will be done in a light that will clearly cast shadows on
your own happiness.
Being able to accept yourself without complaint involves an un-
derstanding of both self-love and the complaining process, which
are mutually exclusive terms. If you genuinely love you, then com-
plaining to others who can do nothing for you becomes absurdly
impossible to defend. And if you notice things in yourself (and oth-
ers) that you dislike, rather than complaining you can actively set
about taking the necessary corrective steps.
The next time you are at a social gathering of four or moreFIRST LOVE  / 41
--- PAGE 50 ---
couples, you can try this little exercise. Chronicle how much conver-
sation is actually spent in complaining. From self to others, to events,
prices, the weather, and on and on. Now, when the party is over
and everyone has gone their separate ways, ask yourself, “How
much of the complaining that went on tonight accomplished any-
thing?” “Who really cares about all of the things that we bemoaned
tonight?” Then, the next time you are about to complain keep the
uselessness of that night in mind.
Self-Love vs. Conceit
You may be thinking that all of this talk about self-love involves
a form of obnoxious behavior akin to egomania. Nothing could be
further from the truth. Self-love has nothing to do with the sort of
behavior characterized by telling everyone how wonderful you are.
That’s not self-love, but rather an attempt to win the attention and
approval of others by chest-thumping behavior. It is just as neurotic
as the behavior of the individual who is overloaded with self-con-
tempt. Boastful behavior is motivated by others, by an attempt to
gain their favor. It means the individual is evaluating himself on the
basis of how others see him. If he were not, he would not feel the
need to convince them. Self-love means you love yourself; it doesn’t
demand the love of others. There is no need to convince others. An
internal acceptance is sufficient. It has nothing to do with the view-
points of others.
The Rewards for Not Loving Yourself
Why would anyone choose not to love himself? Where is the ad-
vantage? The dividends, while they may be unhealthy, are neverthe-
less there for you to examine. And this is the core of42 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 51 ---
learning to be an effective person—understanding why you behave
in self-defeating ways. All behavior is caused, and the road to elim-
inating any self-destructive behavior is strewn with the potholes of
misunderstanding your own motives. Once you comprehend the
why of your self-malice and the maintenance system for retaining
it, you can begin to attack the behaviors. Without the understanding
of self, the old actions will continue to recur.
Why have you chosen to engage in self-denouncing ways, however
slight they may seem to you? It may be that it is just plain easier to
buy the stuff that others tell you than to think for yourself. But there
are other dividends as well. If you choose to not love yourself and
treat yourself as unimportant by placing other heads higher than
your own, you will…
• Have a built-in excuse for why you can’t get any love in your
life, that is, you simply are not worth being loved back. The excuse
is the neurotic payoff.
• Be able to avoid any and all risks that go with establishing love
relationships with others, and thereby eliminate any possibility of
ever being rejected or disapproved.
• Find that it is easier to stay the way you are. As long as you’re
not worthy there is just no point in trying to grow or to be better
and happier, and your payoff is remaining the same.
• Gain a lot of pity, attention and even approval from others,
which substitutes nicely for the risky business of getting involved
in a love relationship. Thus the pity and attention are your self-de-
feating rewards.
• Have many convenient scapegoats to blame for your own misery.
You can complain and thus you won’t have to do anything about it
yourself.
• Be able to use up your present moments with mini-depressions,
and avoid behavior that would help you to be different. Your self-
pity will serve as your escape route.
• Regress to being a good little boy or girl, calling upon theFIRST LOVE  / 43
--- PAGE 52 ---
leftover responses of a child and therefore pleasing those “big-
people” that you learned to regard as superior to you. Your regres-
sion is safer than risk.
• Be able to reinforce your leaning-on-others behavior by making
them more significant than you make yourself. A leaning post is a
dividend even though you’re hurt by it.
• Be unable to take charge of your own life and live it the way
you choose, simply because you won’t feel that you are worth the
happiness you covet.
These are the components of your self-scorn maintenance system.
They are the reasons you choose to hang on to the old thinking and
behavior. It is just plain easier, that is, less risky, to put yourself
down than to try to get up. But remember, the only evidence for life
is growth, and so to refuse to grow into a self-loving person is a
deathlike choice. Armed with these insights into your own behavior,
you can begin to practice some mental and physical exercises to en-
courage the growth of your own self-love.
Some Easy-to-Master Self-Love Exercises
The practice of self-love begins with your mind. You must learn
to control your thinking. This requires a lot of present-moment
awareness at the times when you are behaving in self-condemnatory
kinds of ways. If you can catch yourself as you are doing it, you can
then begin to challenge the thought in back of your behavior.
You find that you have just said something like, “I’m really not
that smart, I guess I was just lucky to get an A on that paper.” The
bell should go off in your head. “I just did it. I behaved in a self-
loathing way. But I’m aware of it now, and the next time I’ll stop
myself from saying those things I’ve been saying all of my life.”
Your strategy is to correct yourself out44 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 53 ---
loud with a statement such as, “I just said I was lucky, but luck really
had nothing to do with it. I got the grade because I deserved it.” One
small step toward self-love, the step being a recognition of your
present-moment put-down and a decision to act differently. Before
you had a habit; now you have an awareness of wanting to be differ-
ent, and you have made a choice to make it happen. It’s just like
learning to drive a stick shift. Eventually you’ll have a new habit
which will not require constant awareness. You’ll soon be behaving
in all kinds of self-adoring ways naturally.
With your mind now working for, rather than against you, exciting
self-love activities are on the horizon. Here is a brief list of such be-
haviors to which you can add as you achieve a sense of self-esteem
based upon your own worth.
• Select new responses to others’ attempts to reach you with love
or acceptance. Rather than instantly being skeptical of a loving ges-
ture, accept them with a “thank-you” or “I’m happy that you feel
that way.”
• If there is someone that you feel genuine love toward, say it
right out front “I love you” and while you check out the reactions
you receive in return, pat yourself on the back for taking the risk.
• In a restaurant, order something you really enjoy no matter what
it costs. Give yourself a treat because you are worth it. Begin to select
items that you would prefer in all situations, including the grocery
store. Indulge yourself with a favorite product because you are worth
it. Outlaw self-denial unless it is absolutely necessary—and it rarely
is.
• After a tiring day and a large meal take a brief nap or a jog in
the park even if you have too many things to do. It will help you to
feel one hundred percent better.
• Join an organization, or sign up for an activity that you will en-
joy. Perhaps you’ve been putting this off because you have so many
responsibilities that you just don’t have the time. ByFIRST LOVE  / 45
--- PAGE 54 ---
choosing to love yourself, and partaking of the slices of life that you
want, those others that you serve will begin to learn some self-reli-
ance of their own. And you will find yourself with an absence of
resentment toward them. You will be serving them out of choice,
rather than obligation.
• Eliminate jealousy by recognizing it is a put-down of yourself.
By comparing yourself to some other person and imagining you are
loved less, you make others more important than you. You are
measuring your own merit in comparison to another. Remind
yourself that (1) Someone can always choose another without having
it be a reflection on you, and (2) whether or not you are chosen by
any significant other is not the way you validate your own self-worth.
If you make it that way, you are doomed to eternal self-doubt, be-
cause of the uncertainty of how a particular someone out there is
going to feel at any precise moment of any given day. Should he/she
choose another, that choice reflects only the other, not you. With
practice at self-love, any circumstances in which you’ve previously
found yourself to be jealous will be reversed. You’ll believe so much
in you that you won’t need the love or approval of others to give
you value.
• Your self-love activity might also include new ways of treating
your body, such as selecting good nutritional foods, eliminating
excess weight (which can be a health risk as well as an indication of
self-rejection), taking regular walks or bicycle rides, choosing plenty
of healthy exercise, getting outdoors to enjoy fresh air because it
feels good, and in general keeping your body healthy and attractive.
Provided you want to be healthy. Why? Because you are important
and are going to treat yourself that way. Any total day spent cooped
up or inactive in boring routine activities is a vote for self-enmity.
Unless you actually prefer being cooped-up, in which case you make
that choice.
• Sexually, you can practice greater self-love. You can stand naked
in front of a mirror and tell yourself how attractive you46 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 55 ---
are. You can get in touch with your body. Explore yourself sensually,
give yourself goosebumbs of shivery pleasure. With others, you can
also choose sexual fulfillment for you, rather than making your
partner’s pleasure more important than your own. Only by choosing
gratification for yourself can you give pleasure. If you aren’t happy,
generally your partner is disappointed. Moreover, when you choose
yourself, others are more able to choose happiness for themselves.
You can slow down the whole process of sex, teaching your lover
what you like with words and actions. You can choose orgasm for
yourself. You can make yourself achieve the ultimate physical exper-
ience by believing that you are worth it, and then getting lost in the
excitement of verifying it for you. Why? Because you are worth it!
• You can stop equating your performance in anything with your
own self-worth. You may lose your job, or fail a given project. You
may not like the way you performed this or that task. But that doesn’t
mean that you are without worth. You must know for yourself, that
you are worth something regardless of your achievements. Without
this knowledge, you will be persistently confusing yourself with
your external activities. It is just as absurd to make your self-value
depend upon some outside accomplishment as it is to tie it in with
some external person’s opinion of you. Once you eliminate this
confusion, you will be able to set about all kinds of undertakings,
and your final score—while it may be interesting to you—will in no
way determine how valuable you are as a person.
These, and many like them, are the actions of those who love
themselves. They may often challenge the lessons that you’ve learned
as you’ve grown-down. At one time, you were the epitome of self-
love. As a child, you knew instinctively that you were worthy.
Now look back at the questions in the introduction to this book.FIRST LOVE  / 47
--- PAGE 56 ---
•Can you accept yourself without complaint?
•Can you love yourself at all times?
•Can you give and receive love?
These are the issues that you can work on. Setting personal goals
to be in love with the most beautiful, exciting, worthy person
ever—you48 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 57 ---
