XI
FAREWELL TO ANGER
The only antidote to anger is to eliminate the internal sentence, “If
only you were more like me.”
Is your fuse too short? You may accept anger as a part of your life,
but do you recognize that it serves no utilitarian purpose? Perhaps
you’ve justified your short-fuse behavior by saying things like, “It’s
only human,” or “If I don’t express it, then I’ll store it up and have
an ulcer.” But anger is probably a part of you that you don’t like,
and needless to say, neither does anyone else.
Anger is not “only human.” You do not have to possess it, and it
serves no purpose that has anything to do with being a happy, ful-
filled person. It is an erroneous zone, a kind of psychological influ-
enza that incapacitates you just as a physical disease would.
Let’s define the term anger . As used in this chapter, it refers to an
immobilizing reaction, experienced when any expectancy
209
--- PAGE 218 ---
is not met. It takes the form of rage, hostility, striking out at someone
or even glowering silence. It is not simple annoyance or irritation.
Once again the key word is immobility. Anger is immobilizing and
it is usually a result of wishing the world and the people in it were
different.
Anger is a choice, as well as a habit. It is a learned reaction to
frustration, in which you behave in ways that you would rather not.
In fact, severe anger is a form of insanity. You are insane whenever
you are not in control of your behavior. Therefore, when you are
angry and out of control, you are temporarily insane.
There is no psychological reward for anger. As defined here, anger
is debilitating. In the physiological realm, it can produce hyperten-
sion, ulcers, rashes, heart palpitations, insomnia, fatigue and even
heart disease. In the psychological sense, anger breaks down love
relationships, interferes with communication, leads to guilt and de-
pression and generally just gets in your way. You may be skeptical,
since you’ve always heard that expressing your anger is healthier
than keeping it bottled up inside of you. Yes, the expression of anger
is indeed a healthier alternative than suppressing it. But there is an
even healthier stance—not having the anger at all. In this case you
won’t be confronted with the dilemma of whether to let it out or
keep it in.
Like all emotions, anger is the result of thinking. It is not something
that simply happens to you. When faced with circumstances that
are not going the way you would like them to, you tell yourself that
things shouldn’t be that way (frustration) and then you select a fa-
miliar angry response which serves a purpose. (See the payoff section
later in this chapter.) And as long as you think of anger as a part of
what it means to be a human being, you have a reason to accept it,
and avoid going to work on it.
By all means give vent to your anger, let it out in nondestructive
ways—if you are still deciding to have it. But begin to think of
yourself as someone who can learn to think new210 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 219 ---
thoughts when you are frustrated, so that the immobilizing anger
can be replaced by more fulfilling emotions. Annoyance, irritation,
and disappointment are feelings that you will very likely continue
to experience, since the world will never be the way you want it.
But anger, that hurtful emotional response to obstacles, can be
eliminated.
You may make a case for anger because it works in getting your
way. Well, take a closer look. If you mean that raising your voice or
looking upset will help you keep your two-year-old child from
playing in the street where she might get hurt, then raising your
voice is an excellent strategy. It only becomes anger when you are
genuinely upset, when you get flushed, and increase your heartbeat,
when you slam things around and are generally immobilized for
any period of time. By all means select personal strategies that will
reinforce appropriate behavior, but don’t take all of the internal hurt
that goes with it. You can learn to think like this: “This behavior she
is exhibiting is dangerous to her. I want to make her see that playing
in the street will not be tolerated. I’ll raise my voice to demonstrate
my strong feelings about it. But I won’t go around being mad.”
Consider a typical mother who cannot master this controlled dis-
play of anger. She is constantly upset about her children’s repetitious
bad behavior. It seems that the more upset she gets, the more they
misbehave. She punishes them, sends them to their room, screams
constantly and is almost always in a state of pique when dealing
with the kids. Her life as a mother is a battle. Loud voices are the
only thing she knows, and each evening she is an emotional wreck,
drained from a day on the battlefield.
So why don’t the kids behave when they know how upset Mommy
decides to be whenever they act up? Because the irony of anger is
that it never works in changing others; it only intensifies the other
person’s desire to control the angry person. Listen to the above
children, assuming they could give voice to their own rationale for
misbehaving.
“See what it takes to set Mommy off? All you have to do isFAREWELL TO ANGER  / 211
--- PAGE 220 ---
say this, or do that, and you can get control over her and send her
into one of her fits. You may have to stay in your room for a short
while, but look at what you get! Complete emotional domination
over her for such a low price. Since we have so little power over her,
let’s do this some more and watch her go bananas over our behavi-
or.”
Anger, when used in any relationship, will almost always encour-
age the other person to continue to act as he has been. While the
provoker may act scared, he also knows that he can set the other
person off whenever he wants, and therefore exercise the same kind
of vindictive authority as the angry individual thinks he has.
Whenever you select anger as a response to someone else’s beha-
vior, you are withholding from that person the right to be what he
chooses. Inside your head is the neurotic sentence, “Why can’t you
be more like me? Then I would like you now, instead of being angry.”
But others will never be the way you want them to be, all of the time.
Much of the time people and things will not go the way you would
like them to go. That’s the way the world is. And the likelihood of
it changing is zero. So, every time you choose anger when you run
into someone or something you don’t like, you are deciding to be
hurt or in some way immobilized because of reality. Now that’s
really silly. Being upset about things that aren’t ever going to change.
Instead of choosing anger, you can begin to think of others as having
a right to be different from what you’d prefer. You may not like it,
but you don’t have to be angry about it. Anger will only encourage
them to continue as they are, and will bring about all of the physical
stress and mental torture described above. The choice is really yours.
Anger or new sentences about things that will help you to eliminate
the need for the anger.
Perhaps you see yourself in the opposite camp, that is, someone
who has a great deal of anger, but has never had the courage to ex-
press it. You keep it in and never say a thing,212 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 221 ---
building yourself up for those painful ulcers, and living with a lot
of present-moment anxiety. But this is not the opposite of the indi-
vidual who rants and rages. You have the same sentences in your
head that people and things should be the way you want them to
be. If they were, you reason, you wouldn’t feel anger. This is faulty
logic, and eradicating it is the secret to getting rid of your tension.
While you will want to learn to express pent-up anger instead of
storing it up, the ultimate goal is to learn to think in new ways that
will not create the anger. Such internal thoughts as: “If he wants to
be a fool, I’m not going to choose to be upset. He, not me, owns his
dumb behavior” or “Things aren’t going the way I think they should.
While I don’t like it, I’m not going to immobilize myself.”
Learning to express the anger with courageous kinds of new be-
haviors that have been discussed throughout this book is your first
step. Then, thinking in new ways that will help you to shift from
the external to the internal side of the mental health ledger, refusing
to own anyone else’s behavior is the ultimate step. You can learn
not to give other people’s behavior and ideas the power to upset
you. By thinking highly of yourself and refusing to let others control
you, you won’t hurt yourself with present-moment anger.
Having a Sense of Humor
It is impossible for you to be angry and laugh at the same time.
Anger and laughter are mutually exclusive and you have the power
to choose either.
Laughter is the sunshine of the soul. And without sunshine
nothing can live or grow. As Winston Churchill put it,
It is my belief, you cannot deal with the most serious things in
the world unless you understand the most amusing.FAREWELL TO ANGER  / 213
--- PAGE 222 ---
You may take life too seriously. Perhaps the single most outstand-
ing characteristic of healthy people is their unhostile sense of humor.
Helping others choose to laugh, and learning to stand back and ob-
serve the incongruity of almost every life situation is an excellent
remedy for anger.
In the scheme of things, what you do and whether you are angry
or not will have all the impact of another glass of water being thrown
over Niagara Falls. Whether you choose laughter or anger will not
matter much—except that the former will fill your present moments
with happiness, and the latter will waste them in misery.
Do you take yourself and your life so seriously that you can’t
stand back and view the absurdity of taking anything that solemnly?
An absence of laughter is an indicator of pathology. When you tend
to be overly sober about yourself and what you do, remind yourself
that this is the only time you have. Why waste your present being
angry when laughing feels so good.
Laughter just for the sake of laughing. It is its own justification.
You don’t have to have a reason to laugh. Just do it. Observe yourself
and others in this nutty world, and then decide whether to carry
around anger or to develop a sense of humor that will give you and
others one of the most priceless gifts of all—laughter. It feels so good.
Some Common Causes of Anger
You can see anger in operation all the time. Examples of people
experiencing varying degrees of immobility, from mild upset to
blind rage, are everywhere. It is the cancer, albeit a learned one, that
permeates human interactions. Below are some of the more common
instances in which people choose anger.
• Anger in the automobile. Drivers scream at other motorists for
virtually everything. Pulse-racing behavior results when214 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 223 ---
someone else is going too slow, too fast, doesn’t signal, signals im-
properly, changes lanes or any number of mistakes. As a driver, you
may experience a great deal of anger and emotional immobility be-
cause of the things you tell yourself about the ways others should
be driving. Similarly, traffic jams are key signals for attacks of anger
and hostility. Drivers yell at passengers and swear at the cause of
the delay. All this behavior is the result of a single thought, “This
shouldn’t be happening, and because it is, I’m going to be upset and
help others to choose unhappiness as well.”
• Anger in competitive games. Bridge, tennis, pinochle, poker
and a variety of other games are excellent anger inducers. People
get angry at partners or opponents for not doing it right or for infrac-
tions of the rules. They may throw things like a tennis racket because
they made an error. While stomping and throwing equipment are
healthier than hitting or screaming at others, they are still barriers
to present-moment fulfillment.
• Anger at the out of place. Many people feel rage at an individual
or event which they consider out of place. For example, a driver in
traffic may decide the cyclist or pedestrian shouldn’t be there and
try to drive him off the road. This kind of anger can be extremely
dangerous. Many so-called accidents are actually the result of just
such incidents in which uncontrolled rage has serious results.
• Anger about taxes. No amount of anger will ever change the tax
laws of our country, but people rage just the same because taxes
aren’t what they would like them to be.
• Anger over the tardiness of others. If you expect others to
function on your timetable, you will choose anger when they do not
and justify your immobilization with, “I have a right to be angry.
He kept me waiting half an hour.”
• Anger at the disorganization or sloppiness of others. Despite
the fact that your rage will probably encourage others to continue
to behave in the same manner, you may persist in choosing anger.
• Anger at inanimate objects. If you hit your shin bone orFAREWELL TO ANGER  / 215
--- PAGE 224 ---
hammer your thumb, reacting with a scream can be therapeutic, but
feeling real rage and doing something about it such as driving your
fist through a wall is not only futile, but painful as well.
• Anger over the loss of objects. No amount of rage will turn up
a lost key or wallet and will probably prevent you from launching
an effective search.
• Anger over world events beyond your control. You may not
approve of politics, foreign relations, or the economy, but your anger
and subsequent immobilization aren’t going to change anything.
The Many Faces of Anger
Now that we’ve seen some of the occasions on which you might
choose anger, let’s look at some forms anger takes.
• Being verbally abusive or ridiculing a spouse, children, or loved
ones, or friends.
• Physical violence—hitting, kicking, slamming—objects or people.
Carried to extremes, this behavior leads to crimes of violence which
are almost always committed under the influence of immobilizing
anger. Murder and assaults don’t occur unless emotions are out of
control and anger has led to temporary insanity. Believing that anger
is normal or subscribing to the psychological schools that encourage
you to get in touch with your anger and let it out can be potentially
dangerous. Similarly, television, movies and books which popularize
anger and violence and present them as normal undermine both the
individual and society.
• Saying things like, “He infuriates me,” or “You really aggravate
me.” In these cases you are choosing to let someone else’s behavior
make you unhappy.
• Using phrases like, “kill him,” “clobber them,” or “destroy the
opposition.” You may think they’re only expressions,216 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 225 ---
but they encourage anger and violence and make it acceptable even
in friendly competition.
• Temper tantrums. Not only is this a common expression of anger,
it frequently serves to get the tantrum thrower exactly what he wants.
• Sarcasm, ridicule and the silent treatment. These expressions of
anger can be just as damaging as physical violence.
While the list of possible anger behavior could go on into eternity,
the above examples constitute the most common incidents of anger
as it surfaces in this erroneous zone.
The Reward System That You’ve Constructed for Choosing Anger
Getting a grip on lengthening your fuse will most effectively start
with some insight into the reasons for using it in the first place. Here
are some of the psychological motives for keeping that fuse as short
as it is.
• Whenever you find it difficult to handle yourself, feel frustrated
or defeated, you can use anger to direct the responsibility for how
you feel to the person or event itself, rather than taking charge of
your own feelings.
• You can use your anger to manipulate those who fear you. This
is particularly effective in getting those who are younger, or physic-
ally or psychologically smaller in line.
• Anger draws attention and thus you can feel important and
powerful.
• Anger is a handy excuse. You can go insane—temporarily—and
then excuse yourself by saying, “I couldn’t help myself.” Thus you
can exonerate your behavior with out-of-control logic.
• You can get your way because others would rather placate you
than have to put up with the angry exhibition.FAREWELL TO ANGER  / 217
--- PAGE 226 ---
• If you are afraid of intimacy or love, you can get angry over
something, and thus avoid the risky business of sharing yourself
affectionately.
• You can manipulate others with guilt by having them wonder
“Where did I go wrong to make him so angry?” When they feel
guilty, you are powerful.
• You can break down communication in which you feel
threatened because someone else is more skillful. You simply use
anger to avoid the risk of looking bad.
• You don’t have to work on yourself when you are angry.
Therefore you can use up your present moments in the easy business
of being fierce and avoid doing whatever it might take to improve
yourself. Thus you can use anger to take the heat off yourself.
• You can indulge in self-pity after you’ve had an attack of anger
and feel sorry for yourself because nobody understands you.
• You can avoid thinking clearly, simply by getting angry.
Everyone knows that you can’t think straight at these times, so why
not haul out the old anger when you want to avoid any of that hard
straight-thinking.
• You can excuse losing or poor performance with a simple fit of
temper. Maybe you can even get others to stop winning, because
they fear your anger so much.
• You can excuse anger by saying you need it to help you carry
out some task, but in fact anger is immobilizing and never improves
performance.
• By saying it’s human to be angry, you have a ready justification
for yourself. “I’m human, and that’s what humans do.”
Some Designs for Replacing Anger
Anger can be eliminated. It will require a great deal of new
thinking and it can be done only one present moment at a time.218 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 227 ---
When confronted with people or events which provoke you to choose
anger, become aware of what you are telling yourself, and then work
at new sentences which will create new feelings and more productive
behavior. Here are some specific strategies for attacking anger.
• First and most important, get in touch with your thoughts at
the time of your anger, and remind yourself that you don’t have to
think that way, simply because you’ve always done so in the past.
Awareness is paramount.
• Try postponing anger. If you typically react with anger in a
particular circumstance, postpone the anger for fifteen seconds, and
then explode in your typical fashion. Next try thirty seconds, and
keep lengthening the intervals. Once you begin to see that you can
put anger off, you’ll have learned control. Postponing is control, and
with lots of practice, you’ll eventually eliminate it totally.
• When trying to use anger constructively to teach a child some-
thing, try faking the anger. Raise your voice and look stern, but don’t
experience all of the physical and psychological pain that goes with
anger.
• Don’t try to delude yourself into believing that you enjoy
something that you find distasteful. You can dislike something and
still not have to be angry about it.
• Remind yourself at the moment of anger that everyone has a
right to be what he chooses and that your demanding that anyone
be different will simply prolong your anger. Work at allowing others
to choose just as you insist on your own right to do the same.
• Ask someone that you trust to help. Have them tell you when
they see your anger either verbally or with an agreed signal. When
you get the signal, think about what you’re doing and then try the
postponing strategy.
• Keep an anger journal, and record the exact time, place and in-
cident in which you chose to be angry. Be religious about the entries,
force yourself to record all angry behavior. You’ll soonFAREWELL TO ANGER  / 219
--- PAGE 228 ---
find, if you are persistent, that the very act of having to write the
incident down will persuade you to choose anger less often.
• Announce after you have had an angry outburst that you’ve
just slipped and that one of your goals is to think differently so that
you don’t experience this anger. The verbal announcement will put
you in touch with what you’ve done, and will demonstrate that you
are truly working on yourself.
• Try being physically close to someone that you love at the mo-
ment of your anger. One way to neutralize your hostility is to hold
hands, despite your inclination not to, and keep holding hands until
you’ve expressed how you feel and dissipated your anger.
• Talk with those who are the most frequent recipients of your
anger at a time when you are not angry. Share with each other the
most anger-provoking activities in the other, and devise a way of
communicating your feelings without debilitating anger. Perhaps a
written note, or a messenger, or a cooling-off walk can be mutually
agreed upon, so that you don’t continue abusing each other with
senseless anger. After several cooling-off walks, you’ll begin to see
the folly of striking out.
• Defuse your anger for the first few seconds by labeling how you
feel, and how you believe your partner feels as well. The first ten
seconds are the most crucial. Once you’ve passed these, your anger
will often have subsided.
• Keep in mind all the things you believe will be met with disap-
proval by fifty percent of the folks, fifty percent of the time. Once
you expect others to disagree, you will not choose to feel angry. In-
stead, you’ll say to yourself that the world is straight since people
aren’t agreeing with everything I say, think, feel and do.
• Keep in mind that while the expression of anger is a healthy al-
ternative to storing it up, not having it at all is the healthiest choice
of all. Once you stop viewing anger as natural or only human, you’ll
have an internal rationale for going to work at eliminating it.220 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 229 ---
• Get rid of the expectations you have for others. When the expect-
ations go away, so will the anger.
• Remind yourself that children will always be active and loud
and getting angry about it won’t do any good. While you can help
children to make constructive choices in other areas, you will never
be able to alter their basic nature.
• Love yourself. If you do, you won’t ever burden yourself with
that self-destructive anger.
• In a traffic jam, time yourself. See how long you can go without
exploding. Work at the control aspect. Instead of hollering at a pas-
senger, ask him a civil question. Use the time creatively to write a
letter, or a song, or to devise ways out of the traffic jam, or relive the
most exciting sexual experience of your life, or better yet, plan to
improve on it.
• Instead of being an emotional slave to every frustrating circum-
stance, use the situation as a challenge to change it, and you’ll have
no present moment time for the anger.
Anger gets in the way. It is good for nothing. Like all erroneous
zones, anger is a means of using things outside yourself to explain
how you feel. Forget others. Make your own choices—and don’t let
them be angry ones.FAREWELL TO ANGER  / 221
--- PAGE 230 ---
