V
THE USELESS EMOTIONS—
GUILT AND WORRY
If you believe that feeling bad or worrying long enough will change
a past or future event, then you are residing on another planet with
a different reality system.
Throughout life, the two most futile emotions are guilt for what
has been done and worry about what might be done. There they
are! The great wastes—Worry and Guilt—Guilt and Worry. As you
examine these two erroneous zones, you will begin to see how con-
nected they are; in fact they can be viewed as opposite ends of the
same zone.
There you have it. Guilt  means that you use up your present mo-
ments being immobilized as a result of past behavior, while worry  is
the contrivance that keeps you immobilized in the now
89
--- PAGE 98 ---
about something in the future —frequently something over which
you have no control. You can see this clearly if you try to think of
yourself as feeling guilty about an event that has yet to occur, or to
worry about something that has happened. Although one response
is to the future and the other to the past, they both serve the
identical purpose of keeping you upset or immobile in your present
moment. Robert Jones Burdette wrote in Golden Day:
It isn’t the experience of today that drives men mad. It is the
remorse for something that happened yesterday, and the dread
of what tomorrow may disclose.
You see examples of guilt and worry everywhere, in virtually
everyone you meet. The world is populated with folks who are either
feeling horrible about something that they shouldn’t have done or
dismayed about things that might or might not happen. You are
probably no exception. If you have large worry and guilt zones, they
must be exterminated, spray-cleaned and sterilized forever. Wash
out those little “w” and “g” bugs that infest so many sectors of your
life.
Guilt and worry are perhaps the most common forms of distress
in our culture. With guilt you focus on a past event, feel dejected or
angry about something that you did or said, and use up your present
moments being occupied with feelings over the past behavior. With
worry, you use up those valuable nows, obsessing about a future
event. Whether you’re looking backward or forward, the result is
the same. You’re throwing away the present moment. Robert Bur-
dette’s Golden Day is really “today,” and he sums up the folly of
guilt and worry with these words.
There are two days in the week about which and upon which
I never worry. Two carefree days, kept sacredly free from fear
and apprehension. One of these days is yesterday…and the
other day I do not worry about is tomorrow.90 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 99 ---
A Closer Look at Guilt
Many of us have been subjected to a conspiracy of guilt in our
lifetimes, an uncalculated plot to turn us into veritable guilt ma-
chines. The machine works like this. Someone sends out a message
designed to remind you that you’ve been a bad person because of
something you said or didn’t say, felt or didn’t feel, did or didn’t
do. You respond by feeling bad in your present moment. You are
the guilt machine. A walking, talking, breathing contraption that
responds with guilt whenever the appropriate fuel is poured into
you. And you are well oiled if you’ve had a total immersion into
our guilt-producing culture.
Why have you bought the worry and guilt messages that have
been laid on you over the years? Largely because it is considered
“bad” if you don’t feel guilty, and “inhuman” not to worry. It all
has to do with CARING. If you really care about anyone, or anything,
then you show this concern by feeling guilty about the terrible things
you’ve done, or by giving some visible evidence that you are con-
cerned about their future. It is almost as if you have to demonstrate
your neurosis in order to be labeled a caring person.
Guilt is the most useless of all erroneous zone behaviors. It is by
far the greatest waste of emotional energy. Why? Because, by defini-
tion, you are feeling immobilized in the present over something that
has already  taken place, and no amount of guilt can ever change
history.
DISTINGUISHING GUILT FROM LEARNING FROM YOUR PAST
Guilt is not merely a concern with the past; it is a present-moment
immobilization about a past event. And the degree of immobilization
can run from mild upset to severe depression. If you are simply
learning from your past, and vowing to avoid the repetition of some
specific behavior, this is not guilt. You experience guilt only when
you are prevented from taking action now as a result of having be-
haved in a certain way previously.THE USELESS EMOTIONS—GUILT AND WORRY  / 91
--- PAGE 100 ---
Learning from your mistakes is healthy and a necessary part of
growth. Guilt is unhealthy because you are ineffectively using up
your energy in the present feeling hurt, upset and depressed about
a historical happening. And it’s futile as well as unhealthy. No
amount of guilt can ever undo anything.
The Origins of Guilt
There are two basic ways in which guilt becomes a part of the
emotional makeup of an individual. In the first, guilt is learned at a
very early age and remains with a grown-up as a leftover childish
response. In the second case, guilt is self-imposed by an adult for
an infraction of a code to which he professes to subscribe.
1. Leftover Guilt.  This guilt is the emotional reaction which is carried
around from childhood memories. There are scores of these guilt
producers, and while they work in that they produce results in
children, people still tote around these sentences as adults. Some of
these leftovers involve admonitions like:
“Daddy won’t like you if you do that again.”
“You should feel ashamed  of yourself.” (As if that will be helpful
to you.)
“Oh, all right, I’m only your mother.”
As an adult, the implications behind these sentences can still
produce hurt if a person disappoints his boss, or others whom he
has made into parents. The persistent attempt to win their support
is there, and so is the guilt when the efforts are unsuccessful.
Leftover guilt also surfaces in sex and marriage. It can be seen in
the numerous self-reproaches and apologies for past behavior. These
guilt reactions are present as a result of learning to be manipulated
by adults in childhood, but they can still operate when the child has
grown up.
2. Self-imposed Guilt.  This second category of guilt reactions92 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 101 ---
is a much more troublesome area. Here the individual is being im-
mobilized by things he has done recently, but which are not neces-
sarily tied to being a child. This is the guilt imposed on the self when
an adult rule or moral code is broken. The individual may feel bad
for a long time even though the hurting can do nothing to change
what has happened. Typical self-imposed guilt includes having told
someone off, and hating one’s self for it, or being emotionally drained
in the present moment because of some act such as shoplifting, not
going to church, or having said the wrong thing in the past.
Thus you can look at all of your guilt either as reactions to leftover
imposed standards in which you are still trying to please an absent
authority figure, or as the result of trying to live up to self-imposed
standards which you really don’t buy, but for some reason pay lip
service to. In either case, it is stupid, and, more important, useless
behavior. You can sit there forever, lamenting about how bad you’ve
been, feeling guilty until your death, and not one tiny slice of that
guilt will do anything to rectify past behavior. It’s over! Your guilt
is an attempt to change history, to wish that it weren’t so. But history
is so and you can’t do anything about it.
You can begin to change your attitude about the things over which
you experience guilt. Our culture has many strains of puritanical
thinking which send out messages like, “If it’s fun, you’re supposed
to feel guilty about it.” Many of your own self-inflicted guilt reactions
can be traced to this kind of thinking. Perhaps you’ve learned that
you shouldn’t indulge yourself, or you mustn’t enjoy a dirty joke,
or you ought not to participate in a certain kind of sexual behavior.
While the restraining messages are omnipresent in our culture, guilt
about enjoying yourself is purely self-inflicted.
You can learn to savor pleasure without a sense of guilt. You can
learn to see yourself as someone who is capable of doing anything
that fits into your own value system and does not harm others—and
doing it without guilt. If you do something, what-THE USELESS EMOTIONS—GUILT AND WORRY  / 93
--- PAGE 102 ---
ever it may be, and you don’t like it or yourself after having done
it, you can vow to eliminate such behavior for yourself in the future.
But to go through a self-inflicted guilt sentence is a neurotic trip that
you can bypass. The guilt does not help. It not only keeps you im-
mobilized, but it actually intensifies the chances that you’ll repeat
the unwanted behavior. Guilt can be its own reward as well as per-
mission to repeat the behavior. As long as you retain the potential
payoff of absolving yourself with guilt, you’ll be able to keep yourself
in that vicious treadmill that leads to nothing but present-moment
unhappiness.
Typical Guilt-Producing Categories and Reactions
PARENTAL GUILT ON CHILDREN OF ALL AGES
Manipulating the child to complete a task through guilt:
Parent—“Donny, bring up the chairs from the basement.
We’ll be eating soon.”
Child—“O.K., Mom, in a minute, I’m watching the ball
game and I’ll do it when this inning is over.”
Parental guilt signal—“Never mind then, I’ll do it—with
my bad back. You just sit there and enjoy yourself.”
Donny has visions of his mother falling down with six chairs
landing on top of her. And he’s responsible.
The “I sacrificed for you” mentality is an exceedingly effective
guilt producer. Here a parent can recall all of the hard times in which
he gave up his happiness so that you might have something. You
naturally ask yourself how you could be so selfish after you’ve been
reminded of your debts. References to the suffering of childbirth are
one example of this guilt-producing attitude. “I went through
eighteen hours of labor just to bring you94 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 103 ---
into the world.” Another effective statement is, “I stayed married
to your father because of you.” This one is designed to make you
feel guilty for Mama’s bad marriage.
Guilt is an effective method for parental manipulation of a child’s
actions. “That’s okay. We’ll stay here by ourselves. You just enjoy
yourself the way you’ve always done. Don’t worry about us.”
Statements like this are effective in getting you to telephone or visit
on a regular basis. With a slight twist you hear: “Whatsamatter; you
got a broken finger and you can’t dial a telephone?” The parent
switches the guilt machine on and you behave accordingly, albeit
resentfully.
The “You disgraced us” tactic is also useful. Or “What will the
neighbors think?” External forces are martialed to make you feel
bad about what you’ve done, and to keep you from thinking for
yourself. The “If you ever fail at anything you’ll disgrace us” guilt
excursion can make living with yourself after a shabby performance
almost impossible.
Parental illness is a super guilt manufacturer. “You’ve made my
blood pressure go up.” References to “killing me” or “giving me a
heart attack” are effective guilt prodders, as well as blaming you for
virtually all of the normal ailments associated with growing older.
You need big shoulders to carry this guilt around, since it can literally
last a lifetime, and if you are particularly vulnerable, you can even
carry the guilt of a parent’s death.
Sexual guilt imposed by parents is quite common. All sexual
thought or behavior is fertile soil for the cultivation of guilt. “God
forbid you should masturbate. It’s bad.” Through guilt you can be
manipulated into the right sexual stance. “You should be ashamed
for reading such magazines. You shouldn’t even have such
thoughts.”
Socially appropriate behavior can be fostered with guilt. “How
could you embarrass me by picking your nose in front of Grandma.”
“You forgot to say thank you. Shame on you, do you want our
friends to think I didn’t teach you anything?” ATHE USELESS EMOTIONS—GUILT AND WORRY  / 95
--- PAGE 104 ---
child can be helped to learn socially acceptable behavior without
the accompanying guilt. A simple reminder which follows an explan-
ation of why the behavior is undesirable is much more effective. For
example, if Donny is told that his constant interruptions are discon-
certing and make conversation impossible, he will have the first seed
planted without having the guilt that goes with a statement such as,
“You’re always interrupting, you should be ashamed of yourself,
it’s impossible to talk with you around.”
Merely reaching adulthood does not put an end to parental ma-
nipulation by guilt. I have a friend who is fifty-two years old. He is
a pediatrician of Jewish extraction married to a non-Jewish woman.
He keeps his marriage a secret from his mother, because he is afraid
it might “kill her” or more aptly, he might kill her. He maintains a
separate apartment with all of the household trimmings for the sole
purpose of meeting with his eighty-five-year-old mother every
Sunday. She does not know that he is married and owns his own
home where he lives six days a week. He plays this little game out
of fear and guilt about being married to a “Shiksa.” Although he is
a fully grown man who is highly successful in his own professional
world, he is still controlled by his mother. Each day he talks to her
from his office and lives out his bachelor fantasy.
Parental-and family-associated guilt is the most common strategy
for keeping a rebellious person in tow. The examples above are only
a small sample of the multitude of statements and techniques for
helping a son/daughter to choose guilt (present-moment immobility
over a past event) as the price of genealogy.
Lover- and Spouse-Related Guilt
The “If you loved me” guilt is one way to manipulate a lover. This
tactic is particularly useful when one wants to pun-96 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 105 ---
ish a partner for some particular behavior. As if love were contingent
upon the right kind of behavior. Whenever one person doesn’t
measure up, guilt can be used to get him back into the fold. He must
feel guilty for not having loved the other.
Grudges, long silences and hurtful looks are useful methods of
engendering guilt. “I’m not talking to you, that’ll fix you” or “Don’t
come near me, how do you expect me to be loving after what you’ve
done?” This is a commonly employed tactic in the case of straying
behavior on the part of one partner.
Often, years after an incident, an action is recalled to help the
other person to choose present-moment guilt. “But don’t forget what
you did in 1951” or “How could I ever trust you again, when you
let me down before?” In this way one partner can manipulate the
other’s present with references to the past. If one partner has finally
forgotten it, the other can periodically bring it up to keep the guilt
feelings about the past behavior current.
Guilt is useful in making a love partner conform to the other’s
demands and standards of behavior. “If you were responsible, you
would have called me” or “That’s the third time I had to empty the
garbage, I guess you just refuse to do your share.” The goal? Getting
one partner to do what the other wants him to. The method? Guilt.
Children-Inspired Guilt
The parental guilt game can be reversed. Guilt can be a two-way
street and children are just as apt to use it in manipulating their
parents as the reverse.
If a child realizes that his parent cannot cope with his being un-
happy and will feel guilty for being a bad parent, the child will often
try to use that guilt to manipulate the parent. A tantrum in the su-
permarket may produce the desired candy. “Sally’s father lets her
do it.” Therefore Sally’s father is a good father and you’re not. “You
don’t love me. If you didTHE USELESS EMOTIONS—GUILT AND WORRY  / 97
--- PAGE 106 ---
you wouldn’t treat me this way.” And the ultimate, “I must be ad-
opted. My real parents wouldn’t treat me like this.” All these state-
ments carry the same message. You as a parent ought to feel guilty
for treating me, your child, in this way.
Of course, children learn this guilt-producing behavior by
watching the adults in their world use them to get the things that
they want. Guilt is not a natural behavior. It is a learned emotional
response that can only be used if the victim teaches the exploiter
that he is vulnerable. Children know when you are susceptible. If
they constantly remind you of things that you’ve done, or haven’t
done, for the purpose of getting what they want, then they have
learned the guilt trick. If your children use these tactics, they picked
them up somewhere. Very likely, from you.
School-Inspired Guilt
Teachers are superlative guilt originators, and children, since they
are most suggestible, are excellent subjects for manipulation. These
are some of the guilt messages that produce present-moment unhap-
piness for young people:
“Your mother is really going to be disappointed in you.”
“You should be ashamed of yourself for getting a C—a
smart boy like you.”
“How could you hurt your parents like that, after all
they’ve done for you? Don’t you know how badly they
want you to go to Harvard?”
“You failed the test because you didn’t study, now you’ll
have to live with yourself.”
Guilt is often used in schools to make children learn certain things
or behave in certain ways. And remember that even as an adult you
are a product of those schools.98 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 107 ---
Church-Related Guilt
Religion is often used to produce guilt and therefore manipulate
behavior. Here God is generally the one you have let down. In some
cases the message is that you will be kept out of heaven for having
behaved badly.
“If you loved God, you wouldn’t behave that way.”
“You won’t get into heaven unless you repent for your
sins.”
“You should feel bad because you haven’t gone to church
every week, and if you feel bad enough, perhaps you’ll be
forgiven.”
“You’ve disobeyed one of God’s rules and you should feel
ashamed of yourself.”
Other Institutional Guilt Producers
Most prisons operate on the guilt theory. That is, if a person sits
long enough thinking how bad he’s been, he will be better for the
guilt. Jail sentences for nonviolent crimes such as tax evasion, traffic
citations, civil infractions and the like are examples of this mind-set.
The fact that a strikingly large percentage of inmates return to law-
breaking behavior has done nothing to challenge this belief.
Sit in a jail and feel bad for what you’ve done. This policy is so
expensive and useless that it defies logical explanation. The illogical
explanation, of course, is that guilt  is such an integral part of our
culture, that it is the backbone of our criminal justice system. Rather
than have civil law breakers help society or repay their debts, they
are reformed through guilt-producing incarceration that has no be-
nefit to anyone, least of all the offender.
No amount of guilt, however large, will change past behav-THE USELESS EMOTIONS—GUILT AND WORRY  / 99
--- PAGE 108 ---
ior. Moreover, jails are not places where new legal choices are
learned. Instead, they encourage a repetition of illegal behavior by
embittering the prisoner. (The policy of imprisoning dangerous
criminals to protect others is a different issue, and not under discus-
sion here.)
In our society tipping is a practice that has come to reflect not su-
perior service but the guilt of the person served. Effective waiters
and waitresses, cab drivers, bell boys, and other serving employees
have learned that most people cannot handle guilt for not behaving
in the correct way and will tip the standard percentage regardless
of the quality of service received. Thus blatant hand extending, nasty
comments and looks that are designed to wither are all used to
produce guilt and, fast on its heels, the big tip.
Littering, smoking and other unacceptable behavior may be things
that you can be made to feel guilty about. Perhaps you’ve dropped
a cigarette or a paper cup. A stern look by a stranger can send you
into paroxysms of guilt for having behaved in such a crass fashion.
Instead of feeling guilty about something you have already done,
why not simply resolve not to behave in an antisocial manner again.
Dieting is an area that is loaded with guilt. The dieter eats one
cookie and feels bad for a day for having been weak for a moment.
If you are striving to lose weight and give in to counterproductive
behavior, you can learn from it and work at being more effective in
your present moment. But to feel guilty and full of self-reproach is
a waste of time, for, if you feel that way for very long, you are likely
to repeat the excess eating, as your own neurotic way out of your
dilemma.
Sexual Expression Guilt
Perhaps the area where guilt flourishes best in our society is in
the realm of sex. We have already seen how parents engender guilt
in children for sexual acts or thoughts. Adults feel no less100 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 109 ---
guilty about matters of sex. People sneak into porno films so that
others won’t know how bad they’ve been. Some people can’t admit
to enjoying oral sex and often feel guilty for even thinking about it.
Sexual fantasies are also effective guilt producers. Many feel bad
about having such thoughts and deny their existence even in private,
or in therapy. In fact, if I had to locate a guilt center in the body, I
would place it in the crotch.
This is only a brief listing of the cultural influences that conspire
to help you choose guilt. Now let’s take a look at the psychological
payoffs for feeling guilt. Keep in mind that whatever the dividend,
it is bound to be self-defeating, and remember that the next time
you opt for guilt over freedom.
The Psychological Payoffs for Choosing Guilt
Here are the most basic reasons for choosing to waste your present
feeling guilty about things that you’ve done or failed to do in the
past.
• By absorbing your present moments feeling guilty about some-
thing that has already taken place, you don’t have to use that now
moment in any kind of effective, self-enhancing way. Very simply,
like so many self-defeating behaviors, guilt is an avoidance technique
for working on yourself in the present. Thus you shift responsibility
for what you are or are not now to what you were or were not in
the past.
• By shifting responsibility backward you not only avoid the hard
work of changing yourself now but the attendant risks that go with
change as well. It is easier to immobilize yourself with guilt about
the past than to take the hazardous path of growing in the present.
• There is a tendency to believe that if you feel guilty enough, you
will eventually be exonerated for having been naughty. This being
forgiven payoff is the basis of the prisonTHE USELESS EMOTIONS—GUILT AND WORRY  / 101
--- PAGE 110 ---
mentality described above, in which the inmate pays for sins by
feeling terrible for a long period of time. The greater the transgres-
sion, the longer the period of remorse necessary for pardon.
• Guilt can be a means of returning to the safety of childhood, a
secure period when others made decisions for you and took care of
you. Rather than taking yourself in hand in the present, you rely on
the values of others from your past. And once again the payoff is in
being protected from having to take charge of your own life.
• Guilt is a useful method for transferring responsibility for your
behavior from yourself to others. It is easy to get infuriated at how
you are being manipulated and to shift the focus for your guilt off
yourself, and onto those infernal others, who are so powerful that
they can make you feel anything they want, including guilt.
• Often you can win the approval of others even when those
others don’t approve of your behavior by feeling guilt for that beha-
vior. You may have done something out of line, but by feeling guilty
you are showing that you know the proper way to behave, and are
making an attempt to fit in.
• Guilt is a superb way to win pity from others. No matter that
the desire for the pity is a clear indication of low self-esteem. In this
case you’d rather have others feel sorry for you, than like and respect
yourself.
There you have the most notorious of the dividends for hanging
onto guilt. Guilt, like all self-nullifying emotions, is a choice, some-
thing that you exercise control over. If you don’t like it, and would
prefer to make it go away so that you are entirely “guilt-free” here
are some beginning strategies for wiping your guilt slate clean.
Some Strategies for Eliminating Guilt
• Begin to view the past as something that can never be102 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 111 ---
changed, despite how you feel about it. It’s over! And any guilt that
you choose will not make the past different. Emblazon this sentence
on your consciousness. “My feeling guilty will not change the past,
nor will it make me a better person.” This sort of thinking will help
you to differentiate guilt from learning as a result of your past.
• Ask yourself what you are avoiding in the present with guilt
about the past. By going to work on that particular thing, you will
eliminate the need for guilt.
A client of mine who had been carrying on an extramarital affair
for some time provides a good example of this kind of guilt elimin-
ation. The man professed to feel guilty about the affair, but continued
to sneak away from his wife each week to see the other woman. I
pointed out to him that the guilt he spoke so much about was a
totally futile emotion. It did not improve his marriage and even
prevented him from enjoying his affair. He had two choices. He
could recognize that he was devoting his present to feeling guilty
because it was easier than examining his marriage closely and going
to work on it—and himself.
Or he could learn to accept his behavior. He could admit that he
condoned extramarital sexual exploration and realize that his value
system encompassed behavior which many people condemn. In
either case, he would be choosing to eliminate the guilt, and to either
change or accept himself.
• Begin to accept certain things about yourself that you’ve chosen
but which others may dislike. Thus, if your parents, boss, neighbors,
or even spouse, take a stand against some of your behavior, you can
see that as natural. Remember what was said earlier about approval
seeking. It is necessary that you approve of yourself; the approval
of others is pleasant but beside the point. Once you no longer need
approval, the guilt for behavior which does not bring approval will
disappear.
• Keep a Guilt Journal  and write down any guilty moments, noting
precisely when, why, and with whom it occurs, and what you are
avoiding in the present with this agonizing over theTHE USELESS EMOTIONS—GUILT AND WORRY  / 103
--- PAGE 112 ---
past. The journal should provide some helpful insights into your
particular guilt zone.
• Reconsider your value system. Which values do you believe in
and which do you only pretend to accept? List all of these phony
values and resolve to live up to a code of ethics that is self-determ-
ined, not one that has been imposed by others.
• Make a list of all the bad things you’ve ever done. Give yourself
guilt points for each of them on a scale of one to ten. Add up your
score and see if it makes any difference in the present whether it’s
one hundred or one million. The present-moment is still the same
and all of your guilt is merely wasteful activity.
• Assess the real consequences of your behavior. Rather than
looking for a mystical feeling to determine yes’s and no’s in your
life, determine whether the results of your actions are pleasing and
productive for you.
• Teach those in your life who attempt to manipulate you with
guilt that you are perfectly capable of handling their disappointment
in you. Thus, if Mamma gets into her guilt act with “You didn’t do
this” or “I’ll get the chairs, you just sit there,” learn new responses
like “Okay, Mom, if you want to risk your back on a few chairs be-
cause you can’t wait a few minutes, I guess there is little I can do to
dissuade you.” It will take some time, but their behavior will begin
to change once they see they cannot force you to choose guilt. Once
you de-fuse the guilt, the emotional control over you and the possib-
ility of manipulation are eliminated forever.
• Do something which you know is bound to result in feelings of
guilt. As you check into a hotel, and a bellboy is assigned to show
you to a room that you are perfectly capable of finding alone with
your one small piece of luggage, announce that you’ll do it alone. If
you’re rejected, tell your unwanted companion that he is wasting
his time and energy since you will not be leaving a tip for a service
that you don’t want. Or take a week to be alone if you’ve always
wanted to do so, despite the104 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 113 ---
guilt-engendering protestations from other members of your family.
These kinds of behavior will help you to tackle that omnipresent
guilt that so many sectors of the environment are adept at helping
you to choose.
• The following dialogue represents a role-working exercise in a
counseling group led by myself, in which a young girl (23) was
confronting her mother (being played by another group member)
about wanting to leave the nest. The mother was using every con-
ceivable guilt-producing response to keep her from leaving home.
This dialogue was the end product of an hour of teaching the
daughter how to outmaneuver her mother’s guilt-producing state-
ments.
DAUGHTER : Mother—I’m leaving home.
MOTHER : If you do, I’ll have a heart attack, you know how
my heart is, and how I need you to help me with my medicine
and all.
DAUGHTER : You’re concerned about your health and you
think you can’t make it without me.
MOTHER : Of course I can’t. Look, I’ve been good to you all
these years, and now you’re just walking out, leaving me
here to die. If that’s all you think of your mother, go ahead.
DAUGHTER : You think that because you’ve helped me as a
child that I should repay you by staying here and not become
independent and be on my own.
MOTHER : (Clutching at her chest) I’m having a tachycardia
attack right now. I think I’m going to die. You’re killing me,
that’s what you’re doing.
DAUGHTER : Is there anything you’d like to say to me before
you leave?”
In this dialogue, the daughter refused to yield to the obvious guilt
producers offered by her mother. The daughter had been aTHE USELESS EMOTIONS—GUILT AND WORRY  / 105
--- PAGE 114 ---
literal slave, and any effort to be on her own had always been met
with guilt-engendering talk. Mamma was willing to use anything
to keep her daughter dependent and in her control, and the daughter
either had to learn new responses or be a slave to her mother and
her own guilt for the rest of her life. Take careful notice of the
daughter’s responses. They all begin with references to her mother
as responsible for her own feelings. By saying “You feel,” rather
than “I feel,” the potential for guilt is tactfully minimized.
Such is guilt in our culture—a convenient tool for manipulating
others and a futile waste of time. Worry, the other side of the coin,
is diagnostically identical to guilt, but focuses exclusively on the
future and all of the terrible things that might  happen.
A Closer Look at Worry
There is nothing to worry about! Absolutely nothing. You can
spend the rest of your life, beginning right now, worrying about the
future, and no amount of your worry will change a thing. Remember
that worry is defined as being immobilized in the present as a result
of things that are going or not going to happen in the future. You
must be careful not to confuse worrying with planning for the future.
If you are planning, and the present-moment activity will contribute
to a more effective future, then this is not worry. It is worry only
when you are in any way immobilized now about a future happen-
ing.
Just as our society fosters guilt, so it encourages worry. Once again
it all begins with equating worrying with caring. If you care about
someone, the message goes, then you are bound to worry about the
person. Thus, you’ll hear sentences like, “Of course I’m worried, it’s
only natural when you care about someone” or “I can’t help worry-
ing, it’s because I love you.” Thus, you prove your love by doing an
appropriate amount of worrying at the correct time.106 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 115 ---
Worry is endemic to our culture. Almost everyone spends an in-
ordinate amount of present moments worrying about the future.
And all of it is for naught. Not one moment of worry will make
things any better. In fact, worry will very likely help you to be less
effective in dealing with the present. Moreover, worry has nothing
to do with love which predicates a relationship in which each person
has the right to be what he chooses without any necessary conditions
imposed by the other.
Think of yourself as being alive in 1860, at the beginning of the
Civil War. The country is mobilizing for war, and there are approx-
imately thirty-two million people in the United States. Each of those
thirty-two million folks has hundreds of things to worry about and
they spend many present moments agonizing about the future. They
worry about war, the price of food, the draughts, the economy, all
the things that you worry about today. In 1975, some 115 years later,
all of those worriers are dead and all their combined worrying did
not change a moment of what is now history. The same is true of
your own worry times. When the earth is populated by an entirely
new crew, will any of your worry moments have made a difference?
No. And, do any of your worry times make a difference today, in
terms of changing the things you worry about? No, again. Then this
is one zone that you must tidy up, since you are just wasting those
precious present moments on behavior that has absolutely no posit-
ive payoff for you.
Much of your worry concerns things over which you have no
control. You can worry all you want about war, or the economy, or
possible illness, but worry won’t bring peace or prosperity or health.
As an individual you have little control over any of those things.
Moreover the catastrophe you’re worrying about frequently turns
out to be less horrible in reality than it was in your imagination.
I worked with Harold, who was forty-seven years old, for several
months. He was worried about being laid off and not being able to
support his family. He was a compulsive worrier. He began losing
weight, was unable to sleep and was gettingTHE USELESS EMOTIONS—GUILT AND WORRY  / 107
--- PAGE 116 ---
sick frequently. In counseling, we talked about the futility of worry
and how he could choose to be content. But Harold was a true
worrier, and he felt that it was his responsibility to worry about
possible impending disaster every day. Finally, after months of
worry, he did receive his pink slip and was unemployed for the first
time in his life. Within three days, he had secured another position,
one which paid more, and gave him a great deal more satisfaction.
He had used his compulsiveness to find the new job. His search was
rapid and relentless. And all of his worry had been useless. His
family had not starved, and Harold had not collapsed. Like most
worry-producing gloom pictures in one’s head, the eventuality res-
ulted in benefits, rather than horror. Harold learned firsthand the
futility of worry, and he has actually begun to adopt a nonworry
stance in his life.
In a clever essay on worry in The New Yorker,  entitled “Look for
the Rusty Lining,” Ralph Schoenstein satirizes worry.
What a list! Something old and something new, something
cosmic yet something trivial too, for the creative worrier must
forever blend the pedestrian with the immemorial. If the sun
burns out, will the Mets be able to play their entire schedule at
night? If cryogenically frozen human beings are ever revived,
will they have to re-register to vote? And if the little toe disap-
pears, will field goals play a smaller part in the National Foot-
ball League? *
You may be in the professional worrier classification, creating
unnecessary stress and anxiety in your life as a result of the choices
you are making to worry about every conceivable kind of activity.
Or you may be a minor league worrier concerned only about your
own personal problems. The following list rep-
*Ralph Schoenstein, “Look for the Rusty Lining,” The New Yorker  (Feb. 3, 1975).108 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 117 ---
resents the most common responses to the question, “What do you
worry about?”
Typical Worry Behaviors in our Culture
I gathered the following data from some two hundred adults at
a lecture one evening. I call this your worry sheet, and you can give
yourself “worry points” similar to the “guilt points” discussed above.
They are not listed in any particular sequence of frequency or im-
portance. The parenthetical statements represent the kinds of sen-
tences that justify the worry.
YOUR WORRY SHEET
I worry about…
1. My children  (“Everyone worries about their children, I wouldn’t
be a very good parent if I didn’t, now would I?”)
2. My health  (“If you don’t worry about your health, you could die
at anytime!”)
3. Dying  (“No one wants to die. Everyone worries about death.”)
4. My job  (“If you don’t worry about it, you might lose it.”)
5. The economy  (“Someone ought to worry about it, the President
doesn’t seem to care.”)
6. Having a heart attack  (“Everyone does, don’t they?” “Your heart
could go at any minute.”)
7. Security  (“If you don’t worry about security, you’ll find yourself
in the poorhouse, or on welfare.”)
8. My wife’s/husband’s happiness  (“God knows I spend a lot of time
worrying about him/her being happy, and they still don’t appre-
ciate it.”)THE USELESS EMOTIONS—GUILT AND WORRY  / 109
--- PAGE 118 ---
9. Am I doing the right thing?  (“I always worry about doing things
right, that way I know I’m okay.”)
10. Having a healthy child if you’re pregnant  (“Every mother-to-be
worries about that.”)
11. Prices  (“Somebody ought to worry about them before they
skyrocket out of sight.”)
12. Accidents  (“I always worry that my spouse or the children will
have an accident. It’s only natural, isn’t it?”)
13. What others will think  (“I worry about my friends not liking
me.”)
14. My weight  (“No one wants to be fat, so naturally I worry about
not gaining back any of the weight I lost.”)
15. Money  (“We never seem to have enough, and I worry that
someday we’ll be broke and have to go on welfare.”)
16. My car breaking down  (“It’s an old clunker and I drive it on the
expressway, so of course I worry about it and what might happen
if it did.”)
17. My bills  (“Everyone worries about paying their bills. You
wouldn’t be human if you didn’t worry about bills.”)
18. My parents dying  (“I don’t know what I’d do if they died, it
worries me sick. I worry about being alone, I don’t think I could
handle it.”)
19. Getting into heaven or what if there is no God  (“I can’t stand the
idea of there being nothing.”)
20. The weather  (“I plan things like a picnic and maybe it’ll rain. I
worry about having snow for skiing.”)
21. Getting old  (“No one wants to get old, and you can’t kid me,
everyone worries about that one.” “I don’t know what I’ll do when
I retire and I really worry about that.”)
22. Flying  (“You hear about all those plane crashes.”)110 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 119 ---
23. My daughter’s virginity  (“Every father who loves his daughter
worries that she’ll be hurt, or get into trouble.”)
24. Talking in front of groups  (“I get petrified in front of a crowd
and I worry like crazy before I do it.”)
25. When my spouse doesn’t call  (“It seems normal to me to worry
when you don’t know where some one you love is, or if they’re
in trouble.”)
26. Going into the city  (“Who knows what’ll happen in the jungle.
I worry every time I go in.” “I always worry about whether I’ll
get a parking space.”)
And perhaps the most neurotic of all…
27. Having nothing to worry about  (“I can’t just sit still when
everything seems all right, I worry about not knowing what will
happen next.”)
This is the collective worry sheet of people in our culture. You can
give worry points to each of those that seem most applicable to you,
total it up, and no matter what your score, it still adds up to zero.
The following paragraph illustrates the extent of worry in our world.
It’s taken from a story in Newsday  (May 3, 1975) on hospital malprac-
tice insurance.
West Islip—Two officials of the Nassau-Suffolk Hospital
Council warned yesterday that those worrying  about the prob-
lems that the malpractice insurance crisis could create—if doc-
tors cease treating patients entirely or treat only emergency
cases—have not worried  quite enough.
Indeed, a call to spend more time worrying about a problem. How
could a story like this even appear? Because the cultural pressure is
to worry, rather than to do. If all of those concerned were to worry
a lot more, perhaps the problem would go away.THE USELESS EMOTIONS—GUILT AND WORRY  / 111
--- PAGE 120 ---
In order to eliminate worry it is necessary to understand the why
behind it. If worry is a large part of your life, you can bet that it has
many historical antecedents. But what are the payoffs? They are
similar to the neurotic dividends that you receive for guilt, since
both worry and guilt are self-nullifying behaviors, that vary only in
a temporal sense. Guilt focuses on the past; worry on the future.
The Psychological Payoffs for Choosing Worry
• Worry is a present-moment activity. Thus, by using your current
life being immobilized over a future time in your life, you are able
to escape the now and whatever it is in the now that threatens you.
For example, I spent the summer of 1974 in Karamursel, Turkey,
teaching and writing a book on counseling. My seven-year-old
daughter was back in the United States with her mother. While I
love writing, I also find it an intensely lonely, difficult chore which
requires a great deal of self-discipline. I would sit down at my
typewriter with paper in place and the margins set, and all of a
sudden my thoughts would be back on little Tracy Lynn. What if
she rides her bicycle into the street and doesn’t look? I hope she’s
being watched at the swimming pool, because she has a tendency
to be careless. Before I knew it, an hour had elapsed, and I had spent
it worrying. This was all in vain of course. But, was it? As long as I
could use up my present moments worrying I didn’t have to struggle
with the difficulty of writing. A terrific payoff indeed.
• You can avoid having to take risks by using your worry as the
reason for immobility. How could you possibly act if you are preoc-
cupied with your present-moment worry? “I can’t do a thing, I’m
just too worried about———” This is a common lament, and one
with a payoff that keeps you standing still and avoiding the risk of
action.112 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 121 ---
• You can label yourself as a caring person  by worrying. Worry
proves that you are a good parent, good spouse, or good whatever.
A handsome dividend, although lacking in logical healthy thinking.
• Worry is a handy justification for certain self-defeating behavior.
If you’re overweight, you undoubtedly eat more when you worry,
hence you have a sensational reason for hanging on to the worry
behavior. Similarly, you find yourself smoking more in worrisome
situations, and can use the worry to avoid giving up smoking. This
same neurotic reward system applies to areas including marriage,
money, health and the like. The worry helps you to avoid changing.
It is easier to worry about chest pains than to take the risk of finding
out the truth, and then have to deal forthrightly with yourself.
• Your worry keeps you from living. A worrier sits around and
thinks about things, while a doer must be up and about. Worry is a
clever device to keep you inactive, and clearly it is easier, if less re-
warding, to worry, than to be an active, involved person.
• Worry can bring ulcers, hypertension, cramps, tension head-
aches, backaches and the like. While these may not seem to be pay-
offs, they do result in considerable attention from others and justify
much self-pity as well, and some people would rather be pitied than
fulfilled.
Now that you understand the psychological support system for
your worry, you can begin to devise some strategic efforts for getting
rid of the troublesome worry bugs that breed in this erroneous zone.
Some Strategies for Eliminating Worry
• Begin to view your present moments as times to live, rather than
to obsess about the future. When you catch yourself worry-THE USELESS EMOTIONS—GUILT AND WORRY  / 113
--- PAGE 122 ---
ing, ask yourself, “What am I avoiding now by using up this moment
with worry?” Then begin to attack whatever it is you’re avoiding.
The best antidote to worry is action. A client of mine, formerly prone
to worry, told me of a recent triumph over it. At a vacation resort
he wandered into the sauna one afternoon. There he met a man who
couldn’t take a holiday from his worries. The other man elaborated
all of the things my client should be worrying about. He mentioned
the stock market, but said not to worry about short-range fluctu-
ations. In six months there would be a virtual collapse, and that was
the thing to really worry about. My client made sure of all the things
he should worry about, and then left. He played a one-hour game
of tennis, enjoyed a touch football game with some young children,
participated with his wife in a Ping-Pong match which they thor-
oughly enjoyed, and finally, some three hours later, returned for a
shower/sauna. His new friend was still there worrying, and began
once again to chronicle more things to worry about. Meantime, my
client had spent his present moments excitedly alive, while the other
man had consumed his in worry. And neither man’s behavior had
any effect on the stock market.
• Recognize the preposterousness of worry. Ask yourself over
and over, “Is there anything that will ever change as a result of my
worrying about it?”
• Give yourself shorter and shorter periods of “worry-time.”
Designate ten minutes in the morning and afternoon as your worry
segments. Use these periods to fret about every potential disaster
you can get into the time slot. Then, using your ability to control
your own thoughts, postpone any further worry until your next
designated “worry-time.” You’ll soon see the folly of using any time
in this wasteful fashion, and will eventually eliminate your worry
zone completely.
• Make a worry list of everything you worried about yesterday,
last week and even last year. See if any of your worry did anything
productive for you. Assess also how many of the114 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 123 ---
things you worried about ever materialized at all. You’ll soon see
that the worry is really a doubly wasteful activity. It does nothing
to alter the future. And the projected catastrophe often turns out to
be minor, or even a blessing when it arrives.
• Just Worry!  See if it is something that you can demonstrate when
you are tempted to worry. That is, stop and turn to someone and
say, “Watch me—I’m about to worry.” They’ll be confounded since
you probably won’t even know how to demonstrate the thing you
do so well, so often.
• Ask yourself this worry-eradicating question. “What’s the worst
thing that could happen to me (or them) and what is the likelihood
of it occurring?” You’ll discover the absurdity of worry in this way.
• Deliberately choose to act in some manner that is in direct con-
flict with your usual areas of worry. If you compulsively save for
the future, always worried about having enough money for another
day, begin to use your money today. Be like the rich uncle who put
in his will, “Being of sound mind, I spent all my money while I was
alive.”
• Begin to face the fears you possess with productive thought and
behavior. A friend of mine recently spent a week on an island off
the coast of Connecticut. The woman enjoys taking long walks, and
soon discovered that the island was populated by many dogs who
were allowed to run wild. She decided to fight her fear and worry
that they might somehow bite her or even tear her limb from
limb—the ultimate calamity. She carried a rock in her hand (insur-
ance) and decided to show no sign of fear as the dogs approached.
She even refused to slow down when the dogs growled and came
running toward her. As the dogs charged forward and encountered
someone who refused to back down, they gave up and ran away.
While I am not advocating dangerous behavior, I do believe that an
effective challenge to a fear or worry is the most productive way to
eradicate it from your life.THE USELESS EMOTIONS—GUILT AND WORRY  / 115
--- PAGE 124 ---
These are some techniques for eliminating worry in your life. But
the most effective weapon you have for wiping out worry is your
own determination to banish this neurotic behavior from your life.
Final Thoughts on Worry and Guilt
The present moment is the key to understanding your guilt and
worry activities. Learn to live now and not waste your current mo-
ments in immobilizing thoughts about the past or future. There is
no other moment to live but now, and all of your futile guilt and
worry are done in the elusive now.
Lewis Carroll in Alice Through the Looking Glass  talked about living
in the present.
“The rule is, jam tomorrow, and jam yesterday…but never jam
today.”
“It must come sometimes to ‘jam-today,’ ” Alice objected.
How about you? Any jam today? Since it must come sometime,
how about now?116 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 125 ---
