IX
PUTTING AN END TO
PROCRASTINATION—NOW
It takes not one drop of sweat
to put off doing anything.
A re you a procrastinator? If you’re like most people, the answer
to that is yes. But chances are that you’d rather not live with all that
anxiety that accompanies putting things off as a way of life. You
may find yourself postponing many tasks that you want to accom-
plish, and yet for some reason you just keep suspending action. This
procrastination business is a mighty tiresome facet of life. If you’ve
got a bad case, hardly a day goes by that you don’t say, “I know I
should be doing it, but I’ll get around to it later.” Your “putting it
off” erroneous zone is difficult to blame on outside forces. It’s all
yours—both the putting off and the discomfort you endure as a
result of it.
Procrastination is the closest there is to a universal erroneous zone.
Very few people can honestly say that they are not procrastinators,
despite the fact that it is unhealthy in the long run. As in all erro-
neous zones, there is nothing unhealthy about the
176
--- PAGE 185 ---
behavior itself. Putting it off, in fact, doesn’t even exist. You simply
do, and those things you don’t do, in reality, are just undone, rather
than postponed. It is only the accompanying emotional reaction and
immobilization that represent neurotic behavior. If you feel that you
put things off, and like it, with no attending guilt, anxiety or upset,
then by all means hang onto it, and pass over this chapter. However,
for most people procrastination is really an escape from living
present moments as fully as possible.
Hoping, Wishing and Maybe
Three neurotic phrases of the procrastinator make up the support
system for maintaining putting-it-off behavior.
“I hope things will work out.”
“I wish things were better.”
“Maybe it’ll be okay.”
There you have the deferrer’s delight. As long as you say maybe, or
hope, or wish, you can use these as a rationale for not doing anything
now. All wishing and hoping are a waste of time—the folly of
fairyland residents. No amount of either ever got anything accom-
plished. They are merely convenient escape clauses from rolling up
your sleeves and taking on the tasks that you’ve decided are import-
ant enough to be on your list of life activities.
You can do anything that you set your mind to accomplish. You
are strong, capable and not the least bit brittle. But by putting things
off for a future moment, you are giving into escapism, self-doubt,
and most significantly, self-delusion. Your putting it off zone is a
movement away from being strong in your now, and toward the
direction of hoping that things will improve in the future.PUTTING AN END TO PROCRASTINATION—NOW  / 177
--- PAGE 186 ---
Inertia as a Strategy for Living
Here is a sentence that can keep you inert, in your present mo-
ments: “I’ll wait, and it’ll get better.” For some this becomes a way
of life—they are always putting it off for a day that can never arrive.
Mark, a recent client of mine, came to me complaining about his
unhappy marriage. Mark was in his fifties and had been married
for almost thirty years. As we began to talk about his marriage, it
became clear that Mark’s complaints were long-standing. “It’s never
been any good, even from the beginning,” he said at one point. I
asked Mark what had made him hold on for all these years of misery.
“I kept hoping things would get better,” he confessed. Almost thirty
years of hope and Mark and his wife were still miserable.
As we talked more about Mark’s life and marriage, he admitted
to a history of impotence that went back at least a decade. Had he
ever sought help for this problem, I asked. No, he had merely
avoided sex more and more and hoped that the problem would go
away on its own. “I was sure things would get better,” Mark echoed
his original comment.
Mark and his marriage were a classic case of inertia. He avoided
his problems and justified his avoidance by saying, “If I wait and
do nothing, maybe it’ll work itself out.” But Mark learned that things
never work themselves out. They remain precisely as they are. At
best, things change, but they don’t get better. Things themselves
(circumstances, situations, events, people) will not improve alone.
If your life is better, it is because you have done something construct-
ive to make it better.
Let’s take a closer look at this procrastination behavior and how
to eliminate it with some rather simple resolutions. This is one zone
that you can clean up without a lot of hard “mental work,” since it
is one that you alone have created for yourself, without any of the
cultural reinforcement that is the hallmark of so many other erro-
neous zones.178 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 187 ---
How Procrastination Works
Donald Marquis called procrastination “the art of keeping up with
yesterday.” To this I would add, “and avoiding today.” This is how
it works. You know there are certain things that you want to do, not
because others have so dictated, but because they are your deliberate
choices. However, many of them never get done, despite your telling
yourself that they will. Resolving to do something in the future
which you could do now is an acceptable substitute for doing it, and
permits you to delude yourself that you are really not compromising
yourself by not doing what you have set out to do. It’s a handy sys-
tem that works something like this. “I know I must do that, but I’m
really afraid that I might not do it well, or I won’t like doing it. So,
I’ll tell myself that I’ll do it in the future, then I don’t have to admit
to myself that I’m not going to do it. And it is easier to accept myself
this way.” This is the sort of convenient if fallacious reasoning that
can be brought into play when you are faced with having to do
something which is unpleasant or difficult.
If you are a person who lives one way and says you are going to
live another way in the future, those proclamations are empty. You
are simply a person who is always adjourning and never getting
things done.
There are, of course, degrees of procrastination. It is possible to
put things off up to a point, and then complete a task just prior to
the deadline. Here again is a common form of self-delusion. If you
allow yourself an absolute minimum amount of time to get your
work done, then you can justify sloppy results or less than top-notch
performance by saying to yourself, “I just didn’t have enough time.”
But you have plenty of time. You know that busy people get things
done. But if you spend your time complaining about how much you
have to do (procrastination), then you’ll have no present-moment
time for doing it.
I once had a colleague who was a procrastination specialist.PUTTING AN END TO PROCRASTINATION—NOW  / 179
--- PAGE 188 ---
He was always busy chasing down deals and talking about how
much he had to do. When he talked, others got tired just imagining
the pace of his life. But a close look would reveal that my colleague
actually did very little. He had a zillion projects going in his mind
and never got down to work on any of them. I imagine that each
night before dozing off, he deluded himself with a promise that to-
morrow he would get that job finished. How else could he go off to
sleep with his self-delusional system intact? He may have known
that he would not, but so long as he swore that he would, his present
moments were safe.
You are not necessarily what you say. Behavior is a much better
barometer of what you are than words. What you do in your present
moments is the only indicator of what you are as a person. Emerson
wrote,
Do not say things. What you are stands over you the while, and
thunders so that I cannot hear what you say to the contrary.
Next time as you say you’ll get it done, but know that you won’t,
keep those words in mind. They are the antidote to procrastination.
Critics and Doers
Putting it off as a way of life is one technique that you can use to
avoid doing. A non-doer is very often a critic, that is, someone who
sits back and watches doers, and then waxes philosophically about
how the doers are doing. It is easy to be a critic, but being a doer
requires effort, risk and change.180 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 189 ---
THE CRITIC
Our culture is full of critics. We even pay to hear them.
As you observe yourself and the people around you, take note of
how much social intercourse is devoted to criticism. Why? Because
it is just plain easier to talk about how someone else has performed
than to be the performer. Take note of real champions, those who
have sustained at a high level of excellence over a period of time.
The Henry Aarons, the Johnny Carsons, the Bobby Fishers, the
Katharine Hepburns, the Joe Louises, and people of that ilk. Doers
at the highest levels. Champions in every way. Do they sit around
poking serious criticism at others? The real doers of the world have
no time for criticizing others. They’re too busy doing. They work.
They help others who are not as talented, rather than serve as their
critics.
Constructive criticism can be useful. But if you’ve chosen the role
of an observer rather than a doer, you are not growing. Moreover,
you may be using your criticism to absolve yourself of the respons-
ibility for your own ineffectiveness by projecting it onto those who
are really making an effort. You can learn to ignore the fault-finders
and self-appointed critics. Your first strategy will be to recognize
these same behaviors in yourself, and resolve to eliminate them en-
tirely, so that you can be a doer rather than a procrastinating critic.
Boredom: A Spin-Off of Procrastination
Life is never boring but some people choose to be bored. The
concept of boredom entails an inability to use up present moments
in a personally fulfilling way. Boredom is a choice; something you
visit upon yourself, and it is another of those self-defeating items
that you can eliminate from your life. When you procrastinate, you
use your present moments doing nothing, as an alternative to doing
anything. Doing nothing leads toPUTTING AN END TO PROCRASTINATION—NOW  / 181
--- PAGE 190 ---
boredom. The tendency is to blame boredom on the environment.
“This town is really dull” or “What a boring speaker.” The particular
town or speaker is never dull, it is you experiencing the boredom,
and you can eliminate it by doing something else with your mind
or energy at that moment.
Samuel Butler said, “The man who lets himself be bored is even
more contemptible than the bore.” By doing what you choose, now,
or using your mind in creative new ways now, you can insure that
you’ll never again choose boredom for yourself. The choice, as al-
ways, is yours.
Some Typical Procrastinating Behavior
Here are some areas where procrastination is a much easier choice
than action.
• Staying in a job in which you find yourself stuck and unable to
grow.
• Hanging onto a relationship that has gone sour. Staying married
(or unmarried) and merely hoping that it will get better.
• Refusing to work on relationship difficulties such as sex, shyness
or phobias. Simply waiting for them to improve, instead of trying
to do something constructive about them.
• Not tackling addictions such as alcoholism, drugs, pills, or
smoking. Saying, “I’ll quit when I’m ready,” but knowing that you
are putting it off because you doubt that you can.
• Putting off arduous or menial tasks such as cleaning, repairing,
sewing, lawn work, painting and the like—providing you really care
about whether or not they get done. If you wait long enough, maybe
it will get done by itself.
• Avoiding a confrontation with others, such as an authority fig-
ure, a friend, a lover, a salesperson or a serviceman. By waiting, you
end up not having to do it, although the confrontation might have
improved the relationship or the service.182 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 191 ---
• Being afraid to change locations geographically. You stay in the
same place for a lifetime.
• Putting off spending a day or an hour with your children which
you might enjoy because you have too much work or are bogged
down in serious matters. Similarly, not going out for an evening to
dinner, or to the theater or a sports event with your loved ones and
using your “I’m busy” line to postpone it forever.
• Deciding to start your diet tomorrow or next week. It’s easier
to put-it-off than to take-it-off, so you say, “I’ll get to it tomorrow,”
which of course will never arrive.
• Using sleep or tiredness as a reason for putting it off. Did you
ever notice how tired you get when you are close to actually doing
something uncomfortable or difficult? A little fatigue is a terrific
deferring device.
• Getting sick when you are faced with a disquieting or trouble-
some task. How could you possibly do it now, when you feel so
terrible? Like exhaustion above, it’s an excellent technique for pro-
crastinating.
• The “I don’t have time to do it” ruse, in which you justify not
doing something because of your busy schedule, which always has
room for those things that you really want to do.
• Constantly looking forward to a vacation or that dream-trip.
Next year we’ll find Nirvana.
• Being a critic and using your criticism of others to camouflage
your own refusal to do.
• Refusing to get a physical checkup when you suspect some
dysfunction. By putting it off you don’t have to deal with the reality
of possible illness.
• Being afraid to make a move toward someone you’re fond of.
It’s what you want, but you’d rather wait it out and hope that things
work out.
• Being bored at any time in your life. This is merely a way of
putting off something and using the boring event as a reason for not
doing something more exciting.PUTTING AN END TO PROCRASTINATION—NOW  / 183
--- PAGE 192 ---
• Planning but never putting in action a regular exercise program.
“I’ll get started on that right away…next week.”
• Living your entire life for your children and always putting off
your own happiness. How can we afford a vacation when we have
the kids’ education to worry about?
Reasons for Continuing to Put It Off
The rationale for putting it off is composed of one part self-delu-
sion and two parts escape. Here are the most important rewards for
hanging onto procrastination.
• Most obviously, putting it off allows you to escape from unpleas-
ant activities. There may be things you’re afraid to do or things part
of you wants to do and part of you doesn’t. Remember, nothing is
black or white.
• You can feel comfortable with your self-delusional system. Lying
to yourself keeps you from having to admit that you are not a “doer”
in this particular present moment.
• You can stay exactly as you are forever, as long as you keep
putting it off. Thus you eliminate change and all the risks that go
with it.
• By being bored you have someone or something else to blame
for your unhappy state, thus you shift responsibility away from
yourself and onto the boring activity.
• By being a critic you can feel important at the expense of others.
It is a way of using others’ performance as stepping-stones for elev-
ating yourself in your own mind. More self-delusion.
• By waiting for things to get better you can blame the world for
your unhappiness—things just never seem to break for you. A great
strategy for doing nothing.
• You can avoid ever having to fail by avoiding all activities184 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 193 ---
which involve some risk. In this way you never have to come face
to face with your self-doubt.
• Wishing for things to happen—Santa Claus fantasies—allow
you to return to a safe and protected childhood.
• You can win sympathy from others and feel sorry for yourself
for the anxiety that you live with as a result of not doing what you’d
like to have done.
• You are able to justify a sloppy or less than acceptable perform-
ance on anything if you put it off long enough, and then just allow
a minimal time segment for getting it done. “But I just didn’t have
time.”
• By putting it off, you might be able to get someone else to do it
for you. Thus, procrastination becomes a means of manipulating
others.
• Putting it off enables you to delude yourself into believing that
you are something other than what you really are.
• By avoiding a task you can escape success. If you don’t succeed
you avoid having to feel good about yourself and accepting all of
the continuing responsibility that goes with success.
Now that you have some insight into why you procrastinate, you
can begin to do something about eliminating this self-destructive
erroneous zone.
Some Techniques for Ousting This Postponing Behavior
• Make a decision to live five minutes at a time. Instead of thinking
of tasks in long-range terms, think about now and try to use up a
five-minute period doing what you want, refusing to put off anything
that would bring about satisfaction.
• Sit down and get started on something you’ve been postponing.
Begin a letter or a book. You’ll find that much of yourPUTTING AN END TO PROCRASTINATION—NOW  / 185
--- PAGE 194 ---
putting it off is unnecessary since you’ll very likely find the job en-
joyable, once you give up the procrastination. Simply beginning will
help you to eliminate anxiety about the whole project.
• Ask yourself, “What is the worst thing that could happen to me
if I did what I’m putting off right now?” The answer is usually so
insignificant that it may jar you into action. Assess your fear and
you’ll have no reason to hang onto it.
• Give yourself a designated time slot (say Wednesday from 10:00
to 10:15 P.M.) which you will devote exclusively to the task you’ve
been putting off. You’ll discover that the fifteen minutes of devoted
effort are often sufficient to see you over the hump of procrastination.
• Think of yourself as too significant to live with anxiety about
the things you have to do. So, the next time you know you are un-
comfortable with postponement anxiety, remember that people who
love themselves don’t hurt themselves that way.
• Look carefully at your now. Decide what you are avoiding in
your current moments and begin to tackle the fear of living effect-
ively. Procrastination is substituting the now with anxiety about a
future event. If the event becomes the now, the anxiety, by definition,
must go.
• Quit smoking…now! Begin your diet…this moment! Give up
booze…this second. Put this book down and do one push-up as your
beginning exercise project. That’s how you tackle problems…with
action now! Do it! The only thing holding you back is you, and the
neurotic choices you’ve made because you don’t believe you’re as
strong as you really are. How simple…just do it!
• Start using your mind creatively in what were previously boring
circumstances. At a meeting, change the dull tempo with a pertinent
question, or make your mind go off in exciting ways such as writing
a poem, or memorizing twenty-five numbers backwards, just for
the sheer drill of memory training. Decide to never be bored again.186 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 195 ---
• When someone begins to criticize you, ask this question, “Do
you think I need a critic now?” Or when you find yourself being a
critic, ask the person in your company if he wants to hear your citi-
cism, and if so, why? This will help you to move from the critic to
the doer column.
• Look hard at your life. Are you doing what you’d choose to be
doing if you knew you had six months to live? If not, you’d better
begin doing it because, relatively speaking, that’s all you have.
Given the eternity of time, thirty years or six months make no differ-
ence. Your total lifetime is a mere speck. Delaying anything makes
no sense.
• Be courageous about undertaking an activity that you’ve been
avoiding. One act of courage can eliminate all that fear. Stop telling
yourself that you must perform well. Remind yourself that doing it
is far more important.
• Decide not to be tired until the moment before you get into bed.
Don’t allow yourself to use fatigue or illness as an escape or to put
off doing anything. You may find that when you take away the
reason for the illness or exhaustion—that is, avoidance of a
task—physical problems “magically” disappear.
• Eliminate the words “hope,” “wish” and “maybe” from your
vocabulary. They are the tools of putting it off. If you see these words
creeping in, substitute new sentences. Change
“I hope things will work out” to “I will make it happen.”
“I wish things were better” to “I am going to do the following
things to ensure that I feel better.”
“Maybe it will be okay” to “I will make it okay.”
• Keep a journal of your own complaining or critical behavior.
By writing these actions down, you’ll accomplish two things. You’ll
see how your critical behavior surfaces in your life—the frequency,
patterns, events and people that are related to your being a critic.
You’ll also stop yourself from criticizing because it will be such a
pain to have to write in the journal.
• If you are putting something off which involves others (a move,
a sex problem, a new job), have a conference with all in-PUTTING AN END TO PROCRASTINATION—NOW  / 187
--- PAGE 196 ---
volved and ask their opinions. Be courageous about talking of your
own fears, and see if you are delaying for reasons that are only in
your head. By enlisting the aid of a confidant to help you with your
procrastination, you’ll have made it a joint effort. Soon you’ll dissip-
ate much of the anxiousness that goes along with procrastination
by sharing that as well.
• Write a contract with your loved ones in which you will deliver
the goods you want to but which you may have been postponing.
Have each party keep a copy of the contract, and build in penalties
for defaulting. Whether it’s a ball game, dinner-out, vacation, or
theater visit, you’ll find this strategy helpful and personally reward-
ing, since you’ll be participating in events that you also find enjoy-
able.
If you want the world to change, don’t complain about it. Do
something. Rather than using up your present moments with all
kinds of immobilizing anxiety over what you are putting off, take
charge of this nasty erroneous zone and live now! Be a doer, not a
wisher, hoper or critic.188 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 197 ---
