VII
BREAKING THE BARRIER
OF CONVENTION
There are no rules, laws or traditions that apply universally…includ-
ing this one.
The world is full of “shoulds” that people apply to their behavior
without evaluation, and the total of these shoulds makes up a very
large erroneous zone. You may be guided by a set of rules and
principles to which you don’t even subscribe, and yet you are unable
to break away and decide for yourself what works and doesn’t work
for you.
Nothing is absolute. There are no rules or laws which always make
sense or provide the greatest amount of good for all occasions.
Flexibility is a far greater virtue, and yet you may find it difficult,
indeed impossible, to break an unserviceable law or violate absurd
tradition. Fitting into your society or enculturation may be useful
for getting along at times, but carried to an extreme, it can become
a neurosis, particularly when unhappiness, depression and anxiety
are the consequences of your meeting the shoulds.
138
--- PAGE 147 ---
Nowhere is it being implied or in any way suggested that you
become contemptuous of the law, or break rules simply because you
see fit to do so. Laws are necessary, and order is an important part
of civilized society. But blind adherence to convention is something
else entirely, something, in fact, which may be far more destructive
to the individual than violation of the rules. Often rules are foolish,
and traditions no longer make any sense. When this is the case, and
you are unable to function effectively because you must follow
senseless rules, that is the time to reconsider the rules and your be-
havior.
As Abraham Lincoln once put it, “I never had a policy that I could
always apply. I’ve simply attempted to do what made the greatest
amount of sense at the moment.” He was not a slave to a single
policy that had to apply in every single case, even if the policy was
written with such an intention.
A should is unhealthy only when it gets in the way of healthy and
effective behavior. If you find yourself doing annoying or otherwise
counterproductive things which are the result of a should, you have
renounced your freedom of choice and are allowing yourself to be
controlled by some external force. A closer examination of this in-
ternal versus external control of yourself will be helpful before con-
tinuing to look at these erroneous musts which may clutter your
life.
Internal vs. External Locus of Control
It has been estimated that a full seventy-five percent of the people
in our culture are more external than internal in their personality
orientation. This means that the chances are that you fit into this
category more often than you don’t. What does it mean to be “ex-
ternal” in your locus of control? Essentially, you are external if you
assign responsibility for your emotional state in your present mo-
ments to someone or something external to yourself. Thus, if you
were to be asked the question, “Why doBREAKING THE BARRIER OF CONVENTION  / 139
--- PAGE 148 ---
you feel bad?” and you responded with answers like…“My parents
mistreat me,” “She hurt my feelings,” “My friends don’t like me,”
“My luck is down,” or “Things just aren’t going well,” you would
be in this external category. Conversely, if you were asked why you
are so happy, and you responded; “My friends treat me well,” “My
luck has changed,” “Nobody is bugging me,” or “She came through
for me,” you are still in the external frame, assigning responsibility
for how you feel to someone or something outside of you.
The internal locus of control person puts the responsibility for
how he feels squarely on his own shoulders, and this person is in-
deed rare in our culture. When asked the same questions, he re-
sponds with internally oriented answers such as: “I tell myself the
wrong things,” “I put too much emphasis on what others say,” “I
worry about what someone else thinks,” “I’m not strong enough
now to avoid being unhappy,” and “I don’t have the skills to keep
me from being miserable.” Similarly, when the internally-put-togeth-
er person is up, he responds with “I” references such as, “I worked
hard at being happy,” “I made things work for me,” “I’m telling
myself the right things,” “I’m in charge of me, and this is where I
choose to be.” Thus, you have one-fourth of the people taking re-
sponsibility for their own feelings, and three-fourths bestowing
blame on external sources. Where do you fit in? Virtually all shoulds
and traditions are imposed by external sources. That is, they come
from someone or something outside of yourself. If you are loaded
with shoulds and unable to break conventions which are prescribed
by others, then you are in the external bag.
An excellent example of this externally directed kind of thinking
is a client who came to me recently. We’ll call her Barbara. Her major
grievance was an obesity problem, but she had a host of minor
complaints as well. When we started to discuss her weight problem,
she said that she had always been overweight because she had a
metabolism problem and also because her mother had forced food
on her as a child. Her pattern of140 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 149 ---
overeating continued now, she said, because her husband had neg-
lected her and her children were inconsiderate of her. She had tried
everything, she lamented—Weight Watchers, pills, a variety of diet
doctors, even astrology. Therapy was to be her last resort. If I couldn’t
make her lose weight, she said, no one could.
As Barbara told her story—and viewed her own dilemma—it was
no wonder she couldn’t lose those unwanted pounds. Everything
and everybody was conspiring against her—her mother, her hus-
band, her children, even her own body and the stars. Weight
Watchers and diet doctors might be able to help less afflicted souls
but in Barbara’s case the odds against her were too great.
Barbara was a classic example of external thinking. It was her
mother, her husband, her children and some uncontrollable part of
her own body that made her fat. It had nothing to do with her own
choices to eat, or overeat, certain foods at certain times. Moreover,
her attempts to alleviate her situation were as externally directed as
her perceptions of the problem itself. Instead of recognizing that she
had chosen to overeat in the past and she would have to learn to
make new choices if she wanted to lose weight, Barbara turned to
other people and things—society’s accepted conventions for weight
loss. When all her friends went to Weight Watchers, Barbara went.
Each time a friend discovered a new diet doctor, Barbara was close
on her heels for help.
After several weeks of counseling, Barbara began to recognize
that her unhappiness and her complaints were the result of her own
choices, not the actions of others. It began with an admission that
she simply ate too much, often more than she really wanted, and
did not exercise enough. Her first decision was to change her eating
habits through sheer self-discipline. She could and would manipulate
her own mind. Next time she felt hungry she resolved to reward
herself with thoughts of her own internal strength rather than a
cookie. Instead of blaming her husband and children for treating
her badly and driving her to food, sheBREAKING THE BARRIER OF CONVENTION  / 141
--- PAGE 150 ---
began to see that she had been playing the martyr for years, virtually
begging them to exploit her. Once Barbara began demanding to be
treated well, she found that her family was only too ready to treat
her that way, and instead of seeking solace in food she found fulfill-
ment in relationships based on mutual respect and love.
Barbara even decided to spend less time with her mother who she
had come to see as running her life and ruining it with overdoses
of food. Once Barbara came to recognize that her mother did not
control her and that she could see her when she chose to, not when
her mother said she should, and similarly that she didn’t have to
eat that piece of chocolate cake just because her mother said she
should, Barbara began to enjoy rather than resent the time they spent
together.
Finally Barbara realized that therapy had nothing to do with
anything outside herself. I couldn’t change her. She had to change
herself. It took time, but gradually, with effort, Barbara replaced her
external shoulds with internal standards of her own. She is now not
only thinner, but happier as well. She knows that it isn’t her husband
or her children, her mother or the stars that are making her happy.
She knows it is herself, for now she controls her own mind.
Fatalists, determinists and people who believe in luck are in the
external slot. If you believe that your life is mapped out for you in
advance, and you need only follow the appropriate roads, then you
are very likely loaded with all of the shoulds that will keep you on
your road map.
You can never find self-fulfillment if you persist in permitting
yourself to be controlled by external forces or persist in thinking
that you are controlled by external forces. Being effective does not
mean eliminating all of the problems in your life. It does mean
moving your locus of control from the external to the internal. In
that way you make yourself responsible for everything that you ex-
perience emotionally. You are not a robot, running your life through
a maze, filled up with other people’s rules and142 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 151 ---
regulations that don’t even make sense to you. You can take a
sterner look at the “rules” and begin to exercise some internal control
over your own thinking, feeling and behavior.
BLAMING AND HERO WORSHIP: OPPOSITE ENDS OF THE
SAME EXTERNALLY DIRECTED BEHAVIOR
Blame is a neat little device that you can use whenever you don’t
want to take responsibility for something in your life. It is the refuge
of the externally oriented person.
All blame is a waste of time. No matter how much fault you find
with another, and regardless of how much you blame him, it will
not change you. The only thing blame does is keep the focus off you
when you are looking for external reasons to explain your unhappi-
ness or frustration. But blame itself is an act of folly. Even if blame
has some effect, it will not be on you. You may succeed in making
another feel guilty for something by blaming him, but you won’t
succeed in changing whatever it is about you that is making you
unhappy. You may succeed in not thinking about it; but you won’t
succeed in changing it.
The tendency to focus on others can go to the opposite extreme
where it surfaces as hero worship. In this case you may find yourself
looking to others to determine your values. If so-and-so does it, then
I should do it too. Hero worship is a form of self-repudiation. It
makes others more important than you, and relates your own fulfill-
ment to something outside of yourself. While there is nothing self-
defeating about appreciating others and their accomplishments, it
becomes an erroneous zone when you model your own behavior
on their standards.
All of your heroes are people. They are all human. They do the
same things that you do every day. They itch where you itch, they
have bad breath in the morning just like you. (The only good hero
is a ham and cheese or possibly an eggplant par-migiana.) All are
wasteful of your efforts.BREAKING THE BARRIER OF CONVENTION  / 143
--- PAGE 152 ---
All the great heroes of your life have taught you nothing. And
they are no better than you, in any way. Politicians, actors, athletes,
rock-stars, your boss, therapist, teacher, spouse, or whoever, are just
skillful at what they do—nothing more. And if you make them your
heroes and elevate them to positions above yourself, then you are
into that external bag of giving others the responsibility for your
good feelings.
If you blame at one end or hero worship at the other, you are
someplace on this Focusing On Others Line.
You are behaving as a fool if you look outside of you for an explan-
ation of how you should feel or what you should do. Taking credit
as well as responsibility for yourself is the first step to eliminating
this erroneous zone. Be your own hero. When you get out of the
blaming and hero worship behavior you’ll be moving over from the
external to the internal side of the ledger. And on the internal side
there are no universal shoulds, either for yourself or for others.
The Right vs. Wrong Trap
The question of right vs. wrong as it applies here has nothing to
do with religious, philosophical or moral issues of a priori  rightness
or wrongness. That is a discussion for another place. Here the subject
is you, and how your notions of right and wrong get in the way of
your own happiness. Your rights and wrongs are your universal
shoulds. You may have adopted some unhealthy stances which in-
clude right means good or just, while wrong is equated with bad or
unjust. This is nonsense. Rights and wrongs in this sense do not exist.
The word right144 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 153 ---
implies a guarantee that if you do something a certain way, you’ll
have sure-fire results. But there are no guarantees. You can begin to
think in terms of any decision as bringing about something different,
or more effective, or legal, but the moment it becomes a question of
right vs. wrong, you are trapped into the “I’ve always got to be right
and when things or people are not right, then I’m going to be un-
happy” trap.
Perhaps some of your need to find the right answer has to do with
the search for certainty that was discussed in the chapter on fear of
the unknown. This may be a part of your tendency to dichotomize,
or to divide the world neatly into extremes such as black/white,
yes/no, good/bad and right/wrong. Few things fit neatly into those
categories and most intelligent folks roam around in those gray
areas, rarely coming to rest on either black or white. This proclivity
for being right is most clearly evidenced in marriage and other adult
relationships. Discussions inevitably become a contest which results
in one partner being right, and the other wrong. You hear it all the
time. “You always think you’re right,” and, “You’ll never admit
you’re wrong.” But there is no right and wrong here. People are
different and they see things from different perspectives. If one must
be right, then a breakdown in communication is the only predictable
outcome.
The only way out of this trap is to stop thinking in those erroneous
right vs. wrong ways. As I explained to Clifford, who was in a
marriage in which he argued every day about every conceivable
topic, “Instead of attempting to convince your wife how wrong she
is, why not simply have discussions in which you have no should-
expectations for her. As long as she is allowed to be different from
you, you’ll eliminate the incessant arguing in which you doggedly,
albeit frustratedly, pursue being right.” Clifford was able to set aside
this neurotic need, and also to put some communication and love
back in his marriage. All rights and wrongs of every description
represent shoulds ofBREAKING THE BARRIER OF CONVENTION  / 145
--- PAGE 154 ---
one kind or another. And the shoulds get in your way, particularly
when they conflict with another person’s need to have his own as
well.
Indecisiveness As a Spin-Off of Right vs. Wrong Thinking
I once asked a client if he had trouble making a decision, and he
said, “Well—Yes and No.” Perhaps you have difficulty with decision-
making, even with small things. This is a direct outgrowth of the
inclination to divide things into right and wrong categories. The in-
decision comes from wanting to be right, and the postponement of
a choice keeps you from dealing with the anxiety that you choose
for yourself whenever you feel you’ve been wrong. Once you take
away the rightness and wrongness of every decision (because right
implies a guarantee), then decision-making will become a snap. If
you are trying to decide on the right college to attend, you might
stay immobilized forever, even after you’ve made the decision, be-
cause maybe it wasn’t right. Instead, shift the process to, “There is
no such thing as the right college. If I select A then these are the
more likely consequences, while B will probably bring about these.”
Neither is right, one is simply different than the other, and you’ll
have no guarantees regardless of the choice to attend, A, B, or Z.
Similarly you can ease your indecision-neurosis by viewing all po-
tential outcomes as being neither right nor wrong, good nor bad, or
even better or worse. Simply different. If you buy this dress which
you like, this is how you are going to look, which is only different
from (not better than) wearing that dress. Once you give up those
inaccurate and self-destructive rights and wrongs, you’ll find de-
cision-making a simple matter of weighing which consequences
you’d prefer at a given present-moment. And if you begin to choose
regret over the decision,146 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 155 ---
rather than deciding that regret is a waste of your time (because it
keeps you living in the past) you’ll simply resolve to make a different
decision in your next present moment, one that will bring con-
sequences that the earlier decision failed to bring. But never attempt-
ing to put it into a right or wrong categorization.
Nothing is more important than anything else. The child collecting
seashells is not doing something more right or wrong than the
President of General Motors making a major corporate decision.
They are different. Nothing more!
You may believe that wrong ideas are bad and should not be
stated, while right ideas are to be encouraged. Perhaps with your
children, friends or spouse, you say, “It’s not worth saying or doing,
if it’s not said or done right.” But danger lurks here. This authorit-
arian stance will lead to totalitarianism when extended to national
and international proportions. Who decides the rightness? That is
the question that can never be answered satisfactorily. The law
doesn’t decide if it’s wrong, only if it’s legal. More than a century
ago, John Stuart Mill, writing in On Liberty,  proclaimed:
We can never be sure that the opinion we are endeavoring to
stifle is false opinion, and if we were sure, stifling it would be
an evil still.
Your effectiveness is not measured by your ability to make a right
choice. How you handle yourself emotionally after any choice is a
far greater barometer of your personal present-moment togetherness,
since a right choice represents those shoulds that you are working
at eliminating. New thinking will be helpful on two counts—one,
you’ll banish those senseless shoulds and become more internal,
and two, you’ll find decision-making less troublesome without those
erroneous right and wrong categories.BREAKING THE BARRIER OF CONVENTION  / 147
--- PAGE 156 ---
The Folly of Shoulds, Musts and Oughts
There is a neat little word, coined by Albert Ellis, for the tendency
to incorporate shoulds into your life. It is “musterbation.” You are
“musterbating” whenever you find yourself behaving in ways that
you feel you must, even though you might prefer some other form
of behavior. Karen Horney, the brilliant psychiatrist, has devoted
an entire chapter of Neurosis and Human Growth  to this topic, and
she titles it, “The Tyranny of the Should.” She comments:
The shoulds always produce a feeling of strain, which is all the
greater the more a person tries to actualize his shoulds in his
behavior…. Furthermore, because of externalizations, the
shoulds always contribute to disturbance in human relations  in
one way or another.*
Do shoulds determine much of your life? Do you feel you should
be kind to your colleagues, supportive of your spouse, helpful to
your children and always work hard? And if at any time you fail in
one of these shoulds do you berate yourself and hence take on that
strain and disturbance to which Karen Horney alludes above? But
perhaps these are not your shoulds. If, in fact, they belong to others
and you have merely borrowed them, then you are musterbating.
There are just as many should-nots as there are shoulds. These
include: you should not be rude, angry, foolish, silly, juvenile, lewd,
gloomy, offensive and scores of others. But you don’t have to mus-
terbate. Ever. It’s all right to be lacking in composure, or to not un-
derstand. You’re allowed to be undignified if you choose to. No one
is keeping score on you, or going to punish you for not being
something that someone else said you must be. Besides, you can
never be anything that you
*Karen Horney, Neurosis and Human Growth  (New York: W. W. Norton & Co.,
1950), p. 81.148 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 157 ---
don’t want to be all of the time. It’s just not possible. Therefore, any
should will have to produce strain in you, since you won’t be able
to fulfill your erroneous expectation. The strain does not result from
your undignified, nonsupportive, indiscreet or whatever behavior,
but from the imposition of the should.
Etiquette as a Should
Etiquette is a beautiful example of useless and unhealthy encultur-
ation. Think of all the little meaningless rules you’ve been encour-
aged to adopt simply because an Emily Post, Amy Vanderbilt, or
Abigail van Buren has so written. Eat your corn on the cob this way,
always wait for the hostess to start before eating, introduce the man
to the woman, sit on that side of the church at a wedding, tip this,
wear that, use these words. Don’t consult yourself; look it up in the
book. While good manners are certainly appropriate—they simply
entail consideration for other people—about ninety percent of all
the etiquette guidelines are meaningless rules that were composed
arbitrarily at one time. There is no proper way for you; there is only
what you decide is right for you—as long as you don’t make it hard
for others to get along. You can choose how you’ll introduce people,
what you’ll tip, what you’ll wear, how you’ll speak, where you’ll
sit, how you’ll eat, and so on, strictly on the basis of what you want.
Anytime you fall into the trap of “What should  I wear,” or “How
should  I do it,” you’re giving up a chunk of yourself. I’m not making
a case here for being a social rebel since that would be a form of
approval-seeking through nonconformity, but rather this is a plea
for being self-rather than other-directed in the everyday running of
your life. Being true to yourself means being devoid of the need for
an external support system.BREAKING THE BARRIER OF CONVENTION  / 149
--- PAGE 158 ---
Blind Obedience to Rules and Laws
Some of the most despicable human behavior ever recorded was
done under the guise of following orders. The Nazis executed six
million Jews and murdered and mistreated countless millions of
others because it was the “Law.” Later, after the war, responsibility
for these acts of barbarism was shifted rapidly up the hierarchy of
Nazi power until throughout Germany the only people who could
be held accountable for these heinous crimes were Hitler and his
chief henchmen. Everyone else was merely following orders and
the law of the Third Reich.
In Suffolk County, New York, a county spokesman recently ex-
plained why people who had been inadvertently overcharged on
their real estate taxes could not be reimbursed. “The law says that
past tax bills cannot be reevaluated once they are paid. It’s the law,
I can’t help it. My job is to enforce it, not to interpret it.” Indeed, in
another time and another place, he’d have made an excellent execu-
tioner. But you know this refrain. You hear it every day. Don’t think,
just obey the rules, even if they are absurd.
At swimming pools, tennis courts and other public places, about
half of the rules make no sense. Recently one hot evening I asked a
group of young people sitting around a pool, obviously thirsting to
get in, why they were lounging near the edge, when the pool was
empty. They responded that it was for adults between 6:00 and 8:00
P.M. This was the rule, and despite the fact that no adults wanted to
use it, the rule was still being enforced. No flexibility, no ability to
alter the rule when circumstances so warrant, simply blind obedience
to a rule that had no logical reason at that moment. When I encour-
aged them to see about shifting the rules, I received a phone call
from the management telling me that I was promoting insurrection.
One of the best examples of blind adherence to the rules—no
matter how silly they may be—can be found in the military. A col-
league of mine tells of an excellent example of this obe-150 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 159 ---
dience mentality. When stationed on Guam, in the South Pacific, he
was struck by the willingness of many enlisted men to enforce rules
that were obviously absurd. Officers were permitted to sit on the
red benches which were sheltered and watch the outdoor movies.
At the midnight showing of the movie, which officers never attended,
there was an enlisted man assigned to ensure that no one sat on the
red benches. Thus, each evening you would see a group of enlisted
sailors sitting in the rain, with one of their own ranks guarding a
section of empty red benches, to ensure that the rule was followed.
When my colleague inquired why such an absurd policy was being
enforced, he was given the standard answer, “I don’t make the rules,
I just enforce them.”
Hermann Hesse said in Demian,
Those who are too lazy and comfortable to think for themselves
and be their own judges obey the laws. Others sense their own
laws within them; things are forbidden to them that every
honorable man will do any day in the year and other things are
allowed to them that are generally despised. Each person must
stand on his own feet.*
If you must comply with all the rules all the time, you are destined
to a life of emotional servitude. But our culture teaches that it is
naughty to disobey, that you shouldn’t do anything that is against
the rules. The important thing is to determine for yourself which
rules work, and are necessary to preserve order in our culture and
which can be broken without harm to yourself or others. There is
no percentage in rebelling just for the sake of rebelling, but there are
great rewards in being your own person and living your life accord-
ing to your own standards.
*Hermann Hesse, Demian  (New York: Bantam Books, 1974), p. 53.BREAKING THE BARRIER OF CONVENTION  / 151
--- PAGE 160 ---
Resisting Enculturation and Traditions When They Affect You
Negatively
Progress, yours personally and the world’s, depends on unreason-
able men, rather than people who adapt to their society and accept
whatever comes along. Progress depends on individuals who are
innovators, who reject convention and fashion their own worlds. In
order to shift from coping to doing, you’ll have to learn to resist
enculturation and the many pressures to conform. To function fully,
a resistance to enculturation is almost a given. You may be viewed
by some as insubordinate, which is the price you’ll pay for thinking
for yourself. You may be seen as different, be labeled selfish or rebel-
lious, incur disapproval from many “normal” people, and at times
be ostracized. Some people will not take kindly to your resistance
to norms they’ve adopted for themselves. You’ll hear the old argu-
ment of, “What if everybody decided to obey only the rules they
wanted to? What kind of a society would we have then?” The simple
answer to this, of course, is that everybody won’t! Most people’s
addiction to external supports and shoulds prohibits such a stand.
What we’re talking about here has nothing to do with anarchy.
No one wants to destroy society, but many of us would like to give
the individual more freedom within it, freedom from meaningless
musts and silly shoulds.
Even sensible laws and rules will not apply under every set of
circumstances. What we are striving for is choice, that is, the ability
to be free from the servant mentality of constant adherence to the
shoulds. You do not have to be always as your culture expects you
to be. If you are, and feel an inability to be otherwise; you are indeed
a follower, one of a flock who allows others to determine his course.
Leading your own life involves flexibility and repeated personal
assessments of how well the rule works at a particular present mo-
ment. True, it’s often easier to follow, to blindly do as you’re told,
but once you recognize152 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 161 ---
that the law is there to serve you, not to make you a servant, you
can begin to eliminate that musterbation behavior.
If you’re going to learn to resist enculturation, you’ll have to be-
come a shrugger. Others will still choose to obey even if it hurts
them, and you will have to learn to allow them their choice. No an-
ger, only your own convictions. A colleague of mine was in the
Navy, stationed aboard an aircraft carrier home ported in San
Francisco at the time President Eisenhower was visiting northern
California on a political swing. They were commanded to spell out
in human formation the words, HI IKE, so that the President could
look down from his helicopter and view the message. My friend
decided the idea was insane, and decided not to do it, because it
conflicted with everything he stood for. But rather than stage a revolt,
he simply slipped away for the afternoon, and allowed everyone
else to participate in this demeaning ritual. He passed up his one
chance to dot the i in Hi. No put-down of those who chose otherwise,
no useless fighting, simply shrugging and letting others go their
own way.
Resisting enculturation means making decisions for yourself and
carrying them out as efficiently and quietly as possible. No bandwag-
ons or hostile demonstrations where they will do no good. The
foolish rules, traditions and policies will never go away, but you
don’t have to be a part of them. Just shrug as others go through their
sheep motions. If they want to behave that way, fine for them but
that’s not for you. To make a big fuss is almost always the surest
way to incur wrath and create more obstacles for yourself. You’ll
find scores of everyday occurrences where it is easier to circumvent
the rules quietly than to start a protest movement. You can decide
to be the person you want to be, or the one others want you to be.
It’s up to you.
Virtually all new ideas which have resulted in change in our soci-
ety were at one time scorned, and many of them were illegal as well.
All progress involves flying in the face of old rules that no longer
apply. People ridiculed the Edisons, Henry Fords, Einsteins, and
Wright Brothers—until they were successful.BREAKING THE BARRIER OF CONVENTION  / 153
--- PAGE 162 ---
You will meet with contempt too as you begin to resist meaningless
policies.
Some Typical Should Behaviors
The roll call of “have-to” behaviors could fill an entire book. Here
is a sampling of the more common examples of these actions as they
surface in our culture.
• Believing that there is a place for everything and everything
must be in its place. The organization syndrome means you are un-
comfortable if things aren’t in their designated locations.
• Asking “What should I wear” on a regular basis, as if there were
only one acceptable mode of dressing and it is determined by other
people. White pants and pastel colors are only worn in the summer.
Wool is always  a winter fabric, and other similar “being controlled
by the seasons” musts  that infiltrate your life. (In Hawaii,  James
Michener describes the New Englanders who arrived in the tropical
climate of Hawaii, and when October arrived, even though it was
still eighty-five degrees, they habitually trotted out their winter
clothes and dressed uncomfortably for six months…Why? Because
they were supposed to.) Being a slave to the dictates of fashion critics,
and wearing only “What’s in” because, after all, you have to  fit in.
• Assuming that certain drinks must go with certain food. White
wine must accompany fish and fowl. Red wine goes only with beef.
Being locked into somebody’s rules on what to eat with what.
• Shifting blame for your actions to others. “It’s really her fault,
she made us late.” “Don’t blame me, he’s the one who did it.”
• You must go to a wedding or send a gift, even if you don’t like
them. You just don’t ignore invitations even when you want154 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 163 ---
to. You may feel resentful about buying the gift, but go through the
motions anyhow because that’s the way things are supposed to be
done. Conversely, attending funerals that you’d rather not go to,
but do because you’re supposed to. You must attend such formal
functions to show that you grieve or respect or have the appropriate
emotions.
• Attending religious services which you dislike and don’t believe
in because it is expected of you and you want to do the right thing.
• Giving titles to those who serve you, which elevates them by
implication to a position higher than you. What do you call your
dentist? If it’s doctor, is it really just a vocational title? Do you say
Carpenter Jones, or Plumber Smith? If it is out of respect for his po-
sition, what makes you think his position is loftier than yours? If he
is paid to serve you, why is it that he gets a title and you get called
by your name?
• Going to bed when it gets to be bedtime, rather than when you’re
tired.
• Having sex only one or two ways because those are the only
acceptable ways, or only participating in sexual activities when all
conditions are met, such as, the kids are asleep, you are not tired,
it’s dark in the room, you’re in your own bed, and on and on.
• Selecting roles in daily living because the culture demands it.
Women do the dishes, men take out the garbage. Housework is for
the wife, outdoor work is for the husband. Boys do this, girls do
that.
• Obedience to silly household rules and traditions that don’t
work for your family, such as asking permission to leave the table,
everyone eating at the same time when it is more inconvenient to
do it that way or bedtimes that are without rationale.
• Following the dictates of all signs whether they make sense or
not. No Talking! No Entry! No anything! Never challenging a sign,
or even assuming that it doesn’t belong there in the first place. People
make signs and people also make mistakes.BREAKING THE BARRIER OF CONVENTION  / 155
--- PAGE 164 ---
• Keeping mattress tags on for years because they say do not re-
move under penalty of law.
• Always having Sunday dinner at Mamma’s, although you’d
rather not. After all, it is a tradition, and even if everyone doesn’t
like it, including Mamma, you must preserve tradition.
• When reading a book, always starting at page one and reading
every word to the end, even if half of it doesn’t apply. Finishing a
book you don’t like because you’re halfway through it, and, if you’ve
read half, you must read it all.
• Women never asking men for dates. After all, that’s the male’s
role. Or never initiating a telephone call, or opening the door for a
man, or paying the bill, or countless other absurd traditions that
serve no real purpose.
• Sending out holiday greeting cards and resenting them. Doing
so because you’ve always done it, and it is expected of you.
• Striving for grades in school or forcing your children to do so.
Learning not for your own satisfaction but for the symbols that will
eventually appear on the transcript.
• Always asking: “Is he/she right for me?” and being regularly
perplexed in search of the right person.
• Going everywhere with your partner because it is expected,
even though you both would prefer to be in different places at that
particular time.
• Consulting a “how-to” book for everything, because every job
must be done a certain way. Not being able to differentiate between
manuals that impart useful information and those that merely tell
you how things ought to be.
• Is this the right dress, hat, automobile, furniture, salad dressing,
appetizer, book, college, job, etc. Being anxious over the search for
the right item and as a result being in that indecision and doubt bag.
• Making rewards, plaques, titles, honors and all merit badges
more important than your own evaluation of your achievements.156 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 165 ---
• Saying, “I could never be as great as———
• Applauding in an audience when you didn’t like the perform-
ance.
• Tipping for poor service.
• Sports-fan behavior in which you go crazy over a home team
victory or loss, and live vicariously through the accomplishments
or lack of accomplishments of athletes.
A Look at the Common Payoffs of Musterbation
Some of the reasons you have for hanging onto your shoulds are
detailed below. These payoffs, like those in all erroneous zones, are
mostly self-destructive but nevertheless constitute a certain support
system of their own.
• You can take solace in being a “good boy” or a “good girl” by
following all of your shoulds. You can pat yourself on the back for
being obedient. This dividend is a regressive one in which you go
back to an earlier developmental period when you were rewarded
with approval whenever you behaved, which meant relying on
someone else to establish your rules of conduct.
• Your obedience to the external should allows you to assign the
responsibility for your standing still to the should rather than to
yourself. As long as the should is the rationale for what you are (or
aren’t), you can avoid the risks involved in trusting yourself to
change. Thus your shoulds keep you from growing. For example,
Marjorie has a should in her head that all premarital sex is a taboo.
She is thirty-four years old, and to date she has never had a sexual
experience because of this learned should. But Marjorie has no inner
peace. She would like to have a sexual relationship, and she is very
much dissatisfied with herself in this area. Moreover, it is possible
that Marjorie will never get married, and her should (in this case
should-not) would thenBREAKING THE BARRIER OF CONVENTION  / 157
--- PAGE 166 ---
keep her from participating in sex for an entire lifetime. When she
is confronted with this possibility she shudders at the thought, and
yet her should-not is still there. Marjorie has spillover effects from
her should. She can’t even stay overnight in the same house with
her boyfriend out of fear of being judged by others. Thus she is
constantly being inconvenienced because of her shoulds by having
to come home to Mamma at night. Hanging onto them keeps her
from the risky business of testing herself out in the scary act of
sexual involvement. But her response is always, “I shouldn’t do it.”
Plainly, her shoulds work against her own happiness.
• Your musts make it possible for you to maneuver others. By
telling someone this is the way it should be done, you can make him
do it the way you want it to be done.
• It is easier to haul out a should when you lack confidence in
yourself. As your self-image wanes, the should becomes your bul-
wark.
• You can remain self-righteous about your behavior and retain
your hostility when others don’t fit into the shoulds that you have
for yourself and the rest of the world. Hence, you build yourself up
in your mind at the expense of others who don’t obey the rule-pat-
terns.
• You can win approval by conforming. You feel good by fitting-
in, which is what you were told all along that you should  be doing.
That old approval-seeking need creeps in here as well.
• As long as you focus on others, and live through their successes
and failures, you don’t have to work on yourself. Having heroes can
reinforce your own low opinion of yourself and allow you to escape
from having to work on yourself. As long as the heroes can be the
cause of your good feelings, or responsible for your bad feelings,
there is no reason for you to take on that responsibility. Your self-
worth in this case is really other-worth and thus fleeting and trans-
itory. It depends upon all of those great people, and how they come
through for you.158 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 167 ---
Some Strategies for Removing Some of Your Shoulds
Basically your chore in scrubbing up this zone involves risk-taking.
Doing! Resolving to be different than the way you’ve been taught
is proper when that way doesn’t work for you. Here are some tactics
that will be helpful in getting out of your musterbatory habits.
• Begin with insight into your own behavior. Study the neurotic
dividends spelled out above. Then ask yourself why are you burden-
ing yourself with so many shoulds. Ask yourself if you really believe
in them, or if you’ve just become accustomed to behaving that way.
• List all of the rules you abide by, which just don’t seem to apply.
Those stupid conventional behaviors that you complain about, but
can’t seem to shed. Then, make your own “Rules of Conduct” that
make the greatest amount of sense to you. Write them down, even
if you don’t believe at this time that you are capable of living them
out.
• Start your own traditions. For example, if you’ve always decor-
ated your Christmas Tree on Christmas Eve, and you’d rather do it
three days before, begin a new Christmas tradition—one that makes
sense to you.
• Have a consultation with your relatives and friends about the
many rules of conduct you all follow which you find distasteful.
Perhaps you’ll be able to bring about some new rules which appear
to be more reasonable to everyone. You’ll discover that the old rules
are still in effect only because no one ever seriously thought to
challenge them in the past.
• Keep an internal/external journal. Write down your “external”
references in which you assign responsibility to others for how you
are feeling. See if you can shift yourself to the “internal” side with
some new acts of courage. Keep track of your success in moving
over to the internal side.
• See how many rules you impose on others. Ask them ifBREAKING THE BARRIER OF CONVENTION  / 159
--- PAGE 168 ---
they really need those directives, or if they would behave in the
identical fashion without them. Perhaps you’ll even learn that they
could come up with more effective and flexible guidelines.
• Take a risk on challenging a rule or policy that you’d like to
eliminate. But be prepared to deal without hostility with the con-
sequences of your behavior. For example if you’ve always believed
that a woman shouldn’t ask a man for a date and you find yourself
without a date on a weekend, call up a man and see what happens.
Or, take back a defective garment even if the rule is no refunds , and
effectively challenge the policy, vowing to go to the top if necessary.
Don’t be guided by the policies of others which have you being a
victim as the final result.
• Think of decisions as having different consequences, rather than
as being right or wrong. In making decisions, eliminate the notion
of right and wrong and say either one is okay, and each will bring
about different consequences. Trust yourself to make the decision
rather than relying on some external kind of guarantee. Please
yourself instead of meeting an outside standard.
• Try to live in your present moments and make your rules and
shoulds apply only for that time. Rather than assuming them to be
universals, recognize them as applicable only at this moment.
• Refuse to share your rule-breaking behavior with anyone. It is
only for you, and you don’t want to get into an approval-seeking
posture, in which the reason for resisting enculturation is to win at-
tention and therefore adulation.
• Get rid of the roles that you (and others) are assuming in your
life. Be whatever you want to be, rather than what you think you
are supposed to be because you are a man, woman, middle-aged,
or whatever.
• Refuse for a given segment of a conversation to focus on others.
Practice in ever-increasing time periods not projecting blame, or
talking about another person, event, or idea in a complaining or
fault-finding manner.
• Stop waiting for others to change. Ask yourself why others160 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 169 ---
should be different simply because you would like it better if they
were. Recognize that every person has a right to be whatever they
choose, even if you irritate yourself about it.
• Come up with a blame list, wherein you detail everything about
yourself that you dislike. It can look something like this:
Who, What Is To Blame What I Dislike About Me and My Life
Sara Lee, metabolism, mother,
McDonalds, heredityI’m too fat……..
Parents, grandparents, God, ge-
netics, homework, Con-EdI have poor eyesight……..
Elementary teachers, sister, defi-
cient math genes, motherI’m lousy in mathematics….
Luck, all creeps at my school,
parents, I can’t wear makeupI have no boy/girl friends….
Genetics, God, mother I’m too tall……..
The economy, Dow-Jones, di-
vorce, my children hate me, ill-
nessI’m unhappy……..
Mother, genetics, luck, no early
nourishment, God, SatanMy breasts are too small……
Helena Rubenstein, heredity, girl
friend, the sunMy hair is the wrong color….
Presidents Ford, Nixon, Johnson,
etc., the Communists, humanityThe state of the world bugs me
The neighborhood, “Those kinds
of people,” zoning regulationsMy neighbors are bitchy……
The wind, the sun, the net is too
high/low, the distractions, my
cramps, my sore arm, leg, etc.My tennis outcome……..
My metabolism, my period, my
doctor, the food, the heat, the
cold, the wind, the rain, the pol-
len, You Name It.I don’t feel well……..BREAKING THE BARRIER OF CONVENTION  / 161
--- PAGE 170 ---
Now add up your total blame score and see if you are any different
now that you have fault and blame appropriately doled out to all
of the precise people and things that are responsible for your feelings.
Isn’t that something? You are exactly the same. Whether you blame
or don’t, you stay as you are unless you do something constructive
to correct your dislikes. You can use this as an exercise in seeing the
futility of blaming.
• Announce out loud that you just blamed and that you are
working on eliminating this behavior. By stating it as a goal, you’ll
be mindful of your proclivities in this direction.
• Decide that any and all unhappiness that you choose will never
be the result of someone else, but rather that it will be the result of
you and your own behavior. Remind yourself constantly that any
externally caused unhappiness reinforces your own slavery, since
it assumes that you have no control over yourself or them, but they
have control over you.
• When someone is blaming, politely ask them, “Would you like
to know if I want to hear what you are telling me right now?” That
is, teach others not to use you as a blame receptacle and begin to
label other people’s blaming and fault-finding so that you get in
touch with recognizing it in yourself. You can label it with a nonof-
fensive treatment such as, “You just made George responsible for
how you feel. Do you really think it’s that way? Or, “You keep saying
that if only the market would go up, you’d be happier. You really
give it a lot of control over your life.” Your recognition of others’
blames and shoulds will help you to eliminate such behavior in
yourself.
• Refer back to the lists of shoulds discussed earlier in this chapter.
Try to substitute some new and different behavior for these old
habits—perhaps a late night dinner, or changing your sexual posi-
tion, or wearing what you like. Begin to trust yourself and give less
credence to those external musts.
• Remind yourself that what other people do is not what bothers
you, it’s your reaction to it. Instead of saying “They162 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 171 ---
shouldn’t do that,” say, “I wonder why I bother myself with what
they are doing.”
Some Final Thoughts on Should Behavior
Ralph Waldo Emerson wrote in Literary Ethics  in 1838,
Men grind and grind in the mill of a truism, and nothing comes
out but what was put in. But the moment they desert the tradi-
tion for a spontaneous thought, then poetry, wit, hope, virtue,
learning anecdote, all flock to their aid.
What a beautiful thought. Stay with tradition and you ensure that
you’ll always be the same, but toss it aside, and the world is yours
to use as creatively as you choose.
Become your own judge of your conduct and learn to rely on
yourself to make present-moment decisions. Cease leafing through
a lifetime of policies and traditions for an answer. Sing your own
song of happiness in any way that you choose, oblivious to how it
is supposed to be.BREAKING THE BARRIER OF CONVENTION  / 163
--- PAGE 172 ---
