VIII
THE JUSTICE TRAP
If the world were so organized that everything had to be fair, no living
creature could survive for a day. The birds would be forbidden to eat
worms, and everyone’s self-interest would have to be served.
W e are conditioned to look for justice in life and when it doesn’t
appear, we tend to feel anger, anxiety or frustration. Actually, it
would be equally productive to search for the fountain of youth, or
some such myth. Justice does not exist. It never has, and it never
will. The world is simply not put together that way. Robins eat
worms. That’s not fair to the worms. Spiders eat flies. That’s not fair
to the flies. Cougars kill coyotes. Coyotes kill badgers. Badgers kill
mice. Mice kill bugs. Bugs…You have only to look at nature to
realize there is no justice in the world. Tornadoes, floods, tidal waves,
draughts are all unfair. It is a mythological concept, this justice
business. The world and the people in it go on being unfair every
day. You can choose to be happy or unhappy, but it has nothing to
do with the lack of justice you see around you.
164
--- PAGE 173 ---
This is not a sour view of humanity and the world, but rather an
accurate report of what that world is like. Justice is simply a concept
that has almost no applicability, particularly as it pertains to your
own choices about fulfillment and happiness. But too many of us
tend to demand that fairness be an inherent part of our relations
with others. “It isn’t fair.” “You have no right to do that if I can’t”
and “Would I do that to you?” These are the sentences that we use.
We seek justice and use the lack of it as a justification for unhappi-
ness. The demand for justice is not the neurotic behavior. It only
becomes an erroneous zone when you punish yourself with a negat-
ive emotion as you fail to see evidence of the justice that you so fu-
tilely demand. In this case the self-defeating behavior is not the de-
mand for justice, but the immobilization that may result from no-
justice-reality.
Our culture promises justice. Politicians refer to it in all of their
campaign speeches. “We need equality and justice for all.” Yet day
after day, nay, century after century, the lack of justice continues.
Poverty, war, pestilence, crime, prostitution, dope and murders
persist generation after generation in public and private life. And if
the history of humanity can be used as a guide they will continue.
Injustice is a constant, but you, in your infinite new wisdom, can
decide to fight that injustice and refuse to be seduced into being
emotionally immobilized over it. You can work at helping to eradic-
ate injustice, and you can decide that you won’t be psychologically
defeated by it.
The legal system promises justice. “The people demand justice,”
and some of them even work to make it happen. But it generally
doesn’t. Those with money are not convicted. Judges and policemen
are often bought by the powerful. A President and Vice-President
of the United States are pardoned or wrist-slapped for obvious
felonies. The poor fill the jails, and have next to no chance of beating
the system. It’s not fair. But it’s true. Spiro Agnew becomes rich after
evading his income taxes. Richard Nixon is exonerated, and his yes-
men serve a fewTHE JUSTICE TRAP  / 165
--- PAGE 174 ---
months in a minimum security prison, while the poor and members
of minority groups rot in jail waiting for trial, waiting for a chance.
A visit to any local courthouse or police station will prove that the
influential have a separate set of rules, although this is relentlessly
denied by the authorities. Where is the justice? Nowhere! Your de-
ciding to fight it may be admirable indeed, but your choosing to be
upset by it is as neurotic as guilt, approval-seeking or any other of
the self-flagellating behavior that constitutes your erroneous zones.
“It’s Not Fair!” The Slogan of Ineffective Relationships
The demand for justice may infiltrate your personal relationships
and prevent you from communicating effectively with others. The
“It’s not fair” slogan is one of the more common—and destruct-
ive—laments made by one person against another. In order for you
to consider something unfair you must compare yourself to another
individual or group of individuals. Your mind-set goes something
like this: “If they can do it, so can I.” “It’s not fair for you to have
more than I.” “But I didn’t get to do that, why should you?” On and
on they go. In this case you’re determining what is good for you on
the basis of someone else’s conduct. They, not you, are in charge of
your emotions. If you are upset because of not being able to do
something that someone else has done, then you’ve given them
control over you. Whenever you compare yourself to anyone else,
you are playing the “It’s not fair” game, and shifting from self-reli-
ance to other-directed external thinking.
One of my clients, an attractive young woman named Judy, is a
good example of this kind of self-destructive thinking. Judy com-
plained about her unhappy marriage of five years. One night in
counseling she acted out a marital argument for the group. When
the young man who was taking the role of Judy’s insur-166 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 175 ---
ance salesman husband said something unpleasant to her, Judy im-
mediately countered with “Why did you say that? I never say things
like that to you.” When he mentioned their two children, Judy said,
“That isn’t fair. I never bring the children into an argument.” When
their role working turned to a prospective evening’s entertainment,
Judy’s reasoning was once again, “That isn’t fair. You get out all the
time while I have to stay home with the children.”
Judy ran her marriage on a tally sheet. One for you, one for me.
Everything must be fair. If I act this way, you must act the same
way. It was no wonder she was hurt and resentful most of the time,
more concerned with righting imaginary injustices than examining
and perhaps improving her marriage.
Judy’s search for justice was a neurotic dead end. She was assess-
ing her husband’s behavior on the basis of her own and her happi-
ness on the basis of her husband’s behavior. Were she to stop her
incessant keeping track and begin going after the things she wants
without having to be in debt to the other, then her relationship would
improve significantly.
Fairness is an external concept—a way of avoiding the taking
charge of your own life.’ Instead of thinking of anything as being
unfair, you can decide what you really want, and then set about
devising strategies for attaining it, independent of what anyone else
in the world wants or does. The simple facts are that everyone is
different, and no amount of your bitching about others having it
better than you will bring about any positive self-changes. You’ll
need to eliminate the other-references, and throw away the binocu-
lars that focus on what others are doing. Some people work less and
get more money. Others get promoted out of favoritism, when you
have the ability. Your spouse and children will continue to do things
differently from you. But if you focus on yourself rather than com-
pare yourself to others, then you will have no opportunity to upset
yourself with the lack of equality you observe. The backdrop for
virtually all neurosis is making others’ behavior more significantTHE JUSTICE TRAP  / 167
--- PAGE 176 ---
than your own. If you carry around the “If he can do it, so should
I” sentences, you’ll be running your life on the basis of someone else
and never create your own life.
Jealousy: A “Demand for Justice” Sideshow
John Dryden called jealousy “the jaundice of the soul.” If your
jealousy gets in your way, and creates any amount of emotional
immobility, then you can set as a goal the elimination of this wasteful
thinking. Jealousy is really a demand that someone love you in a
certain way, and you saying “It isn’t fair” when they don’t. It comes
from a lack of self-confidence, simply because it is an other-directed
activity. It allows their behavior to be the cause of your emotional
discomfort. People who really like themselves don’t choose jealousy
or allow themselves to be distraught when someone else doesn’t
play fair.
You can never predict how someone you love will react to another
human being, but if they choose to be affectionate or loving you can
only experience the immobility of jealousy if you see their decisions
as having anything to do with you. That is your choice. If a partner
loves another, he isn’t being “unfair,” he is simply being. If you label
it unfair, you’ll probably end up trying to figure out why. A perfect
example is a client of mine who was furious because her husband
had an affair. She became obsessed with trying to figure out why?
She was constantly asking, “Where did I go wrong?” “What’s wrong
with me?” “Wasn’t I good enough for him?” and similar self-
doubting questions. Helen was always thinking about the injustice
of her husband’s infidelity. She even contemplated having an affair
herself as a way to right the balance. She cried a great deal and al-
ternated between fury and sadness.
Helen’s faulty thinking, which leads her to unhappiness, lies in
her demand for justice which suffocates her in this relationship. She
has made her husband’s choice to engage in sex168 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 177 ---
the reason for her to be upset. At the same time she is using his be-
havior as a rationale for doing something that she probably wanted
to do for a long time—but didn’t because it isn’t fair. Helen’s insist-
ence on strict justice would have meant that if she were the first to
have an affair, then her husband would have to retaliate. Helen’s
emotional condition will not improve until she decides that his de-
cision was made independent of her, and that he might have a
thousand reasons of his own, all unrelated to Helen, for his sexual
exploration. Maybe he just wanted to do something different, per-
haps he felt love for someone besides his wife, or perhaps he wanted
to prove his virility or keep old age at bay. Whatever the reason, it
has nothing to do with Helen. She can see the affair as something
between two people rather than as something against her. The upset
rests solely in Helen. She can continue to bruise herself with the self-
flagellating jealousy in which she is less important than her husband
or his mistress, or she can recognize that someone else’s affair has
nothing to do with her self-worth.
Some Typical “Demand for Justice” Behaviors
“Searching-for-equity” behavior is obvious in virtually all areas
of life. If you are the least bit perceptive you’ll see them cropping
up over and over in yourself and others. Here are some of the more
common examples of this kind of behavior.
• Complaining that others make more money for doing the same
work.
• Saying it isn’t fair that a Frank Sinatra, Sammy Davis, Barbra
Streisand, Catfish Hunter or Joe Namath make the kind of salaries
that they do, and being upset by it.
• Being upset that others get away with infractions, while you
always get caught. From speeders on the highway to Nixon’s pardon,
you insist that justice must  prevail.THE JUSTICE TRAP  / 169
--- PAGE 178 ---
• All of the “Would I treat you that way?” sentences in which the
assumption is that everyone should be exactly like you.
• Always reciprocating when someone does a favor for you. If
you invite me for dinner, then I owe you one or at least a bottle of
wine. This sort of behavior is often justified as good manners or
politeness, but in reality it is simply a means of keeping the scales
of justice in balance.
• Kissing someone back or saying “I love you, too” instead of ac-
cepting it and expressing your own feelings whenever you choose.
The implication is that it isn’t fair to have an “I love you” or kiss
without giving one back.
• Having sex with someone out of obligation, even though you
don’t want to, because it really isn’t fair not to be cooperative. Thus
you operate by justice rather than what you would like to do at a
particular present moment.
• Always insisting on things being consistent. Remember Emer-
son’s often misquoted line:
A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds.
If you always want things to be the “right” way, you are in this
“little-minds” category.
• In arguments, insisting on a clear-cut decision which calls for
the winners to be right and the losers to admit that they were wrong.
• Using the fair argument in order to get your own way. “You
went out last night, it’s not fair for me to have to stay home.” And
then being upset because of the lack of fairness.
• Saying it isn’t fair to the kids, my parents,  or the neighbors,  and
consequently doing things that you’d rather not do and feeling re-
sentment about it. Instead of blaming the entire mess on the lack of
fairness, try looking hard at your own in-170 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 179 ---
ability to decide for yourself what is most appropriate for you.
• The “If he can do it, so can I” game in which you justify some-
thing by someone else’s behavior. This can be the neurotic rationale
for cheating, stealing, flirting, lying, being late, or anything that
you’d rather not admit into your own value system. On the highway,
cutting off another driver because he did it to you, or hurrying up
to get in front of a slowpoke, to slow him down, because he did it
to you, or leaving your highbeams on because oncoming cars are
doing it—literally putting your own life in jeopardy because your
sense of justice has been violated. This is the “He hit me, so I hit
him” routine that is largely employed by children who have seen
this behavior thousands of times in their own parents. It is the cause
of war when extended to its ridiculous extreme.
• Spending the same amount of money on a gift that someone
else spent on one for you. Paying back every favor with a favor of
equal value. Keeping the tally sheet equal, rather than doing what
you would like in such matters. After all, “It has to be fair.”
There they are, a brief excursion down Justice-Alley, where you,
and those around you, find yourself internally shaken—often only
slightly, but still shaken—because of that unserviceable sentence in
your head that things must be fair.
Some of the Psychological Payoffs for Hanging Onto Your “Demands
for Justice”
The rewards for this kind of behavior are generally self-defeating
in that they keep the focus off reality and on some kind of a dream
world that will never exist. The most common reasons for retaining
your “demand for justice” thinking and behavior are:THE JUSTICE TRAP  / 171
--- PAGE 180 ---
• You can feel smug with yourself for being honorable. It’s one
way to make yourself feel superior and better. As long as you insist
on a mythological justice system for everything and are careful to
keep your tally sheet in balance, you’ll hold onto your holier than
thou feeling and use up your present moments with smugness rather
than effective living.
• You can give up responsibility for yourself and justify being
immobilized by shifting the responsibility to those people and events
that are not fair. A scapegoating for your lack of ability to be and
feel what you choose. In this way, you can avoid risks, and the hard
work of change. As long as injustice is the cause of your problems
you can never change until the injustice goes away, which, of course,
it never will.
• Injustice can win you attention, pity and self-pity. The world
has been unjust to you and now you and everyone around you must
feel sorry for you. This is another great technique for avoiding
change. The attention, pity and self-pity are your rewards, and you
use them to prop yourself up rather than take charge of yourself
and eliminate comparison behavior.
• You can justify all kinds of immoral, illegal and inappropriate
behavior by making your action someone else’s responsibility. If he
can do it, so can I. That’s a beautiful rationalization system for any
behavior.
• It gives you a sensational self-excuse for being ineffective. “If
they aren’t going to do anything, then neither am I.” A clever little
ploy for being too lazy, too tired, or too frightened.
• It gives you a conversation topic and helps you to avoid talking
about yourself to the people around you. Complain about all the
injustices in the world and nothing gets done, but at least you killed
those moments and maybe escaped dealing more honestly and
personally with each other.
• As long as you have a concept of justice, you can always make
the just decision.
• You can manipulate others, particularly your children, by re-
minding them that they are being unfair to you if they aren’t172 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 181 ---
exactly the same as you, and don’t keep a precise tally of all give-
and-take in the relationship. A nice little device for getting your own
way.
• You can justify vindictive behavior because everything must be
fair. This is a ploy for getting away with all kinds of manipulative
and unsavory activities. Vengeance is justifiable because everything
must be fair and even. Just as you must repay a favor, so you must
repay a meanness.
There you have the psychological maintenance system for hanging
onto demands for justice. But this support system is not unshakable.
Below are some strategic methods for tossing out this kind of
thinking and wiping clean this demand-for-justice erroneous zone.
Some Strategies for Giving Up the Futile Insistence on Justice
• Make a list of everything in your world that you think is unfair.
Use your list as a guide for effective personal action. Ask yourself
this important question. “Will the inequities go away if I am upset?”
Obviously not. By attacking the erroneous thinking that brings about
your upset, you will be on your way to escape from the justice trap.
• When you find yourself saying, “Would I do that to you?” or
any similar sentence, change it to, “You are different from me, al-
though I find that hard to accept right now.” This will open, rather
than close communication between you and the other person.
• Begin to view your emotional life as independent of whatever
anyone else does. This will free you from the chains of being hurt
when others behave differently from the way you want them to.
• Try to view each decision not as a monumental life-chang-THE JUSTICE TRAP  / 173
--- PAGE 182 ---
ing event, but in perspective. Carlos Castaneda calls a man of
knowledge one who—
Lives by acting, not by thinking about acting, nor by thinking
about what he will think when he has finished acting…He
knows that his life will be over altogether too soon; he knows,
because he sees, that nothing is more important than anything
else…. Thus a man of knowledge sweats and puffs and if one
looks at him he is just like any ordinary man, except that the
folly of his life is under control. Nothing being more important
than anything else, a man of knowledge chooses any act, and
acts it out as if it mattered to him. His controlled folly makes
him say that what he does matters and makes him act as if it
did, and yet he knows that it doesn’t; so when he fulfills his
acts he retreats in peace, and whether his acts were good or
bad, or worked or didn’t, is in no way any part of his concern*
• Replace the sentence “It isn’t fair” with “It’s unfortunate,” or
“I’d prefer…” Thus, instead of insisting that the world be other than
it is, you begin to accept reality—but not necessarily to approve of
it.
• Eliminate external references of comparison. Have your own
goals independent of what Tom, Dick or Harry do. Set out to be
what you want, without references to what others have or don’t
have.
• Correct yourself out loud when you use a sentence such as, “I
always call you when I’m going to be late, so why didn’t you call
me?” to “I would have felt better if you had called me.” Thus you
eliminate the erroneous notion that another’s reason for calling is
to become more like you.
• Rather than paying someone off, by bringing wine or a gift in
exchange for dinner or a party, wait until you feel like it and
*Carlos Castaneda, A Separate Reality: Further Conversations with Don Juan  (New
York: Pocket Books, 1972).174 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 183 ---
then send a bottle of wine with a note saying, “Just because I think
you’re a great person.” There’s no need to balance the books with
reciprocal trades; just do something nice because you, rather than a
special occasion, call for it.
• Spend the amount of money you want to on any gift, and don’t
be swayed by what was spent for you. Eliminate invitations based
on obligation and fairness. Decide whom you’ll see on an internal
rather than external standard.
• Set up your own standards of conduct in your family based
upon what you think is appropriate for you. Have everyone else do
the same. Then see if it isn’t quite possible to make it happen without
infringing on each other’s rights. If you feel that being out three
nights a week is what you want, but can’t because someone has to
watch the children, “fairness” doesn’t have to enter into your de-
cision-making. Perhaps you make some kind of baby-sitting arrange-
ment, or have the kids go along, or whatever will be a mutually
satisfying settlement. But to bring in the “It isn’t fair” routine will
surely lead to everyone’s resentment—and to staying at home as
well. Be a doer, not a complainer about injustice. For every injustice
you suffer, there is a resolution that does not require you to be im-
mobilized in any way.
• Remember that revenge is just another way of being controlled
by others. Do what you, not they, decide is for you.
These are just a few beginning suggestions that will help you to
be happier by ridding yourself of the need to compare yourself with
others and to use their status as a barometer of your own happiness.
It’s not the injustice that counts, it’s what you do about it.THE JUSTICE TRAP  / 175
--- PAGE 184 ---
