IV
BREAKING FREE FROM
THE PAST
Only a ghost wallows around in his past, explaining
himself with self-descriptors based on a life lived
through. You are what you choose today, not what
you’ve chosen before.
W ho are you? How do you describe yourself? To answer these
two questions, you will very likely have to refer to your own history,
to a past that has been lived through, but to which you are un-
doubtedly tied, and from which you find it difficult to escape. What
are your self-descriptors? Are they neat little labels that you have
accumulated over a lifetime? Do you have a drawer full of self-
definitions which you use on a regular basis? They may include tags
such as I’m nervous, I’m shy, I’m lazy, I’m not musical, I’m clumsy,
I’m forgetful, and a whole catalog of additional I’ms that you use.
You probably have many positive I’ms such as I’m loving, I’m good
at bridge, I’m sweet, as well. These will not be dealt with here since
the purpose of this chapter is to help you grow, rather than to ap-
plaud you for the areas of your life where you are operating effect-
ively.
Self-descriptors are not in themselves inappropriate, but they
74
--- PAGE 83 ---
can be used in harmful ways. The very act of labeling might be a
specific deterrent to growth. It’s easy to use the label as justification
for remaining the same. Sören Kierkegaard wrote, “Once you label
me, you negate me.” When the individual must live up to the label,
the self ceases to exist. The same is true of self-labels. You could be
negating yourself by identifying with your trademarks, rather than
your own potential for growth.
All self-labels come out of an individual’s history. But the past,
as Carl Sandburg said in Prairie,  “is a bucket of ashes.”
Check yourself out on the extent to which you are chained to your
past. All self-defeating “I’ms” are the result of the use of these four
neurotic sentences:
(1) “That’s me.”
(2) “I’ve always been that way.”
(3) “I can’t help it.”
(4) “That’s my nature.”
There they are in one little package. The connectors that keep you
from growing, changing and making your life (from this instant
on—which is all the life you have) new, exciting and heaped with
present-moment fulfillment.
I know of a grandmother who, each Sunday when she has the
family over for dinner, decides exactly how much each person will
eat by deliberately portioning out plates to her own specifications.
She gives each person two slices of meat, a spoonful of peas, a clump
of potatoes, and on and on. When asked, “Why do you do that?”
she responds with, “Oh, I’ve always been that way.” Why? Because
“That’s just the way I am.” Grandma’s rationale for her behavior is
her own label which comes from a past of always having behaved
in that manner.
Some people will actually use all four sentences in one shot when
confronted with their behavior. You might ask someone why he al-
ways gets upset when the subject of accidents arisesBREAKING FREE FROM THE PAST  / 75
--- PAGE 84 ---
and he is likely to respond, “Oh, that’s just me, I’ve always been that
way. I really can’t help it, it’s just my nature.” Whew! All four at
once, and each being used as an explanation for why he will never
be different and never even consider changing.
Your I’ms which describe self-canceling behavior can be traced
to something that you’ve learned in the past. And every time you
use one of these four sentences you are really saying, “And I intend
to continue being the way I’ve always been.”
You can begin to unknot the ropes that link you to your past and
eliminate the fruitless sentences which are spoken to keep you just
as you’ve always been.
Here is a typical list of “I’ms” that may be included in your own
self-portrait
I’m Fat I’m a Lousy Cook I’m Shy
“Not Musical “a Poor Speller “Lazy
“Not Athletic “Tired Easily “Timid
“Sloppy “Sickly “Afraid
“Stubborn “Gauche “Clumsy
“Immature “Accident Prone “Anxious
“Meticulous “Short Fused “Forgetful
“Careless “Hostile “Not Mechanical
“Vindictive “Solemn “Poor at Mathematics
“Irresponsible “Apathetic “A Loner
“Nervous “Bored “Frigid
You are probably in there several times, or perhaps you are con-
juring up your own list. The point is not which labels you choose,
but that you choose to label yourself at all. If you are genuinely sat-
isfied with any of the I’ms, then let them be, but if you can admit to
any of these or other I’ms getting in your way at times, it’s time to
make some changes. Let’s begin with an understanding of the origins
of the I’ms.
People want to label you, to pigeonhole you into neat little76 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 85 ---
categories. It’s easier that way. D. H. Lawrence saw the folly of this
labeling process in his poem What Is He?*
What is he?
—A man, of course.
Yes, but what does he do?
—He lives and is a man.
Oh quite! but he must work. He must have a job of some
sort.
—Why?
Because obviously he’s not one of the leisured classes.
—I don’t know. He has lots of leisure. And he makes quite
beautiful chairs.
There you are then! He’s a cabinet maker.
—No, no!
Anyhow a carpenter and joiner.
—Not at all.
But you said so.
—What did I say?
That he made chairs, and was a joiner and carpenter.
—I said he made chairs, but I did not say he was a
carpenter.
All right then, he’s just an amateur?
—Perhaps! Would you say a thrush was a professional
flautist, or just an amateur?
I’d say it was just a bird.
—And I say he is just a man.
All right! You always did quibble.
How Those “I’ms” Got Started
The antecedents to your I’ms fall into two categories. The first
kind of labels come from other people. They were pinned
* The Complete Poems of D. H. Lawrence,  vol. I, edited by Vivian de Sola Pinto and
F. Warren Roberts; copyright 1929 by Frieda Lawrence Ravagli; by permission of
The Viking Press, Inc.BREAKING FREE FROM THE PAST  / 77
--- PAGE 86 ---
on you as a child and you carry them around with you to this day.
The other labels are the result of a choice you made to keep from
having to do uncomfortable or difficult chores.
The first category is by far the most prevalent. Little Hope is in
the second grade. She goes to her art class every day, full of delight
about coloring and dabbling in paint. Her teacher tells her that she
really isn’t all that good, and she begins to stay away from it because
she doesn’t like disapproval. Before long, she has the beginning of
an I’m. I’m not good at art. With enough avoidance behavior she
reinforces this notion and, as an adult, when asked why she doesn’t
draw, she says, “Oh, I’m not good at it. I’ve always been that way.”
Most I’ms are leftovers, hangers-on from a time when you heard
such sentences as: “He’s kind of clumsy; his brother is good at ath-
letics, but he’s the studious one.” Or, “You’re just like me, I was
never good at spelling either.” Or, “Billy was always the shy one.”
Or, “She’s just like her father; he couldn’t carry a tune with a
wheelbarrow.” These are the birth rites to a lifetime of I’ms that
never get challenged. They are simply accepted as a condition of
life.
Have a conversation with the people in your life who you feel are
most responsible for many of your I’ms. (Parents, long-time family
friends, old teachers, grandparents, etc.) Ask them how they think
you got to be the way you are and if you’ve always been that way.
Tell them you are determined to change and see if they believe you
are capable. You’ll be surprised at their own interpretations and
how they feel you can’t be any different, since “You’ve always been
that way.”
The second category of I’ms originates in those convenient tags
that you’ve learned to place on yourself in order to avoid distasteful
activities. I have been working with a client who is forty-six years
old, and wants very much to attend college, since he missed out on
his opportunity because of World War Two. But Horace is threatened
by the prospect of being in academic competition with young people
right out of high school. Fear of78 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 87 ---
failure and doubt about his intellectual capacities scare Horace. He
looks at catalogs regularly, and with the help he receives in counsel-
ing he has taken the appropriate entrance examinations and arranged
an interview with an admissions official at a local community college.
But he still uses his I’ms to skirt the actual doing process. He justifies
his inaction with, “I’m too old, I’m not smart enough, and I’m not
really interested.”
Horace uses his I’ms to avoid something he genuinely wants. A
colleague of mine employs them to get out of tasks he doesn’t enjoy.
He avoids having to fix the doorbell, or the radio, or any unpleasant
handyman activity by simply reminding his wife, “Now you know,
dear, I’m just not mechanical.” These kinds of I’ms are adaptive be-
haviors, but they are nevertheless delusional excuses. Instead of
saying, “I find this kind of activity dull or uninteresting, and I choose
not to work at it in my present moments (which is perfectly logical
and healthy)” it becomes easier to simply haul out an I’m.
In these cases, the individuals are saying something about them-
selves. They are stating, “I am a finished product in this area, and I
am never going to be any different.” If you are a finished product,
all tied up and put away, you have stopped growing, and while you
may very well want to hang onto some I’ms you may find that others
are simply limiting and self-destructive.
Below is a listing of some labels that are relics of the past. If any
of them belong to you, you might like to change them. To stay exactly
the way you are in any area is to make one of those deathlike de-
cisions described in Chapter I. Keep in mind that this is not a discus-
sion of the things that you just plain don’t enjoy, but rather a look
at behavior that keeps you from activities from which you might
choose a great deal of pleasure and excitement.BREAKING FREE FROM THE PAST  / 79
--- PAGE 88 ---
Ten Typical “I’m” Categories and Their Neurotic Dividends
1. I’m poor at math, spelling, reading, languages, etc.
This I’m guarantees that you won’t put in the effort required
to change. The academic I’m is designed to keep you from
ever having to do the hard work involved in mastering sub-
ject matter that you have traditionally found difficult or
boring. As long as you label yourself inept, you have a built-
in reason to avoid tackling it.
2. 2. I’m lousy at some skill areas such as cooking, sports, crocheting,
drawing, acting, etc.
This I’m assures that you won’t have to do any of these things
in the future and justifies any poor performance in the past.
“I’ve always been that way; it’s just my nature.” This attitude
reinforces your inertia and, more important, it helps you to
hang onto the absurd notion that you shouldn’t do anything
if you don’t do it really well. Thus, unless you’re the world
champion, avoidance is better than doing.
3. I’m shy, reserved, temperamental, nervous, afraid, etc.
The call is to genetics for these I’ms. Rather than challenging
them and the self-destructive thinking which supports them,
you simply accept them as a confirmation of the way you’ve
always been. Also, you can blame your parents, and use them
as the reason for your current I’m. You make them the cause
and don’t have to work at being different. You choose this
behavior as a way to avoid being assertive in situations which
have always been troublesome for you. This is a leftover I’m
from a childhood in which others had an inherent interest in
having you believe that you were incapable of thinking for
yourself. These are the personality I’ms. These self-definitions
help you to avoid the tough business of being different from
what you’ve always been. You simply define your personality
with a convenient I’m and you can now excuse all kinds of
self-forfeiting behav-80 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 89 ---
iors as out of your control. You negate the notion that you
can choose your own personality, and rely instead on your
genetic misfortune to explain away all of those personality
traits that you would like to disown.
4. I’m clumsy, uncoordinated, etc.
These I’ms that you learned as a child enable you to avoid
potential ridicule that might come your way because you
aren’t as physically skilled as others. Of course, your lack of
skill comes from a history of believing those I’ms and hence
avoiding physical activity, rather than from some inherent
defect. You get good at what you practice, not what you shun.
Keep your I’m and stay on the sidelines watching and wish-
ing, but pretending that you really don’t like that sort of
thing.
5. I’m unattractive, ugly, big-boned, plain, too tall, etc.
These physiological I’ms are helpful in keeping you from
taking risks with the opposite sex, and in justifying the poor
self-image and lack of love you’ve chosen for yourself. As
long as you describe yourself in this fashion, you have a
ready-made excuse for not putting yourself on the line in a
love relationship. And you don’t have to work at looking
attractive to yourself, as well. You use your mirror as justific-
ation for not taking a chance. There’s only one problem: we
see exactly what we choose to—even in mirrors.
6. I’m unorganized, meticulous, sloppy, etc.
These behavioral I’ms are convenient for manipulating others
and in justifying why things have to be done a certain way.
I’ve always done it that way. As if tradition were a reason to
do anything. And I’ll always do it that way is the unstated
message. By relying upon the way you’ve always done it,
you don’t ever have to entertain the risky notion of doing it
differently, and you can simultaneously ensure that everyone
around you will do it your way as well. This is the I’m that
calls upon “policy” as a substitute for thinking.BREAKING FREE FROM THE PAST  / 81
--- PAGE 90 ---
7. I’m forgetful, careless, irresponsible, apathetic, etc.
These kinds of I’ms are especially useful to you when you
want to vindicate yourself for some ineffective behavior. The
I’m keeps you from ever going to work on your memory, or
your carelessness, and you simply excuse yourself with your
neat little, “That’s me.” As long as you can haul out this I’m
when you behave in any of the ways described above, you
will never have to work at changing. Just go on forgetting
and reminding yourself that you can’t really help it, and
you’ll always be forgetful.
8. I’m Italian, German, Jewish, Irish, Black, Chinese, etc.
These are your ethnic I’ms, and they work very well when
you run out of other reasons to explain some behaviors that
you have, which don’t work for you, but are just too damned
difficult to tackle. Whenever you find yourself behaving in
stereotypical ways associated with your subculture, you
simply trot out your ethnic I’m as a justification. I once asked
a maître d’ why he seemed so excitable and reacted to the
slightest problem with outrageous outbursts. He responded,
“What do you expect from me? I’m Italian. I can’t help it.”
9. I’m bossy, pushy, authoritarian, etc.
Here your I’m can allow you to continue hostile acts, rather
than work at developing self-discipline. You varnish the be-
havior with “I can’t help it, I’ve always been that way.”
10. I’m old, middle-aged, tired, etc.
With this I’m you can use your age as a reason for not parti-
cipating in what might be risky or threatening activities.
Whenever you find yourself faced with an activity such as a
sports event, dating after a divorce or the death of a spouse,
traveling, or the like you can just say “I’m too old” and you
will have eliminated any attendant risks that go with trying
something new and growth-producing. The implication of
an “age-I’m” is that you are absolutely finished in82 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 91 ---
this area, and since you will always get older, you are finished
growing and experiencing anything new.
The “I’m” Circle
The rewards for hanging onto your past by trotting out your I’ms
can be neatly summed up in the one word: avoidance. Whenever
you want to dodge a certain kind of activity or to gloss over a per-
sonality defect, you can always justify yourself with an I’m. In fact,
after you use these labels enough, you begin to believe them yourself,
and at that present moment you are a finished product destined to
remain as you are for the rest of your days. Labels enable you to
avoid the hard work and the risk of trying to change. They perpetu-
ate the behavior which has given rise to them. Thus, if a young man
goes to a party with the belief that he is shy, he will behave as if he
is shy and his behavior will further support his self-image. It’s a vi-
cious circle.
There you have it. Rather than intervening between point 3 and
4 on the circle, he simply exonerates his behavior with an I’m, and
the attendant risk-taking that is necessary to get out of his trap is
adroitly avoided. There may be many reasons for theBREAKING FREE FROM THE PAST  / 83
--- PAGE 92 ---
young man’s shyness, some of which probably go back to his
childhood. Whatever the reasons for his fear he has decided not to
go to work on his social-wariness, but to explain it away with a
simple I’m. His fear of failing is strong enough to prevent him from
trying. Were he to believe in the present moment and his ability to
make a choice, his sentence would change from, “I’m shy,” to “Up
until now, I’ve behaved in a shy manner.”
The vicious circle of shyness can be applied to virtually all I’ms
that are self-diminishing. Consider the circle of a student who be-
lieves he’s poor in math as he tackles his algebra homework.
Rather than stop between 3 and 4, and put in the extra time, con-
sult a tutor, or struggle with it he simply stops. When asked why he
flunked algebra class, he’ll say “I’ve always been lousy in mathem-
atics.” Those infernal I’ms are the things that you call upon to exon-
erate yourself and to explain to others why you persist in a self-de-
feating pattern.
You can look at your own circle of neurotic logic and begin to
challenge any aspect of your life in which you’ve chosen to be a
finished product. The number one payoff for hanging onto your
past and resting on your I’ms is avoidance of change. Every time
you use an I’m to explain a behavior that you don’t84 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 93 ---
like, think of yourself in that gaily decorated box, all wrapped up
as a finished package.
Certainly it is easier to describe yourself than to change. Perhaps
you ascribe the reasons for your labels to your parents, or to other
significant adults in your childhood such as your teachers, neighbors,
grandparents and the like. By giving them responsibility for your
present-day I’m you’ve given them a measure of control over your
life today, elevated them to a higher position than you and ingeni-
ously created an alibi for staying in your ineffective condition. A
neat little payoff indeed, and one that provides you with a warranty
against any risk-taking. If it’s the “culture’s” fault that you have this
I’m, you can’t do anything about it.
Some Strategies for Freeing Yourself from the Past and Eliminating
Your Vexing I’ms
Leaving the past behind involves taking risks. You have become
accustomed to your self-definitions. In many cases they function as
a support system in your daily life. Some specific strategies for
eliminating those I’ms include:
• Eliminating I’m wherever you can. Substitute with such sen-
tences as, “Until today I’ve chose to be that way,” or “I used to label
myself…”
• Announce to those close to you that you are going to work at
eliminating some of your I’ms. Decide which are most important to
eliminate and ask them to remind you whenever you haul them out.
• Set behavioral goals to act differently than you’ve ever done
before. For example, if you consider yourself shy, introduce yourself
to one person who you might otherwise have avoided.BREAKING FREE FROM THE PAST  / 85
--- PAGE 94 ---
• Talk with a trusted confidant who will help you combat the
powers of the past. Ask him to signal you silently with a tug to his
ear each time he notices you falling back into your I’m.
• Keep a journal on your self-destructive I’m behavior, and record
your action as well as how you were feeling about yourself while
you were behaving that way. For one week record in a notebook the
exact time, date and occasion when you used any of the self-destruct-
ive I’ms, and work at diminishing the entries. Use the list provided
earlier in this chapter as a guide to your journal-keeping.
• Watch out for the four neurotic sentences and whenever you
fall into using them, correct yourself out loud  in the following way.
Change
“That’s me.”…to…“That was me.”
“I can’t help it.”…to…“I can change that if I work on it.”
“I’ve always been that way.”…to…“I’m going to be different.”
“That’s my nature.”…to…“That’s what I used to believe was my
nature.”
• Try to work each day on eliminating one I’m just for that day.
If you’ve used I’m forgetful as a self-descriptor, devote Monday to
working specifically at being aware of this tendency, and see if you
can alter one or two forgetful behaviors. Similarly, if you don’t like
your stubbornness I’m, give yourself one day to be tolerant of con-
trary opinions, and see if you can rid yourself of I’ms one day at a
time.
• You can interrupt your own “I’m-Circle” between point 3 and
4, and resolve to toss out those ancient excuses for avoidance.
• Find something you’ve never done and set aside an afternoon
for that activity. After your three-hour immersion in a totally new
activity, one that you’ve always avoided in the past, see if you can
still use the same I’m that you applied that morning.86 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 95 ---
All of your I’ms are learned avoidance patterns, and you can learn
to be almost anything if you make the choice to do so.
Some Final Thoughts
There is no such thing as human nature. The phrase itself is de-
signed to pigeonhole people and to create excuses. You are the sum
product of your choices, and every I’m you treasure could be re-
labeled, “I’ve chosen to be.” Go back to the opening questions in
this chapter, Who are you? and How do you describe yourself? Think
about some delicious new labels that are in no way connected to the
choices that others have made for you, or those that you’ve made
until now. Those old tiresome labels may be keeping you from living
your life as fully as you might.
Remember what Merlin said about learning:
“The best thing for being sad,” replied Merlin, beginning to
puff and blow, “is to learn something. That is the only thing
that never fails. You may grow old and trembling in your ana-
tomies, you may lie awake at night listening to the disorder of
your veins, you may miss your only love, you may see the
world about you devastated by evil lunatics, or know your
honor trampled in the sewers of baser minds. There is only one
thing for it then—to learn. Learn why the world wags and what
wags it. That is the only thing which the mind can never ex-
haust, never alienate, never be tortured by, never fear or dis-
trust, and never dream of regretting. Learning is the thing for
you. Look at what a lot of things there are to learn—pure sci-
ence, the only purity there is. You can learn astronomy in a
lifetime, natural history in three, literature in six. And then,
after you have exhausted a million lifetimes in biology and
medicine and theocriticism and geography and history and
eco-BREAKING FREE FROM THE PAST  / 87
--- PAGE 96 ---
nomics, why, you can start to make a cartwheel out of the ap-
propriate wood, or spend fifty years learning to begin to learn
to beat your adversary at fencing. After that you can start again
on mathematics until it is time to learn to plough.”*
Any I’m that keeps you from growing is a demon to be exorcised.
If you must have an I’m, try this one on for size. “I’m an ‘I’m’ exor-
cist—and I like it.”
*Terence H. White, The Once and Future King  (New York: C. P. Putnam’s Sons,
1958).88 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 97 ---
