X
DECLARE YOUR
INDEPENDENCE
In any relationship in which two people become
one, the end result is two half people.
Leaving the psychological nest is one of life’s difficult chores. The
dependency viper intrudes in life in many, many ways, and routing
it entirely is made more difficult by the numerous people who benefit
from another’s psychological dependency. Psychological independ-
ence means total freedom from all obligatory relationships, and an
absence of other-directed behavior. It means being free from having
to do something you would not otherwise choose, were the relation-
ship not to exist. The nest-leaving business is especially difficult
because our society teaches us to fulfill certain expectations in special
relationships, which include parents, children, authority figures and
loved ones.
Leaving the nest means becoming your own person, living and
choosing the behaviors that you want. It does not mean
189
--- PAGE 198 ---
breaking off in any sense of the word. If you enjoy your way of in-
teracting with anyone and it doesn’t interfere with your own goals,
then it is something you can cherish rather than change. Psycholo-
gical dependence, on the other hand, means that you are in relation-
ships that involve no choice, a relationship in which you are obliged
to be something you don’t want to be and that you resent the way
in which you are being forced to conduct yourself. This is the guts
of this erroneous zone, and it is akin to the approval-seeking dis-
cussed in Chapter III. If you want some kind of relationship, then it
is not unhealthy. But if you need it, or are forced into it, and sub-
sequently feel resentment, then you are in a self-defeating area. Thus,
it is the obligation that is the problem, rather than the relationship
itself. Obligation breeds guilt and dependency, while choice fosters
love and independence. There is no choice in a psychologically de-
pendent relationship, consequently there will always be indignation
and ill-feelings in any such alliance.
Being psychologically independent involves not needing others.
I didn’t say wanting others, I said needing. The moment you need,
you become vulnerable, a slave. If the one you need leaves, or
changes his mind, or dies, you are then forced into immobilization,
collapse, or even death. But society teaches us to be psychologically
dependent on a whole raft of folks from parents on, and you still
may be holding open your mouth waiting for the worms in many
significant relationships. As long as you feel that you have to do
anything because it is expected of you in a particular relationship,
and your doing it creates any resentment or your not doing it any
guilt, you can count yourself as having work to do in this erroneous
zone.
Eliminating dependency starts with your family, with the way
your parents dealt with you as a child and the way you deal with
your own children today. How many psychologically dependent
sentences do you carry in your head today? How many of them do
you force on your children?190 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 199 ---
The Dependency Trap in Child Rearing and the Family
Walt Disney produced a superb film some years ago entitled Bear
Country.  It traced a mother bear and her two babies through the first
few months of the cubs’ lives. Mama-bear taught the cubs how to
hunt, fish and climb trees. She taught them how to protect themselves
when they confronted danger. Then one day, Mama-bear, for her
own instinctive reasons, decided that it was time to leave. She forced
them to scamper up a tree, and without even looking back, she left.
Forever! In her own bear mind, she had completed her parental re-
sponsibilities. She didn’t try to manipulate them into visiting her on
alternate Sundays. She did not accuse them of being ungrateful, or
threaten to have a nervous breakdown if they disappointed her. She
simply let them go. Throughout the animal kingdom, parenting
means to teach the offspring the skills necessary to be independent
and then to leave. With us humans, the instinct is still the same, that
is, to be independent, but the neurotic need to own and live one’s
life through one’s children seems to take over, and the goal of raising
a child to be independent is subverted into the idea of raising a child
to hold onto him.
What do you want for your children? Would you like them to be
high in self-esteem and self-confidence, neurosis-free, fulfilled and
happy? Of course you would. But how can you help to ensure such
an outcome? Only by being that way yourself. Children learn from
the behavior of their models. If you are full of guilt and unfulfilled
in your life, but telling your children not to be, then you are selling
a tainted product. If you model low self-esteem, then you’ll teach
your children to adopt the same attitudes for themselves. Even more
significantly, if you make your children more important than your-
self, you are not helping them, you are merely teaching them to put
others ahead of themselves, and to take a back seat while remaining
unfulfilled. Such irony. You cannot hand your children self-confid-
ence;DECLARE YOUR INDEPENDENCE  / 191
--- PAGE 200 ---
they must acquire it by seeing you living the same way yourself.
Only by treating yourself as the most important person and not al-
ways sacrificing yourself for your children will you teach them to
have their own self-confidence and belief in themselves. If you are
a sacrificer, you are modeling sacrificing behavior. And what does
sacrificing behavior mean? Putting others before yourself, not liking
yourself, seeking approval and other erroneous behavior. While
doing for others is sometimes admirable, if it is at the expense of
yourself, you are merely teaching the others the same kind of resent-
ment-breeding behavior.
From the very beginning children want to do things for them-
selves. “I can do it myself!” “Watch me, Mommy, I can do it without
any help.” “I’ll feed myself.” On and on the signals come. And while
there is a great deal of dependence in those early years, there is also
the distinctive push toward autonomy almost from the first day.
As a four-year-old, little Roxanne will always come to Mommy
and Daddy when she is hurt or in need of an emotional support of
any sort. She pours out her soul when she is eight and ten years of
age. While she wants to be thought of as a big girl (I’ll button my
own coat!”), she also wants the support of a caring parent. (“Look
Mom, I scratched my knee and it’s bleeding.”) Her self-concept is
developing through the views of her parents and other significant
people in her life. Suddenly, Roxanne is fourteen. She comes home
crying because of a fight with her boyfriend, and she runs into her
bedroom, slamming the door behind her. Mamma comes up and
asks her to talk about it in her typically caring way. But now she is
told by Roxanne in no uncertain terms, “I don’t want to talk about
it. Leave me alone.” Instead of Mamma understanding that this little
scene is evidence that she has been an effective parent, and the little
Roxanne who always told all her problems to Mommy is now
working on them herself (emotional independence), Mamma is
distressed. She is not ready to let go, to let Roxanne192 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 201 ---
work it out in her own independent way. She still sees Roxanne as
the same nestling that she was only a short time ago. But if Mamma
persists, and forces the issue, she will be in for a huge dose of resent-
ment from Roxanne.
The child’s desire to get out of the nest is strong, but when own-
ership and sacrifice have been the lubrication for the family machine,
the natural act of leaving turns into a crisis. Nest-leaving in a psy-
chologically sound atmosphere involves neither crisis nor turmoil;
it is the natural consequence of effective living. But when guilt and
fear of disappointment color the nest-leaving, they continue
throughout life, sometimes to the point that the marriage relationship
becomes one of parenting, rather than of two individuals sharing
on an equal footing.
What then are your goals of parenting, and of working out an ef-
fective present relationship with your own parents? Certainly the
family is an important unit in the developmental process, but it
should not be a permanent unit. It should not be a vehicle of guilt
and neurosis when its various members make moves for emotional
independence. You may have heard parents say, “I have a right to
make my child into anything I choose.” But what is the payoff for
such a domineering attitude? Hate, resentment, anger and frustrating
guilt when the child grows up. As you examine effective parent-
child relationships which have no requirements or obligations at-
tached, you’ll discover parents who treat their children as friends.
If a child spills the catsup on the table, it’s not a “Why don’t you
watch what you’re doing; you’re so clumsy” routine. Instead, you’ll
see the same kind of a response that would be given to a friend were
they to spill something. “Can I help you?” No abuse because they
are owned, but a respect for the child’s dignity. You’ll also discover
that effective parents foster independence rather than dependence,
and create no scenes about normal desires to be autonomous.DECLARE YOUR INDEPENDENCE  / 193
--- PAGE 202 ---
Differences Between Dependent and Independent
Focused Families
In families that focus on independence, movement toward being
one’s own person is seen as normal, rather than as a challenge to
anyone’s authority. Clinging and needing are not emphasized.
Similarly, there are no demands that a child have allegiance forever,
simply because of membership in a family. The result is family
members who want to be together, rather than feel obligated to be
together. There is also a respect for privacy rather than a demand
to share everything. In families like this, the woman has a life of her
own beyond being a mother and wife. She will model effective living
for her children, rather than live her life for and through them. The
parents feel that their own happiness is paramount, because without
it there can be no family harmony. Hence the parents can go off
alone occasionally, and not feel obliged to always be there for their
children. The mother isn’t a slave, because she doesn’t want her own
children (especially the girls) to become one. And she doesn’t want
to be one herself. She doesn’t feel that she must be there all the time
for her infant’s every need. She feels that she can appreciate her
children and vice versa all the more if she is fulfilling herself and
contributing to her family, her community and her culture on an
equal footing with the men in this world.
In this sort of family there is no subtle manipulation via guilt or
threats to keep the children dependent and responsible to the parents.
As the children mature, the parents don’t want their kids to visit
them out of obligation. Besides, the parents are too busy being effect-
ive in their own way to be sitting around waiting for children and
grandchildren to show up and give them a reason for living. Parents
like these don’t believe that they should spare their own children
all of the hardships that they suffered because they recognize that
the very act of working at a hardship is what gave them their own
self-confidence and self-194 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 203 ---
esteem. They wouldn’t want to rob their children of such precious
experiences.
These parents perceive the desire of their children to struggle for
themselves, with the assistance but not overbearance of a caring
parent, as healthy and not to be denied. Hesse’s Demian talks about
the variety of paths to independence.
Sooner or later each of us must take the step that separates him
from his father, from his mentors; each of us must have some
cruelly lonely experience…I myself had not parted from my
parents and their world, the “luminous” world in a violent
struggle, but had gradually and almost imperceptibly become
estranged. I was sad that it had to be this way, and it made for
many unpleasant hours*
You can have all visits back home be fond experiences, if you get
a firm handle on your own struggle for independence from your
parents. And if you model self-pride and self-worth for your chil-
dren, they will in turn leave the nest with an absence of stress and
turmoil for all concerned.
Dorothy Canfield Fisher summed it up perfectly in Her Son’s Wife:
A mother is not a person to lean on, but a person to make
leaning unnecessary.
So be it. You can make nest-leaving a natural event, or one which
is loaded with trauma and which will haunt the child and the rela-
tionship forever. But you were also a child at one time, and if you
learned the psychological dependency routine well, then perhaps
when you married you substituted one dependent relationship for
another.
*Hermann Hesse, Demian  (New York: Bantam Books, 1974), p. 104.DECLARE YOUR INDEPENDENCE  / 195
--- PAGE 204 ---
Psychological Dependence and Marriage Crisis
You may have resolved your dependency on your parents, and
perhaps your relationship with your own children is under control
as well. Perhaps you recognize your children’s need for independ-
ence and are encouraging it. But you may still have a dependency
problem in your life. If you’re one of those people who left one de-
pendent relationship with your parents and entered into another
when you married, then you have an erroneous zone that needs
work.
Louis Anspacher wrote about marriage in America—
Marriage is that relation between man and woman in which
the independence is equal, the dependence mutual, and the
obligation reciprocal.
There they are, the two ugly words, dependence and obligation,
which account for the state of marriage and rate of divorce in our
country. The simple fact is that most folks just don’t like marriage,
and while they may endure it, or get out of it, the psychological
casualties persist.
A relationship based on love, as was said earlier, is one in which
each partner allows the other to be what he chooses, with no expect-
ations and no demands. It is a simple association of two people who
love each other so much that each would never expect the other to
be something that he wouldn’t choose for himself. It is a union based
on independence, rather than dependence. But this sort of relation-
ship is so rare in our culture that it is almost mythological. Imagine
a union with the one you love, in which each of you can be whatever
you desire. Now consider the reality of most relationships. How
does that grisly dependency sneak in and muck up the works?196 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 205 ---
A Typical Marriage
The thread that winds through most marriages is one of dominance
and submission. While the roles may shift regularly, different for
various marital situations, the thread is nevertheless present. One
partner dominates the other as a condition of the alliance. A case
history of a typical marriage and its psychological crisis points goes
something like that of our fictional couple below.
At the time of marriage, the husband is twenty-three and his wife
is twenty. He has slightly more education, and has secured the
money-earning prestige position, while the woman works as a sec-
retary, clerk, or perhaps in a profession dominated by women such
as teacher or nurse. The woman’s job is a filler, until she can become
a mother. After four years of marriage, there are two or three chil-
dren, and the woman is serving as a wife and mother in the home.
Her role is that of taking care of the house, her children and her
husband. From a job standpoint, her position is that of a domestic,
and psychologically she is in a submissive position. The man’s work
is given more significance, largely because he brings in money to
support the family. His successes become his wife’s successes, and
his social contacts become their friends. He is given more status in
the home, and the woman’s role is often one of making his life as
comfortable as she can. The woman spends the greater part of her
day interacting with children or she talks with neighborhood women
who are in the same psychological snare. When her husband has a
crisis on the job, it becomes her crisis, and generally speaking, any
objective observer would see that there is a dominant and a sub-
missive member in this arrangement. The woman has accepted and
perhaps sought out this kind of relationship, because it is all she has
ever known. Her marriage is modeled on that of her parents and
others she saw as she grew up. And more often than not, her depend-
ence on her husband merely replaced her dependence on her parents.
The man similarly soughtDECLARE YOUR INDEPENDENCE  / 197
--- PAGE 206 ---
out a woman who was soft spoken, gentle, and who would reinforce
the fact that he was the breadwinner and headwinner in all interac-
tions. Thus, both people got what they were looking for, and what
they had seen all of their own lives in terms of how a marriage oper-
ates.
After several years of marriage, perhaps four to seven years, a
crisis begins to erupt. The submissive partner begins to feel trapped,
unimportant and dissatisfied because she is not making a significant
contribution. The man encourages his wife to be more her own
person, to be more assertive, and to take charge of her life and stop
feeling sorry for herself. These are the first messages that conflict
with what he wanted when he got married. “If you want to work,
why don’t you look for a job?” or “Go back to school.” He encourages
her to seek new outlets, to stop being so namby-pamby. In short, to
be something different than what he married, which was submissive
and domestic. The woman, until now, has always felt that any un-
happiness in her husband was her fault. “Where did I go wrong?”
If he’s unhappy or frustrated, she feels that she has been inadequate,
or that she must not be as attractive as she used to be. The submissive
partner resorts to her own subservient mind-set, and assesses all
male problems as being lodged in her own self.
At this time in the marriage the man is very much occupied with
job promotions, social contacts and professional striving. He is on
his way up, and a sniveling wife is something he cannot tolerate.
Because of his many opportunities to deal with a great number of
different people (something denied to his submissive partner) he is
changing. He has become even more self-assertive, demanding and
intolerant of weaknesses in others, including his family, Thus, his
admonitions to “get yourself together” to his submissive wife. This
is also a time when the husband may look for sexual outlets outside
the marriage. He has many opportunities and he seeks the compan-
ionship of more exciting women. Sometimes the submissive partner
begins some experimentation of her own. She may take on a volun-
teer job,198 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 207 ---
enroll in school, seek therapy, have an affair of her own, most  of
which is enthusiastically supported by the husband.
Perhaps the submissive partner will begin to gain new insights
into her behavior. She sees her subservience as something that she
has chosen all her life, not just in her marriage. Her approval-seeking
behavior has now been challenged, and she begins to put herself on
the road to greater self-responsibility by eliminating all dependency
in her world, including that of her parents, her husband, her friends,
and even her children. She begins to gain self-confidence. She may
take on a job, and begin to make new friends. She begins to stand
up to her dominant husband, and stops taking all of the abuse that
has been her lot since the marriage began. She demands equality,
no longer satisfied to wait any longer for it to be granted to her. She
simply takes it. She insists on a sharing of domestic chores, including
care of the children.
This new independence and the shift from the external to internal
thinking on the part of the woman is not easily accepted by her
husband. He becomes threatened. Anxiety is entering his life at a
time when he cannot afford it. The last thing he needs is an upstart
wife, even though he encouraged her to get out more on her own
and think for herself. He didn’t expect to create a monster, least of
all one that would challenge his own established supremacy. He
may react with a heavy dose of dominance, which has always worked
at putting his submissive partner in her place in the past. He argues
against the absurdity of working, when she is paying most all of her
salary for babysitters. He points to the illogic of her belief that she
isn’t equal. In fact, she’s indulged. “You don’t have to work, you
have it made, all you have to do is take care of a house and be a
mother to your children.” He tries guilt. “The children are going to
suffer.” “I can’t have this aggravation.” Perhaps he threatens her
with divorce, or as a last resort, suicide. This often works. The wife
says to herself, “Wow, I almost blew it,” and reverts to her sub-
missive role. The heavy dose of dominance served toDECLARE YOUR INDEPENDENCE  / 199
--- PAGE 208 ---
remind her of her place. But if she refuses to regress, the marriage
itself may be in jeopardy. At any rate, there is a definite crisis. If the
wife persists in replacing her submissiveness with self-reliance, the
husband, who needs to dominate someone, might leave for a
younger wife who will stand in awe of him and thus put her in the
position of looking up to him and becoming a cute little showpiece.
On the other hand, the marriage may survive the crisis, and an inter-
esting shift may take place. The thread of dominance and submission
still winds its way through the marriage. That is the only kind of
marriage both partners recognize. Often the husband will now take
on the submissive role out of fear of losing something he cherishes,
or at least depends on. Staying home more, getting closer to the
children (out of guilt from earlier abandonment), he may say things
like, “You don’t need me any more” or “You’re changing, you’re
not the girl I married and I’m not sure I like the new you.” He has
become more submissive. He may become a heavy drinker, and a
self-pitier out of a need to manipulate his wife or to recapture his
long-lost superiority. The wife is now in a career, or moving toward
one; she has her own circle of friends, and is developing outside in-
terests of her own. Perhaps she is having an affair as an assertive
retaliatory gesture, but at the least, she is feeling good about receiving
some acclaim and compliments for her accomplishments. However,
the thread is still there, and a crisis looms heavy. As long as one
partner must be more important than the other or fear-of-divorce is
the thing that binds the two together, dependency is still the
cornerstone of the alliance. The dominant partner, be it man or wo-
man, is not satisfied with a slave for a spouse. The marriage may
continue in a legal sense, but any love or communication between
the two partners has been destroyed. Divorce is common here, but
if not, two people begin to go their separate ways within the mar-
riage—no sex, separate quarters, a communication pattern based on
mutual put-down, in lieu of understanding.
A different conclusion is also possible, if both partners decide200 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 209 ---
to reevaluate themselves and their relationship. If both work at be-
coming free of erroneous zones, and loving each other in the sense
of allowing the other partner to choose his own fulfillment, then the
marriage can flower and grow. With two self-reliant people, who
care enough about each other to foster independence rather than
dependence, but at the same time share happiness with a loved
person, marriage can be an exciting prospect. But, when two people
try to merge into oneness, or one tries to dominate the other in any
way, that spark that is within us all fights for one of the greatest
human needs, independence.
Longevity is not an indication of success in marriage. Many people
stay married out of fear of the unknown, or because of inertia, or
simply because it is the thing to do. In a successful marriage, a
marriage where both partners feel genuine love, each is willing to
let the other person choose for himself rather than to dominate. There
is not the constant hassling that involves thinking and speaking for
the other partner, and demanding that he does what he’s supposed
to. Dependency is the serpent in the paradise of a happy marriage.
It creates patterns of dominance and submission and ultimately
destroys relationships. This erroneous zone can be eliminated, but
it will never be an easy battle, since power and control are at stake,
and few want to give them up without a fight. Most important, de-
pendency should not be confused with love. Putting some spaces
in togetherness ironically solidifies marriages.
You Are Treated the Way You Teach Others to Treat You
Dependency is not something that just happens because of associ-
ation with domineering people. It is, like all erroneous zone behavior,
a choice. You teach people to dominate you, and to treat you the
way you’ve always been treated. There are manyDECLARE YOUR INDEPENDENCE  / 201
--- PAGE 210 ---
schemes that maintain the domineering process, and they are re-
peated only if they work. They work if they keep you in line and in
a dependent position in the relationship. Here are some of the com-
mon strategies for maintaining dominance and control threads in
marriage.
• Yelling, screaming and voice-raising of any kind. This will keep
you in line if you are a soft person and want things quiet and smooth.
• Threatening behavior such as, “I’ll leave, I’ll get a divorce.”
• Inducement of guilt. “You had no right to—” “I don’t understand
how you could have done such a thing.” If guilt is your hang-up,
then you can be kept “submissive” with such statements.
• The use of anger and explosive behavior, such as throwing
things, swearing, hitting objects.
• The physical ailment ploy. Having a heart attack, headache,
back problem, or whatever when one partner doesn’t act the way
the other wants him to. You can be manipulated by this if you have
taught your partner that you’ll behave when he gets sick.
• The silent treatment. No talking and deliberate sulking are su-
perlative strategies that one partner can use to maneuver the other
into correct behavior.
• The tears routine in which you cry in order to help the other
person to feel guilty.
• The leaving scene. Simply getting up and walking out is a good
way to manipulate a partner into or out of certain behavior.
• The “You don’t love me” or “You don’t understand me” contriv-
ance for getting one’s way and maintaining the dependency in the
relationship.
• The suicide scheme. “If you don’t do what I want, then I’ll kill
myself” or “If you leave me, I’ll end it all.”202 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 211 ---
All of the above strategies are methods that keep the other person
in the desired role in marriage. They are used when they work. If
one partner refuses to be manipulated by them, the other will not
continue to use them. It is only when one mate is responsive to these
ploys that the other gets in the habit of using them. If you give the
proper submissive reactions, you are teaching the other what you
will tolerate.
If you get pushed around, you’ve been sending push-me-around
signals. You can learn to teach others to treat you the way you want
to be treated. It will take time and effort because it has taken a lot
of time to teach others how you wanted to be treated until now. But
you can make the change whether it be on the job, in the family, at
a restaurant, on the bus, any place at all that you receive shabby
treatment which you dislike. Rather than saying, “Why don’t you
treat me better?” begin to say, “What am I doing to teach others to
treat me this way?” Put the focus on you, and begin changing those
reactions.
Some Common Dependency and Dependency-Fostering Behavior
• Feeling unable to leave the nest or leaving it with bad feelings
on both sides.
• Feeling required or obliged to visit, telephone, entertain,
chauffeur and the like.
• Asking permission of a spouse for anything, including spending
money, authority to speak, or use of the car.
• Invasions of privacy, such as looking through drawers and
private records of children.
• Sentences like, “I could never tell him how I feel, he wouldn’t
like it.”
• Falling into depression and immobilization after the death of a
loved one.DECLARE YOUR INDEPENDENCE  / 203
--- PAGE 212 ---
• Feeling committed to a particular job and never venturing out
on your own.
• Having expectations for how a spouse, parent, or child has to
be.
• Being embarrassed by a child’s, spouse’s, or parent’s behavior,
as if what they are is a part of what you are.
• Being in training  all of your life for a job or position. Never
leaving the training phase for self-reliance.
• Being hurt by what others say, feel, think, or do.
• Only feeling happy or successful if your mate is feeling that
way.
• Taking orders from someone.
• Allowing someone else to make decisions for you, or always
asking advice before deciding.
• “You owe me, look what I did for you.” The obligations that go
with being dependent.
• Not doing something in front of a parent or dominant person
because they wouldn’t approve. Not smoking, drinking, swearing,
eating a hot fudge sundae, or whatever, because of your submissive
role.
• Giving up on your own life when a loved one dies, or becomes
seriously ill.
• Using careful language around a dominant person, so that he
won’t be upset with you.
• Persistently lying about your own behavior, and having to distort
the truth so that “they” won’t be upset with you.
The Psychological Compensation of Dependency
The reasons for hanging on to this self-thwarting behavior are not
very complicated. You may know the payoffs for being a dependent,
but do you know how destructive they are? Dependency may appear
harmless, but it is the enemy of all happiness and fulfillment. Here
are the more common dividends for keeping yourself in a dependent
state:204 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 213 ---
• Being dependent can keep you in the protective custody of
others, and give you the little child benefits of not being responsible
for your own behavior.
• By staying dependent, you can blame your shortcomings on
others.
• If you are dependent on others, you don’t have to undertake
the hard work and risk of change. You are secure in your reliance
on others who will take responsibility for you.
• You can feel good about yourself because you are pleasing oth-
ers. You learned that the way to be good is to please Mommy, and
now many symbolic Mommies manipulate you.
• You can avoid guilt which you choose when you behave assert-
ively. It is easier to behave than to learn to eliminate guilt.
• You needn’t make choices or decisions for yourself. You model
yourself on the parent, spouse, or individual on whom you depend.
So long as you think what they think or feel what they feel, there’s
no need for the hard work of determining what you think or feel.
• When everything else is boiled away, it is just plain easier to be
a follower than a leader. You can do what you’re told and avoid
trouble, even though you may not like the way you feel as a follower.
It’s still simpler than taking all those risks that go with being your
own person. Dependency is distasteful because it makes you into
less than a whole, independently functioning person. But it is easier,
that’s for sure.
A Prospectus for Ridding Yourself of Dependency
• Write your own Declaration of Independence in which you spell
out for yourself how you want to function in all relationships, not
eliminating compromise, but wiping out any manipulation without
representation. “I, the person, in order to have a more perfect union,
etc.”
• Talk with each person that you feel you are psychologically
dependent upon. Declare your aims of functioning indepen-DECLARE YOUR INDEPENDENCE  / 205
--- PAGE 214 ---
dently, explain how you feel when you do things out of a sense of
obligation. This is an excellent strategy for getting started, because
the other may not even be aware of how you feel as a dependent.
• Give yourself five-minute goals for how you’re going to deal
with dominant people in your life. Try a one-shot “No, I don’t want
to,” and test the reaction of your reaction in the other person’s.
• Arrange a planning session with your dominant partner at a
time when you are feeling unthreatened. During this session, explain
that you sometimes feel manipulated and submissive and that you
would like to arrange a nonverbal signal to let the other person know
how you are feeling when it crops up, but that you don’t want to
discuss it at that time. A simple tugging of the ear or a thumb in the
mouth to signal you’re feeling submissive at a particular time.
• At the moment you are feeling shoved-around psychologically,
state how you feel to the person, and then act out the way you’d like
to behave.
• Remind yourself that parents, spouses, friends, bosses, children
and others will often disapprove of your behavior, and that has
nothing to do with who or what you are. It is a given fact in any re-
lationship that you will incur some disapproval. If you expect it,
then you won’t be thrown by it. In this way you can break many of
the dependency-ties that enslave you emotionally.
• Even if you are deliberately avoiding dominant people (parent,
spouse, boss, child), you are still being controlled by them in their
absence if you are experiencing emotional immobilization because
of them.
• If you are feeling obligated to visit certain people, ask yourself
if you would want others to visit you simply because they felt re-
quired to do so. If not, extend a similar courtesy to those you are
treating in this manner, and talk it out with them. That is, reverse
the logic and see how undignified a relationship of obligation really
is.206 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 215 ---
• Make a decision to get out of your dependency role by doing
volunteer work, reading, getting a baby-sitter (even if you can’t af-
ford it), getting a job that doesn’t necessarily even pay well. Why?
Simply because the remuneration of your own high self-esteem is
worth whatever the price it costs in money or time.
• Insist on financial independence with no strings, and no account-
ing to anyone. You are a slave if you must ask for money. If that is
impossible, arrange to make your own money in any creative way
that you can devise.
• Let them go! Let yourself go! Stop giving orders! Stop taking
orders!
• Recognize your desire for privacy and not having to share
everything you feel and experience with someone. You are unique
and private. If you feel you must share everything then you are
without choice, and of course, a dependent.
• Let a child’s room be his. Give him an area that he can control,
and, as long as it’s not unhealthy, allow him to make decisions about
how it will be organized. A made bed is not any more psychologic-
ally sound than an unmade bed, even though you may have learned
the opposite.
• At a party, congregate with people away from your partner.
Don’t feel responsible to be with that person at all times. Split up
and then join forces when it is over. You’ll double your learning and
experience.
• If you want to go to a movie and your partner wants to play
tennis, do it that way! Allow yourself more separateness, and your
moments of togetherness will be happier, and more exciting.
• Take mini-trips alone, or with friends without having to feel
attached to your partner. You’ll feel more strongly toward your
partner when you come back, and you’ll treasure your independent
functioning as well.
• Keep in mind that you have no responsibility to make others
happy. Others make themselves happy. Thus, you may truly enjoy
the company of another, but if you feel it is yourDECLARE YOUR INDEPENDENCE  / 207
--- PAGE 216 ---
mission to make them happy, then you are a dependent who will
also feel gloom when the other person is down. Or even worse, you’ll
feel as though you let him down. You are responsible for your own
emotions and so is everyone else. No one has control over your
feelings, except you.
• Remember that habit is no reason to do anything. Just because
you’ve always been submissive to others is not sufficient justification
for allowing it to continue.
The business of effective living and parenting is independence.
Similarly, the hallmark of effective marriage is minimal fusion and
optimal autonomy and self-reliance. And while you may feel real
fear about breaking away from dependent relationships, if you asked
those upon whom you are emotionally dependent, you would sur-
prisingly discover that they most admire those who think and act
for themselves. More irony. You get the most respect for being inde-
pendent, particularly from those who try the hardest to keep you
subordinate.
The nest is a beautiful place for a child to develop, but nest-leaving
is even more beautiful and can be viewed that way by the one leav-
ing, as well as the one watching the takeoff.208 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 217 ---
