I
TAKING CHARGE OF
YOURSELF
The essence of greatness is the ability to choose personal fulfillment
in circumstances where others choose madness.
Look over your shoulder. You will notice a constant companion.
For want of a better name, call him Your-Own-Death.  You can fear
this visitor or use him for your personal gain. The choice is up to
you.
With death so endless a proposition and life so breathtakingly
brief, ask yourself, “Should I avoid doing the things I really want to
do?” “Should I live my life as others want me to?” “Are things  im-
portant to accumulate?” “Is putting it off the way to live?” Chances
are your answers can be summed up in a few words: Live…Be
You…Enjoy…Love.
You can fear your death, ineffectually, or you can use it to help
you learn to live effectively. Listen to Tolstoy’s Ivan Ilych as he
awaits the great leveler, contemplating a past which was thoroughly
dominated by others, a life in which he had given up control of
himself in order to fit into a system.
7
--- PAGE 16 ---
“What if my whole life has been wrong?” It occurred to him
that what had appeared perfectly impossible before, namely
that he had not spent his life as he should have done, might
after all be true. It occurred to him that his scarcely noticeable
impulses, which he had immediately suppressed, might have
been the real thing, and the rest false. And his professional
duties and the whole arrangement of his life and of his family,
and all his social and official interests, might all have been false.
He tried to defend all those things to himself and suddenly felt
the weakness of what he was defending. There was nothing to
defend….
The next time you are contemplating a decision in which you are
debating whether or not to take charge of yourself, to make your
own choice, ask yourself an important question, “How long am I
going to be dead?” With that eternal perspective, you can now make
your own choice and leave the worrying, the fears, the question of
whether you can afford it and the guilt to those who are going to be
alive forever.
If you don’t begin taking these steps, you can anticipate living
your entire life the way others say you must. Surely if your sojourn
on earth is so brief, it ought at least to be pleasing to you. In a word,
it’s your life; do with it what you want.
Happiness and Your Own I.Q.
Taking charge of yourself involves putting to rest some very pre-
valent myths. At the top of the list is the notion that intelligence is
measured by your ability to solve complex problems; to read, write
and compute at certain levels; and to resolve abstract equations
quickly. This vision of intelligence predicates formal education and
bookish excellence as the true measures of self-fulfillment. It encour-
ages a kind of intellectual snobbery8 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 17 ---
that has brought with it some demoralizing results. We have come
to believe that someone who has more educational merit badges,
who is a whiz at some form of scholastic discipline (math, science,
a huge vocabulary, a memory for superfluous facts, a fast reader) is
“intelligent.” Yet mental hospitals are clogged with patients who
have all of the properly lettered credentials—as well as many who
don’t. A truer barometer of intelligence is an effective, happy life
lived each day and each present moment of every day.
If you are happy, if you live each moment for everything it’s worth,
then you are an intelligent person. Problem solving is a useful adjunct
to your happiness, but if you know that given your inability to re-
solve a particular concern you can still choose happiness for yourself,
or at a minimum refuse to choose unhappiness, then you are intelli-
gent. You are intelligent because you have the ultimate weapon
against the big N.B.D. Yep— Nervous Break Down.
Perhaps you will be surprised to learn that there is no such thing
as a nervous breakdown. Nerves don’t break down. Cut someone
open and look for the broken nerves. They never show up. “Intelli-
gent” people do not have N.B.D.’s because they are in charge of
themselves. They know how to choose happiness over depression,
because they know how to deal with the problems  of their lives. Notice
I didn’t say solve  the problems. Rather than measuring their intelli-
gence on their ability to solve  the problem, they measure it on their
capacity for maintaining themselves as happy and worthy, whether
the problem gets solved or not.
You can begin to think of yourself as truly intelligent on the basis
of how you choose to feel in the face of trying circumstances. The
life struggles are pretty much the same for each of us. Everyone who
is involved with other human beings in any social context has similar
difficulties. Disagreements, conflicts and compromises are a part of
what it means to be human. Similarly, money, growing old, sickness,
deaths, natural disas-TAKING CHARGE OF YOURSELF  / 9
--- PAGE 18 ---
ters and accidents are all events which present problems to virtually
all human beings. But some people are able to make it, to avoid im-
mobilizing dejection and unhappiness despite such occurrences,
while others collapse, become inert or have an N.B.D. Those who
recognize problems as a human condition and don’t measure happi-
ness by an absence of problems are the most intelligent kind of hu-
mans we know; also, the most rare.
Learning to take total charge of yourself will involve a whole new
thinking process, one which may prove difficult because too many
forces in our society conspire against individual responsibility. You
must trust in your own ability to feel emotionally whatever you
choose to feel at any time in your life. This is a radical notion. You’ve
probably grown up believing that you can’t control your own emo-
tions; that anger, fear and hate, as well as love, ecstasy and joy are
things that happen to you. An individual doesn’t control these things,
he accepts them. When sorrowful events occur, you just naturally
feel sorrow, and hope that some happy events will come along so
that you can feel good very soon.
Choosing How You’ll Feel
Feelings are not just emotions that happen to you. Feelings are
reactions you choose to have. If you are in charge of your own
emotions, you don’t have to choose self-defeating reactions. Once
you learn that you can feel what you choose to feel, you will be on
the road to “intelligence”—a road where there are no bypaths that
lead to N.B.D.’s. This road will be new because you’ll see a given
emotion as a choice rather than as a condition of life. This is the very
heart and soul of personal freedom.
You can attack the myth of not being in charge of your emotions
through logic. By using a simple syllogism (a formulation in logic,
in which you have a major premise, a minor premise10 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 19 ---
and a conclusion based upon the agreement between the two
premises) you can begin the process of being in charge of yourself,
both thinkingly and emotionally.
Logic —Syllogism
MAJOR PREMISE : Aristotle is a Man.
MINOR PREMISE : All men have facial hair.
CONCLUSION : ARISTOTLE HAS FACIAL HAIR.
Illogic —Syllogism
MAJOR PREMISE : Aristotle has facial hair.
MINOR PREMISE : All men have facial hair.
CONCLUSION : ARISTOTLE IS A MAN.
It is clear that you must be careful as you employ logic that your
major and minor premises agree. In the second illustration, Aristotle
could be an ape or a mole. Here is a logical exercise that can forever
put to rest the notion that you cannot take charge of your own
emotional world.
MAJOR PREMISE : I can control my thoughts.
MINOR PREMISE : My feelings come from my thoughts.
CONCLUSION : I can control my feelings.
Your major premise is clear. You have the power to think whatever
you choose to allow into your head. If something just “pops” into
your head (You choose to put it there, though you may not know
why), you still have the power to make it go away, and therefore
you still control your mental world. I can say to you, “Think of a
pink antelope,” and you can turn it green, or make it an aardvark,
or simply think of something else if you so choose. You alone control
what enters your head as a thought. If you don’t believe this, just
answer this question, “If you don’t control your thoughts, who
does?” Is it your spouse, or your boss, or your mamma? And if they
control what youTAKING CHARGE OF YOURSELF  / 11
--- PAGE 20 ---
think, then send them off for therapy and you will instantly get better.
But you really know otherwise. You and only you control your
thinking apparatus (other than under extreme kinds of brainwashing
or conditioning experimentation settings which are not a part of
your life). Your thoughts are your own, uniquely yours to keep,
change, share, or contemplate. No one else can get inside your head
and have your own thoughts as you experience them. You do indeed
control your thoughts, and your brain is your own to use as you so
determine.
Your minor premise is hardly debatable if you examine the re-
search as well as your own common sense. You cannot have a feeling
(emotion) without first having experienced a thought. Take away
your brain and your ability to “feel” is wiped out. A feeling is a
physical reaction to a thought. If you cry, or blush, or increase your
heartbeat, or any of an interminable list of potential emotional reac-
tions, you have first had a signal from your thinking center. Once
your thinking center is damaged or short-circuited, you cannot ex-
perience emotional reactions. With certain kinds of lesions in the
brain you cannot even experience physical pain, and your hand
could literally fry on a stove burner with no sensation of pain. You
know that you cannot bypass your think-center and experience any
feelings in your body. Thus your minor premise is lodged in truth.
Every feeling that you have was preceded by a thought, and without
a brain you can have no feelings.
Your conclusion is also inescapable. If you control your thoughts,
and your feelings come from your thoughts, then you are capable
of controlling your own feelings. And you control your feelings by
working on the thoughts that preceded them. Simply put, you believe
that things or people make you unhappy, but this is not accurate.
You make yourself unhappy because of the thoughts that you have
about the people or things in your life. Becoming a free and healthy
person involves learning to think  differently. Once you can change
your thoughts,12 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 21 ---
your new feelings will begin to emerge, and you will have taken the
first step on the road to your personal freedom.
To look at the syllogism in a more personal light, let’s consider
the case of Cal, a young executive who spends most of his time ag-
onizing over the fact that his boss thinks he is stupid. Cal is very
unhappy because his boss has a low opinion of him. But if Cal didn’t
know that his boss thought he was stupid, would he still be un-
happy? Of course not. How could he be unhappy about something
he didn’t know. Therefore, what his boss thinks or doesn’t think
doesn’t make him unhappy. What Cal thinks makes him unhappy.
Moreover, Cal makes himself unhappy by convincing himself that
what someone else thinks is more important than what he thinks.
This same logic applies to all events, things and persons’ points
of view. Someone’s death does not make you unhappy; you cannot
be unhappy until you learn of the death, so it’s not the death but
what you tell yourself about the event. Hurricanes aren’t depressing
by themselves; depression is uniquely human. If you are depressed
about a hurricane, you are telling yourself some things that depress
you. This is not to say that you should delude yourself into enjoying
a hurricane, but ask yourself, “Why should I choose depression?
Will it help me to be more effective in dealing with it?”
You have grown up in a culture which has taught you that you
are not responsible for your feelings even though the syllogistic truth
is that you always were. You’ve learned a host of sayings to defend
yourself against the fact that you do control your feelings. Here is
a brief list of such utterances that you have used over and over. Ex-
amine the message they send.
•“You hurt my feelings.”
•“You make me feel bad.”
•“I can’t help the way I feel.”
•“I just feel angry, don’t ask me to explain it.”TAKING CHARGE OF YOURSELF  / 13
--- PAGE 22 ---
•“He makes me sick.”
•“Heights scare me.”
•“You’re embarrassing me.”
•“She really turns me on.”
•“You made a fool of me in public.”
The list is potentially endless. Each saying has a built-in message
that you are not responsible for how you feel. Now rewrite the list
so it is accurate, so it reflects the fact that you are in charge of how
you feel and that your feelings come from the thoughts you have
about anything.
• “I hurt my feelings because of the things I told myself about
your reaction to me.”
• “I made myself feel bad.”
• “I can help the way I feel, but I’ve chosen to be upset.”
• “I’ve decided to be angry, because I can usually manipulate
others with my anger, since they think I control them.”
• “I make myself sick.”
• “I scare myself at high places.”
• “I’m embarrassing myself.”
• “I turn myself on whenever I’m near her.”
• “I made myself feel foolish by taking your opinions of me more
seriously than my own, and believing that others would do the
same.”
Perhaps you think that the items in List 1 are just figures of speech,
and that they really don’t mean very much, but are simply figures
of speech that have become clichés in our culture. If this is your ra-
tionale, then ask yourself why the statements in List 2 did not evolve
into clichés. The answer lies in our culture, which teaches the
thinking of List 1, and discourages the logic of List 2.
The message is crystal clear. You are the person responsible14 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 23 ---
for how you feel. You feel what you think, and you can learn to think
differently about anything—if you decide to do so. Ask yourself if
there is a sufficient payoff in being unhappy, down, or hurt. Then
begin to examine, in depth, the kind of thoughts that are leading
you to these debilitating feelings.
Learning Not To Be Unhappy: A Tough Assignment
It is not easy to think in new ways. You are accustomed to a certain
set of thoughts and the debilitating thoughts that follow. It requires
a great deal of work to unlearn all of the habits of thought you have
assimilated until now. Happiness is easy, but learning not to be un-
happy can be difficult.
Happiness is a natural condition of being a person. The evidence
is plainly visible when you look at young children. What is tough
is unlearning all of the “shoulds” and “oughts” that you’ve digested
in the past. Taking charge of yourself begins with awareness. Catch
yourself when you say things like, “He hurt my feelings.” Remind
yourself what you’re doing at the moment you’re doing it. New
thinking requires awareness of the old thinking. You have become
habituated in mental patterns that identify the causes of your feelings
as outside of yourself. You have put in thousands of hours of rein-
forcement for such thinking, and you’ll need to balance the scale
with thousands of hours of new thinking, thinking that assumes
responsibility for your own feelings. It is tough, damn tough; but
so what? That certainly is no reason to avoid doing it.
Think back to the time you were learning to drive a stick shift
automobile. You were faced with what seemed to be an insurmount-
able problem. Three pedals but only two feet to make them work.
You first became aware of the complexity of the task. Let the clutch
out slow, ooops too fast, jerky business, gas pedal down at the same
rate as you release the clutch, right footTAKING CHARGE OF YOURSELF  / 15
--- PAGE 24 ---
for the brake, but the clutch must go in, or you jerk again. A million
mental signals: always thinking, using your brain. What do I do?
Awareness,  and then after thousands of trials, mistakes, new efforts,
the day comes when you step into your car and drive away. No
stalling, no jerking and no thinking.  Driving a stick shift has become
second nature, and how did you do it? With great difficulty. Lots of
present-moment thinking, reminding, working.
You know how to regulate your mind when it comes to accom-
plishing physical tasks, such as teaching your hands and feet to co-
ordinate for driving. The process is less well-known but identical in
the emotional world. You’ve learned the habits you now have by
reinforcing them all of your life. You get unhappy, angry, hurt and
frustrated automatically because you learned to think that way a
long time ago. You have accepted your behavior and never worked
at challenging it. But you can learn to not be unhappy, angry, hurt,
or frustrated just as you learned to be all those self-defeating things.
For example, you’ve been taught that going to the dentist is a
nasty experience, and one that is associated with pain. You’ve always
felt that it is unpleasant and you even say things to yourself like, “I
hate that drill.” But these are all learned reactions. You could make
the whole experience work for rather than against you by choosing
to make it a pleasant, exciting procedure. You could, if you really
decided to use your brain, make the sound of the drill signal a
beautiful sexual experience and each time the brrrrrr sound ap-
peared, you could train your mind to envision the most orgiastic
moment of your life. You could think something different about
what you used to call pain, and choose to feel something new and
pleasurable. How much more exciting and fulfilling to take charge
and master your own dental world environment than to hang on to
the old images and just endure.
Perhaps you’re skeptical. You may say something like, “I can think
all I want, but I still get unhappy when he starts to16 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 25 ---
drill.” Think back to the stick shift. When did you believe  that you
could drive it? A thought becomes a belief when you’ve worked on
it repeatedly, not when you simply try it once and use your initial
inability as the rationale for giving up.
Taking charge of yourself involves more than simply trying on
new thoughts for size. It requires a determination to be happy and
to challenge and destroy each and every thought that creates a self-
immobilizing unhappiness in you.
Choice—Your Ultimate Freedom
If you still believe that you don’t choose to be unhappy, try to
imagine this course of events. Each time you become unhappy you
are subjected to some treatment you find unpleasant. Perhaps you
are locked in a room alone for long periods of time or, conversely,
forced into a crowded elevator where you must stand for days. You
may be deprived of all food or forced to eat some dish you find
particularly distasteful. Or perhaps you will be tortured—physically
tortured by others, rather than mentally tortured by yourself. Imagine
that you were subjected to any one of these punishments until you
made your unhappy feelings go away. How long do you think you
would continue to hold on to them? Chances are you would take
control rather quickly. So the issue is not whether you can take
control of your feelings, but whether you will. What must you endure
before you’ll make such a choice? Some people choose to go insane
rather than take control. Others merely give up and succumb to a
life of misery because the dividend of pity received is greater than
the reward of being happy.
The issue here is your own ability to choose happiness or at least
not to choose unhappiness at any given moment of your life. A mind-
blowing notion perhaps, but one that you should consider carefully
before rejecting, since to discard it is to give up on yourself. To reject
it is to believe that someone else in-TAKING CHARGE OF YOURSELF  / 17
--- PAGE 26 ---
stead of you is in charge of you. But choosing to be happy might
seem easier than some things which daily confound your life.
Just as you are free to choose happiness over unhappiness, so in
the myriad events of everyday life you are free to choose self-ful-
filling behavior over self-defeating behavior. If you drive in this day
and age, chances are you find yourself frequently stuck in traffic.
Do you become angry, swear at other drivers, berate your passengers,
take your feelings out on anyone and anything in range? Do you
justify your behavior by saying that traffic always sends you into a
snit, that you simply have no control in a traffic jam? If so, you are
accustomed to thinking certain things about yourself and the way
you act in traffic. But what if you decided to think something else?
What if you chose to use your mind in a self-enhancing kind of way?
It would take time but you could learn to talk to yourself in new
ways, to become accustomed to new behavior which might include
whistling, singing, turning on a tape recorder to write verbal letters,
even timing yourself with thirty-second postponements of your an-
ger. You have not learned to like the traffic but you have learned to
practice, very slowly at first, new thoughts. You have decided not
to be uncomfortable. You have chosen to substitute in slow progress-
ive steps healthy new feelings and habits for old self-defeating
emotions.
You can choose to make any experience enjoyable and challenging.
Dull parties and committee meetings are fertile territory for choosing
new feelings. When you find yourself bored, you can make your
mind work in exciting ways, by changing the subject with a key
observation, or writing the first chapter of your novel, or working
on new plans which will help you to avoid these settings in the fu-
ture. Using your mind actively means assessing the people and
events which give you the greatest difficulty and then deciding on
new mental efforts to make them work for you. In a restaurant, if
you typically get upset over poor service, think first of why you
should not choose to18 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 27 ---
be upset because someone or something is not going the way you
would like it to go. You’re too worthy to be upset by someone else,
especially someone who is so unimportant in your life. Then devise
strategies to change the setting, or leave, or whatever. But don’t just
get perturbed. Use your brain to work for you, and eventually you’ll
have the terrific habit of not being upset when things go wrong.
Choosing Health Over Illness
You can also choose to eliminate some physical sufferings which
are not rooted in a known organic dysfunction. Some common
physical ailments, which often do not have an origin in a physiolo-
gical disorder, include headaches, backaches, ulcers, hypertension,
rashes, skin eruptions, cramps, fleeting pains and the like.
I once had a client who swore she had a headache every morning
for the past four years. Each morning at 6:45 she waited for it to ar-
rive and then took her pain pills. She also kept each of her friends
and co-workers informed of how much she was suffering. It was
suggested to the client that she wanted the headaches, and had ac-
tually chosen them as a means of being noticed and as a means of
receiving sympathy and pity. It was also suggested that she could
learn not to want this for herself and to practice making the headache
shift from a point located centrally on her forehead to one on the
side of her head. She was going to learn that she controlled the
headache by making it move around. The first morning she
awakened at 6:30 A.M., and lay in bed awaiting her headache. When
it arrived she was able to think  it to another place in her head. She
had chosen something new for herself and ultimately she stopped
choosing headaches completely.
There is a burgeoning amount of evidence to support the notion
that people even choose things like tumors, influenza, arthritis, heart
disease, “accidents” and many other infirmities,TAKING CHARGE OF YOURSELF  / 19
--- PAGE 28 ---
including cancer, which have always been considered something
that just happens to people. In treating what have been labeled
“terminally ill” patients, some researchers are beginning to believe
that helping the patient not to want the disease, in any form, may
be a means of ameliorating the internal killer. Some cultures treat
pain in this way, taking complete power over the brain, and making
self-control synonymous with brain -control.
The brain, which is composed of ten billion, billion working parts,
has enough storage capacity to accept ten new facts every second.
It has been conservatively estimated that the human brain can store
an amount of information equivalent to one hundred trillion words,
and that all of us use but a tiny fraction of this storage space. It is a
powerful instrument you carry around with you wherever you go,
and you might choose to put it to some fantastic uses which you’ve
never even considered up until now. Keep that in mind as you go
through the pages of this book and try to choose new ways of
thinking.
Don’t be too quick to call such control quackery. Most doctors
have seen patients who have chosen a physical malady for which
there is no known physiological cause. It’s not uncommon for indi-
viduals to become mysteriously sick when confronted with some
kind of difficult circumstance, or to avoid illness when being sick is
simply “impossible” at that time, and so postponed the effects, per-
haps the fever, until the big event is over, and then collapse.
I know of a case of a thirty-six-year-old man trapped in a horrible
marriage. He decided on January 15th that he was leaving his wife
on March 1st. On February 28th he developed a 104 degree fever
and began vomiting uncontrollably. This became a recurring pattern;
each time he built himself up, he got the flu, or an attack of indiges-
tion. He was making a choice. It was easier to be sick than to face
the guilt, fear, shame and the unknown that go with separation.
Listen to the advertisements we see and hear on television.
“I’m a stockbroker…. So you can imagine the tension and20 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 29 ---
headaches I must have. I take this pill to make it go away.” Message:
You can’t control how you feel if you work in certain kinds of jobs
(teachers, executives, parents) so rely on something else to do it for
you.
We are bombarded with messages like this every day. The implic-
ation is clear. We are helpless prisoners who must have someone or
something else do things for us. NONSENSE. Only you can improve
your lot or make yourself happy. It is up to you to take control of
your own mind, and then practice feeling and behaving in the ways
that you choose.
Avoiding Immobilization
As you consider your potential for choosing happiness, keep in
mind the word immobilization  as the indicator of negative emotions
in your life. You might believe that anger, hostility, shyness and
other similar feelings are worth having at times, and so you want
to hang onto them. Your guide should be the extent to which you
are in any way immobilized by the feeling.
Immobilization can range from total inaction to mild indecision
and hesitancy. Does your anger keep you from saying, feeling, or
doing something? If so, then you are immobilized. Does your shyness
prevent you from meeting people you want to know? If so, you are
immobilized and missing out on experiences that are rightfully
yours. Is your hate and jealousy helping you to grow an ulcer or to
raise your blood pressure? Does it keep you from working effectively
on the job? Are you unable to sleep or make love because of a negat-
ive present-moment feeling? These are all signs of immobilization.
Immobilization:  A state, however mild or serious, in which you are
not functioning at the level that you would like to. If feelings lead
to such a state, you need to look no further for a reason to get rid of
them.
Here is a brief checklist of some instances in which you mayTAKING CHARGE OF YOURSELF  / 21
--- PAGE 30 ---
be immobilized. They range from minor to major states of immobil-
ity.
You are immobilized when…
You can’t talk lovingly to your spouse and children though
you want to.
You can’t work on a project that interests you.
You don’t make love and would like to.
You sit in the house all day and brood.
You don’t play golf, tennis, or other enjoyable activities,
because of a leftover gnawing feeling.
You can’t introduce yourself to someone who appeals to
you.
You avoid talking to someone when you realize that a
simple gesture would improve your relationship.
You can’t sleep because something is bothering you.
Your anger keeps you from thinking clearly.
You say something abusive to someone that you love.
Your face is twitching, or you are so nervous that you don’t
function the way you would prefer.
Immobilization cuts a wide swath. Virtually all negative emotions
result in some degree of self-immobility, and this alone is a solid
reason for eliminating them entirely from your life. Perhaps you are
thinking of occasions when a negative emotion has a payoff, such
as yelling at a young child in an angry voice to emphasize that you
do not want him to play in the street. If the angry voice is simply a
device for emphasis and it works, then you’ve adopted a healthy
strategy. However, if you yell at others not to make a point, but be-
cause you are internally upset, then you’ve immobilized yourself,
and it’s time to begin working at new choices that will help you to
reach your goal of keeping your child out of the street without ex-
periencing feelings that are hurtful to you. For more on anger and
fuse-lengthening behavior, see Chapter XI.22 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 31 ---
The Importance of Living in the Present Moment
One way to combat immobilization, however slight, is to learn to
live in the present moment. Present-moment living, getting in touch
with your “now,” is at the heart of effective living. When you think
about it, there really is no other moment you can ever live. Now is
all there is, and the future is just another present moment to live
when it arrives. One thing is certain; you cannot live it until it does
appear. The problem here, however, is that we live in a culture which
deemphasizes the now. Save for the future! Consider the con-
sequences. Don’t be a hedonist. Think of tomorrow. Plan for your
retirement.
Avoiding the present moment is almost a disease in our culture,
and we are continually being conditioned to sacrifice the present for
the future. Carried to its logical conclusion, this attitude is not merely
the avoidance of enjoyment in the now, but an evasion of happiness
forever. When the future does arrive it becomes the present and we
must use it to prepare for the future. Happiness is something for the
morrow and therefore ever elusive.
The disease of present-moment avoidance assumes many forms.
Here are four typical examples of such dodging behavior.
Ms. Sally Forth decides to go into the woods to soak up nature
and get in touch with her present moments. While in the woods she
lets her mind wander and focuses on all of the things that she should
be doing back home…. The kids, the groceries, the house, the bills,
is everything O.K.? At other times her mind flits forward to all of
the things she’ll have to do when she gets out of the woods. There
goes the present, occupied by past and future events, and that rare
opportunity for present-moment delight in that natural setting is
lost.
Ms. Sandy Shore goes to the islands to enjoy herself, and spends
her entire vacation basking in the sun—not for the delight of feeling
the sun on her body, but in anticipation of whatTAKING CHARGE OF YOURSELF  / 23
--- PAGE 32 ---
her friends back home will say when she returns with a magnificent
tan. Her mind is on a future moment, and when that future moment
arrives, she’ll bemoan not being able to be back at the beach sunning
herself. If you think society doesn’t contribute to this sort of attitude,
consider the slogan of one sun lotion company, “They’ll hate you
more back home if you use this product.”
Mr. Neil N. Prayer has a problem with impotence. When he is
experiencing the present moment with his wife, his mind is off and
running on some past or future event, and his present just slips
away. When he finally manages to concentrate on the present and
begins making love, he imagines her to be someone else, while she
similarly fantasizes about her absent lover.
Mr. Ben Fishen is reading a textbook and working hard at staying
with it. Suddenly he discovers that he has just read three pages and
his mind was on a mental excursion. He wasn’t absorbing a single
idea. He was avoiding the material on those pages even while his
eyes were focusing on each word. He was literally participating in
the ritual of reading, while his present moments were being taken
up by thinking about last night’s movie or worrying about tomor-
row’s quiz.
The present moment, that elusive time which is always with you,
can be most beautifully experienced if you allow yourself to get lost
in it. Drink in all of every moment and tune out that past which is
over and the future which will arrive in time. Seize the present mo-
ment as the only one you have. And remember, wishing, hoping
and regretting are the most common and dangerous tactics for
evading the present.
Frequently avoidance of the present leads to idealization of the
future. At some miraculous moment in the future life will change,
everything will fall into place, and you will find happiness. When
you achieve that special event—a graduation, a wedding, a child, a
promotion—then life will begin in earnest. More often than not when
the event arrives it will be disappointing. It will never live up to
what you had imagined. Think back to that first sexual experience.
After all that waiting there were24 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 33 ---
no Fourth of July orgasms, no grand mal seizures, but rather a
quizzical wondering why everyone made such a big deal about it,
and perhaps a feeling of Is that all there is?
Of course, when an event doesn’t live up to your expectations you
can get out of the depression by idealizing again. Don’t let this vi-
cious circle become your life-style. Interrupt it now with some stra-
tegic present-moment fulfillment.
Way back in 1903, Henry James gave this advice in The Ambassad-
ors:
“Live all you can; it’s a mistake not to. It doesn’t so much matter
what you do in particular, so long as you have your life. If you
haven’t had that what have you had?…What one loses one loses,
make no mistake about that…. The right time is any time that
one is still so lucky as to have…. Live!”
As you look back on your life, much the way Tolstoy’s Ivan Ilych
did, you’ll find that you seldom experience regret for anything that
you’ve done. It is what you haven’t done that will torment you. The
message, therefore, is clear. Do it! Develop an appreciation for the
present moment. Seize every second of your life and savor it. Value
your present moments. Using them up in any self-defeating ways
means you’ve lost them forever.
The theme of present-moment awareness appears on every page
of this book. The people who know how to grab that present moment
and maximize it are the people who have chosen a free, effective
and fulfilling life. It is a choice each of us can make.
Growth vs. Imperfection as Motivators
In your quest to become as happy and fulfilled in your life as you
choose to be, you can be motivated by two types of need. The more
common form of motivation is called imperfection orTAKING CHARGE OF YOURSELF  / 25
--- PAGE 34 ---
deficiency motivation, while the healthier variety is labeled growth
motivation.
If you place a rock under a microscope and observe it carefully,
you note that it never changes. But, if you put a piece of coral under
that same microscope, you’ll detect that it is growing and changing.
Conclusion: The coral is alive, the rock is dead. How do you distin-
guish between a flower that is alive and one that is dead? The one
that is growing is alive. The only evidence of life is growth! This is
also true in the psychological world. If you are growing, you are
alive. If you are not growing then you might as well be dead.
You can be motivated out of a desire to grow rather than a need
to repair your deficiencies. If you recognize that you can always
grow, improve, become more and greater, that is enough. When you
decide to be immobilized or to experience hurtful emotions, you’ve
made a nongrowth decision. Growth motivation means using your
life energy for greater happiness, rather than having to improve
yourself because you’ve sinned or because you are in some way in-
complete.
A corollary of choosing growth as motivation is personal mastery
in every present moment of your life. Mastery means you are the
decider of your fate; you are not a coper, or a striver, or someone
who adjusts to the world. Rather you choose what your world will
be for you. George Bernard Shaw expressed it in Mrs. Warren’s Pro-
fession,
People are always blaming their circumstances for what they
are. I don’t believe in circumstances. The people who get on in
this world are the people who get up and look for the circum-
stances they want, and if they can’t find them, make them.
But remember what was said at the beginning of this chapter.
Changing the way you think, or feel, or live is possible but never
easy. Let’s be hypothetical for a moment. If you were26 / Your Erroneous Zones
--- PAGE 35 ---
told, at point of gun, that within one year you would have to com-
plete a difficult task, such as running a mile in four minutes and
thirty seconds, or performing a perfect jackknife dive from the high
board, and failure to do so would result in your execution, you
would set out on a regimented schedule in which you would practice
each and every day until your time came to deliver. You would be
training your mind  as well as your body because your mind tells
your body what to do. You would practice, practice, practice, never
yielding to the temptation to quit or slack off. And you would deliv-
er, and consequently save your life.
This little fairy story is, of course, intended to make a point. No
one expects to train his body overnight and yet too many of us expect
our minds to respond with just such alacrity. When we are trying
to learn new mental behavior we expect to try it once, and have it
become a part of us instantaneously.
If you really want to be neurosis-free, self-fulfilled and in control
of your own choices, if you really want to achieve present-moment
happiness, you will need to apply the same kind of rigid application
to the task of unlearning the self-defeating thinking you have learned
up until now that you would give to the learning of any difficult
enterprise.
In order to master this kind of fulfillment, you’ll need to repeat
endlessly that your mind really is your own and that you are capable
of controlling your own feelings. The remainder of this book will be
an effort to help you in your personal goals by having you begin
precisely that repetition of such themes: you can choose, and your
present moments are yours for the enjoying—if you decide to be in
charge of you.TAKING CHARGE OF YOURSELF  / 27
--- PAGE 36 ---
