=== CHAPTER 1: "Who the Heck Is T. Harv Eker, and Why Should I Read This Book?" ===
“Who the Heck Is 
T.Harv Eker, and Why Should  
I Read This Book?”  
 
 
      
People are shocked, at the beginning of my seminars, when 
one of the first things I tell them is “Don’t believe a word I 
say.” Why would I suggest that? Because I can only speak 
from my own experience. None of the concepts and insights I 
share are inherently true or false, right or wrong. They simply 
reflect my own results, and the amazing results I’ve seen in the 
lives of thousands and thousands of my students. Having said 
that, however, I believe that if you use the principles you learn 
in this book, you will totally transform your life. Don’t just 
read this book. Study it as if your life depended on it. Then try 
the principles out for yourself. Whatever works, keep doing. 
Whatever doesn’t, you’re welcome to throw away.  
I know I may be biased, but when it comes to money, this 
may be the most important book you have ever read. I un-
derstand that’s a bold statement, but the fact is, this book 
provides the missing link between your desire for success
 

and your achievement of success. As you’ve probably found 
out by now, those are two different worlds.  
No doubt you’ve read other books, listened to tapes or 
CDs, gone to courses, and learned about numerous get-rich 
systems be they in real estate, stocks, or business. But what 
happened? For most people, not much! They get a short blast 
of energy, and then it’s back to the status quo.  
Finally, there’s an answer. It’s simple, it’s law, and you’re 
not going to circumvent it. It all comes down to this: if your 
subconscious “financial blueprint” is not “set” for success, 
nothing you learn, nothing you know, and nothing you do will 
make much of a difference.  
In the pages of this book, we will demystify for you why 
some people are destined to be rich and others are destined for 
a life of struggle. You will understand the root causes of 
success, mediocrity, or financial failure and begin changing 
your financial future for the better. You will understand how 
childhood influences shape our financial blueprint and how 
these influences can lead to self-defeating thoughts and habits. 
You will experience powerful declarations that will help you replace your nonsupportive ways of thinking with mental 
“wealth files” so that you think—and succeed—just as rich 
people do. You will also learn practical, step-by-step strategies 
for increasing your income and building wealth.  
In Part I of this book, we will explain how each of us is 
conditioned to think and act when it comes to money, and 
outline four key strategies for revising our mental money 
blueprint. In Part II, we examine the differences between how 
rich, middle-class, and poor people think, and provide 
seventeen attitudes and actions to take that will lead to per-
manent changes in your financial life. Throughout the book 
 

we also share just a few examples of the thousands of letters 
and e-mails I’ve received from students who have attended the 
Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar and achieved powerful 
results in their lives.  
So what is my experience? Where am I coming from? Was I 
always successful? I wish!  
Like many of you, I supposedly had a lot of “potential” but 
had little to show for it. I read all the books, listened to all the 
tapes, and went to all the seminars. I really, really, really 
wanted to be successful. I don’t know whether it was for the 
money, the freedom, the sense of achievement, or just to 
prove I was good enough in my parents’ eyes, but I was almost 
obsessed with becoming a “success.” During my twenties, I 
started several different businesses, each with the dream of 
making my fortune, but my results went from dismal to worse.  
I worked my butt off but kept coming up short. I had 
“Loch Ness monster disease”: I had heard of this thing called 
profit, I just never saw any of it. I kept thinking, “If I just get 
into the right business, get on the right horse, I’ll make it.” But 
I was wrong. Nothing was working...at least for me. And it was the last part of that sentence that finally struck me. How come 
others were succeeding in the exact same business I was in and 
I was still broke? What happened to “Mr. Potential”?  
So I began doing some serious soul-searching. I examined 
my true beliefs and saw that even though I said I really wanted 
to be rich, I had some deep-rooted worries about it. Mostly I 
was afraid. Afraid that I might fail, or worse, succeed and then 
somehow lose it all. Then I’d really be a schmuck. Worse, I 
would blow the one thing I had going for 
 
 
 

me: my “story” that I had all this “potential.” What if I found 
out I didn’t have what it took and I was destined to a life of 
struggle?  
Then, as luck would have it, I got some advice from an 
extremely rich friend of my father’s. He was at my parents’ 
house playing cards with the “boys” and, in passing, noticed 
me. This was the third time I’d moved back home, and I was 
living in the “lower-level suite,” otherwise known as the 
basement. I suppose my dad had complained to him of my 
woeful existence because when he saw me, he had the sym-
pathy in his eyes usually reserved for the bereaved at a funeral.  
He said, “Harv, I started in the same way as you, a complete 
disaster.” Great, I thought, this was making me feel a lot 
better. I should let him know that I was busy...watch-ing the 
paint peel off the wall.  
He kept going: “But then I got some advice that changed 
my life, and I’d like to pass it on to you.” Oh, no, here comes 
the father-son lecture, and he’s not even my father! Finally he 
came out with it: “Harv, if you’re not doing as well as you’d 
like, all that means is there’s something you don’t know.” Being a brash young man at the time, I thought I knew pretty 
well everything, but alas, my bank account said something 
different. So I finally began to listen. He continued, “Did you 
know that most rich people think in very similar ways?”  
I said, “No, I never really considered that.” To which he 
replied, “It’s not an exact science, but for the most part, rich 
people think a certain way and poor people think a completely 
different way, and those ways of thinking determine their 
actions and therefore determine their results.” He went on, “If 
you thought the way rich people do and did what 
 
 

rich people do, do you believe you could become rich too?” I 
remember answering with all the confidence of a mush ball, “I 
think so.” “Then,” he replied, “all you have to do is copy how 
rich people think.”  
Being the skeptic I was at the time, I said, “So what are you 
thinking right now?” To which he replied, “I’m thinking that 
rich people keep their commitments and mine is to your dad 
right now. The guys are waiting for me, see ya.” Although he 
walked out, what he said sank in.  
Nothing else was working in my life, so I figured what the 
heck and threw myself wholeheartedly into studying rich 
people and how they think. I learned everything I could about 
the inner workings of the mind, but concentrated primarily on 
the psychology of money and success. I discovered that it was 
true: rich people really do think differently from poor and even 
middle-class people. Eventually, I became aware of how my 
own thoughts were holding me back from wealth. More 
important, I learned several powerful techniques and strategies 
to actually recondition my mind so that I would think in the 
same ways rich people do.  
Finally, I said, “Enough yakking about it, let’s put it to the 
test.” I decided to attempt yet another business. Because I was 
really into health and exercise, I opened one of the first retail 
fitness stores in North America. I didn’t have any money, so I 
had to borrow $2,000 on my Visa card to get the business 
started. I began using what I’d learned by modeling rich 
people, both in terms of their business strategies and their 
thinking strategies. The first thing I did was commit to my 
success and playing to win. I swore I would focus and not 
even consider leaving this business until I was a millionaire or 
more. this was radically different from my previous efforts, 
where, because I always thought short-term, I would 

constantly get sidetracked by either good opportunities or 
when things got tough.  
I also began challenging my mental approach whenever I 
began thinking in financially negative or counterproductive 
ways. In the past, I believed that what my mind said was truth. 
I learned that in many ways, my mind was my biggest obstacle 
to success. I chose not to entertain thoughts that did not 
empower me toward my vision of wealth. I used every one of 
the principles you are going to learn in this book. Did it work? 
Boy, did it work!  
The business was so successful that I opened ten stores in 
only two and a half years. I then sold half the company shares 
to a Fortune 500 company for $1.6 million.  
After that, I moved to sunny San Diego. I took a couple of 
years off to refine my strategies and began doing one-on-one 
business consulting. I presume it was quite effective for people 
because they kept bringing friends, partners, and associates to 
our sessions. Soon I was coaching ten and sometimes twenty 
people at a time.  
One of my clients suggested that I might as well open up a 
school. I thought that was a great idea, so I did. I founded the 
Street Smart Business School and taught thousands of people 
all across North America “street-smart” business strategies for 
“high-speed” success.  
As I traveled across the continent giving my seminars, I 
noticed something strange: You could have two people sitting 
side by side in exactly the same room, learning exactly the 
same principles and strategies. One person would take these 
tools and skyrocket to success. But what do you think might 
happen to the person sitting right next to him or her? The 
answer is, not much!  
That’s when it became obvious that you can have the 

greatest “tools” in the world, but if you’ve got a tiny leak in 
your “toolbox” (I’m pointing to my head right now), you’ve 
got a problem. So I designed a program called the Millionaire 
Mind Intensive based on the inner game of money and 
success. When I combined the inner game (the toolbox) with 
the outer game (the tools), virtually everybody’s results went 
through the roof! So that’s what you’re going to learn in this 
book: how to master the inner game of money to win the 
game of money—how to think rich to get rich!  
People often ask me whether my success was a “one-shot 
deal” or whether it has continued. Let me put it this way: 
Using the exact principles I teach, I have now earned millions 
and millions of dollars and am a multimultimillionaire several 
times over. Virtually all my investments and business ventures 
seem to skyrocket! Some people tell me I have the “Midas 
touch,” where everything I get involved in turns to gold. 
They’re right, but what they may not realize is that having a 
Midas touch is simply another way of saying, having a 
“financial blueprint” set for success, which is exactly what you 
will have once you learn these principles and do this work.  
Early on during our Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar, I 
generally ask the audience, “How many of you came here to 
learn?” It’s a bit of a trick question because as author Josh 
Billings said, “It’s not what we don’t know that prevents us 
from succeeding; it’s what we know that just ain’t so that is our 
greatest obstacle.” This book is not as much about learning as 
it is about “unlearning”! It is essential you recognize how your 
old ways of thinking and acting have gotten you exactly where 
you are right now.  
If you’re really rich and really happy, fine. But if you’re not, 
I invite you to consider some possibilities that may not 
 

fit into your “box” of what you currently think is right or even 
appropriate for you.  
Even though I suggest that you “don’t believe a word I say” 
and want you to test these concepts out in your own life, I’m 
going to ask you to trust the ideas you are reading. Not 
because you know me personally, but because thousands and 
thousands of people have already changed their lives as a result 
of the principles in this book.  
Speaking of trust, it reminds me of one of my favorite sto-
ries. It’s about a man who is walking along a cliff and all of a 
sudden loses his balance, slips, and falls off. Fortunately, he 
has the presence of mind to grab on to the ledge, and he’s 
hanging there for dear life. He hangs and hangs and finally 
yells out, “Is there anybody up there who can help me?” 
There’s no answer. He keeps calling and calling, “Is there 
anybody up there who can help me?” Finally this big bellowing 
voice calls back, “This is God. I can help you. Just let go and 
trust.” Next thing you hear: “Is there anybody else up there 
who can help me?”  
The lesson is simple. If you want to move to a higher level 
of life, you have to be willing to let go of some of your old 
ways of thinking and being and adopt new ones. The results 
will eventually speak for themselves.  
 
         

 
  
PART ONE 
______________ 
 
 
Your Money Blueprint 
W e live in a world of duality: up and down, light and dark, 
hot and cold, in and out, fast and slow, right and left. These 
are but a few examples of the thousands of opposite poles. For 
one pole to exist, the other pole must also exist. Is it possible 
to have a right side without a left side? Not a chance.  
Consequently, just as there are “outer” laws of money, there 
must be “inner” laws. The outer  laws include things like 
business knowledge, money management, and investment 
strategies. These are essential. But the inner game is just as 
important. An analogy would be a carpenter and his tools. 
Having top-of-the-line tools is imperative, but being the top-
notch carpenter who masterfully uses those tools is even more 
critical.  
I have a saying: “It’s not enough to be in the right place at 
the right time. You have to be the right person in the right place 
at the right time.”  
So who are you? How do you think? What are your beliefs? 
What are your habits and traits? How do you really feel about 
yourself ? How confident are you in yourself ? How well do 
you relate to others? How much do you trust others? 
 

Do you truly feel that you deserve wealth? What is your ability 
to act in spite of fear, in spite of worry, in spite of incon-
venience, in spite of discomfort? Can you act when you’re not 
in the mood?  
The fact is that your character, your thinking, and your 
beliefs are a critical part of what determines the level of your 
success.  
One of my favorite authors, Stuart Wilde, puts it this way: 
“The key to success is to raise your own energy; when you do, 
people will naturally be attracted to you. And when they show 
up, bill ’em!”  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Your income can grow only to the extent you do!

=== CHAPTER 2: "Why Is Your Money Blueprint Important?" ===
Why Is Your Money Blueprint Important?  
Have you heard of people who have “blown up” financially? 
Have you noticed how some people have a lot of money and 
then lose it, or have excellent opportunities start well but then 
go sour on them? Now you know the real cause. On the 
outside it looks like bad luck, a downturn in the economy, a 
lousy partner, whatever. On the inside, however, it’s another 
matter. That’s why, if you come into big money when you’re 
not ready for it on the inside, the chances are your wealth will 
be short-lived and you will lose it.  
The vast majority of people simply do not have the internal 
capacity to create and hold on to large amounts of money and 
the increased challenges that go with more 
 

money and success. That, my friends, is the primary reason 
they don’t have much money.  
A perfect example is lottery winners. Research has shown 
again and again that regardless of the size of their winnings, 
most lottery winners eventually return to their original fi-
nancial state, the amount they can comfortably handle.  
On the other hand, the opposite occurs for self-made mil-
lionaires. Notice that when self-made millionaires lose their 
money, they usually have it back within a relatively short time. 
Donald Trump is a good example. Trump was worth billions, 
lost everything, and then a couple of years later, got it all back 
again and more.  
Why does this phenomenon occur? Because even though 
some self-made millionaires may lose their money, they never 
lose the most important ingredient to their success: their 
millionaire mind. Of course in “The Donald” ’s case, it’s his 
“billionaire” mind. Do you realize Donald Trump could never 
be just a millionaire? If Donald Trump had a net worth of only 
1 million dollars, how do you think he’d feel about his 
financial success? Most people would agree that he’d probably feel broke, like a financial failure!  
That’s because Donald Trump’s financial “thermostat” is 
set for billions, not millions. Most people’s financial thermo-
stats are set for generating thousands, not millions of dollars; 
some people’s financial thermostats are set for generating 
hundreds, not even thousands; and some people’s financial 
thermostats are set for below zero. They’re frickin’ freezing 
and they don’t have a clue as to why!  
The reality is that most people do not reach their full po-
tential. Most people are not successful. Research shows that 80 
percent of individuals will never be financially free in the 
 

way they’d like to be, and 80 percent will never claim to be 
truly happy.  
The reason is simple. Most people are unconscious. They 
are a little asleep at the wheel. They work and think on a su-
perficial level of life—based only on what they can see. They 
live strictly in the visible world.

=== CHAPTER 3: "The Roots Create the Fruits" ===
The Roots Create the Fruits  
Imagine a tree. Let’s suppose this tree represents the tree of 
life. On this tree there are fruits. In life, our fruits are called 
our results. So we look at the fruits (our results) and we don’t 
like them; there aren’t enough of them, they’re too small, or 
they don’t taste good.  
So what do we tend to do? Most of us put even more at-
tention and focus on the fruits, our results. But what is it that 
actually creates those particular fruits? It’s the seeds and the 
roots that create those fruits.  
It’s what’s under the ground that creates what’s above the 
ground. It’s what’s invisible that creates what’s visible. So what 
does that mean? It means that if you want to change the fruits, 
you will first have to change the roots. If you want to change the visible, you must first change the invisible.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
If you want to change the fruits, you will first have to 
change the roots. If you want to change the visible, 
you must first change the invisible.  
 
 
 
Of course, some say that seeing is believing. The question I 
have for such people is “Why do you bother paying your elec-
tric bill?” Although you cannot see electricity, you can cer-

tainly recognize and use its power. If you have any doubt as to 
whether it exists, just stick your finger in an electric socket, 
and I guarantee that your doubts will quickly disappear.  
In my experience, what you cannot see in this world is far 
more powerful than anything you can see. You may or may 
not agree with this statement, but to the extent that you do not 
apply this principle in your life, you must be suffering. Why? 
Because you are going against the laws of nature, whereby 
what is under the ground creates what is above the ground, 
where what is invisible creates what is visible.  
As humans, we are a part of nature, not above it. Conse-
quently, when we align with the laws of nature and work on 
our roots—our “inner” world—our life flows smoothly. When 
we don’t, life gets rough.  
In every forest, on every farm, in every orchard on earth, it’s 
what’s under the ground that creates what’s above the ground. 
That’s why placing your attention on the fruits that you have 
already grown is futile. You cannot change the fruits that are 
already hanging on the tree. You can, however, change 
tomorrow’s fruits. But to do so, you will have to dig below the ground and strengthen the roots.

=== CHAPTER 4: "The Four Quadrants" ===
The Four Quadrants  
 
 
 
 
 
One of the most important things you can ever understand is 
that we do not live on only one plane of existence. We live 
 

in at least four different realms at once. These four quadrants 
are the physical world, the mental world, the emotional world, 
and the spiritual world.  
What most people never realize is that the physical realm is 
merely a “printout” of the other three.  
For example, let’s suppose you’ve just written a letter on 
your computer. You hit the print key and the letter comes out 
of your printer. You look at your hard copy, and lo and 
behold, you find a typo. So you take out your trusty eraser and 
rub out the typo. Then you hit print again and out comes the 
same typo.  
Oh my gosh, how could this be? You just erased it! So this 
time you get a bigger eraser and you rub even harder and 
longer. You even study a three-hundred-page manual called 
Effective Erasing. Now you’ve got all the “tools” and knowledge 
you need. You’re ready. You hit print and there it is again! “No 
way!” you cry out, stunned in amazement. “How could this 
be? What’s going on here? Am I in the twilight zone?”  
What’s going on here is that the real problem cannot be 
changed in the “printout,” the physical world; it can only be changed in the “program,” the mental, emotional, and spiritual 
worlds.  
Money is a result, wealth is a result, health is a result, illness 
is a result, your weight is a result. We live in a world of cause 
and effect.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Money is a result, wealth is a result, health is a result, 
illness is a result, your weight is a result. We live in a 
world of cause and effect. 
 
 
 

Have you ever heard someone assert that a lack of money 
was a bit of a problem? Now hear this: A lack of money is 
never, ever, ever a problem. A lack of money is merely a 
symptom of what is going on underneath.  
Lack of money is the effect, but what is the root cause? It 
boils down to this. The only way to change your “outer” world 
is to first change your “inner” world.  
Whatever results you’re getting, be they rich or poor, good 
or bad, positive or negative, always remember that your outer 
world is simply a reflection of your inner world. If things 
aren’t going well in your outer life, it’s because things aren’t 
going well in your inner life. It’s that simple.

=== CHAPTER 5: "Declarations: A Powerful Secret for Change" ===
Declarations: A Powerful Secret for Change  
In my seminars we use “accelerated learning” techniques that 
allow you to learn faster and remember more of what you 
learn. The key is “involvement.” Our approach follows from 
the old saying “What you hear, you forget; what you see, you 
remember; what you do, you understand.”  
So I’m going to ask that every time you reach the end of a 
major principle in this book, you first put your hand on your 
heart, then make a verbal “declaration,” then touch your head 
with your index finger and make another verbal “declaration.” 
What’s a declaration? It’s simply a positive statement that you 
make emphatically, out loud.  
Why are declarations such a valuable tool? Because every-
thing is made of one thing: energy. All energy travels in fre-
quencies and vibrations. Therefore, each declaration you make 
carries its own vibrational frequency. When you state a 
declaration aloud, its energy vibrates throughout the cells of 
your body, and by touching your body at the same time, you 
can feel its unique resonance. Declarations not only send a 

specific message to the universe, they also send a powerful 
message to your subconscious mind.  
The difference between a declaration and an affirmation is 
slight, but in my mind, powerful. The definition of an 
affirmation is “a positive statement asserting that a goal you 
wish to achieve is already happening.” The definition of a 
declaration is “to state an official intention to undertake a 
particular course of action or adopt a particular status.”  
An affirmation states that a goal is already happening. I’m 
not crazy about this because, often when we affirm something 
that is not yet real, the little v oice in our head usually responds 
with “This isn’t true, this is BS.”  
On the other hand, a declaration is not saying something is 
true, it’s stating that we have an intention of doing or being 
something. This is a position the little voice can buy, because 
we’re not stating it’s true right now, but again, it’s an intention 
for us in the future.  
A declaration, by definition, is also official. It is a formal 
statement of energy into the universe and throughout your 
body.  
Another word from the definition is important— action. You 
must take all the actions necessary to make your intention a 
reality.  
I recommend that you state your declarations aloud each 
morning and each evening. Doing your declarations while 
looking into a mirror will accelerate the process even more.  
Now I have to admit that when I first heard of all this, I 
said, “No way. This declaration stuff is far too hokey for me.” 
But because I was broke at the time, I decided, “What the 
heck, it can’t hurt,” and started doing them. Now I’m rich, so 
it shouldn’t come as a big surprise that I believe that 
declarations really work.  

Either way, I’d rather be really hokey and really rich than 
really cool and really broke. How about you?  
That said, I invite you to place your hand on your heart and 
repeat the following...  
DECLARATION:  
“My inner world creates my outer world.”  
Now touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind.”  
As a special bonus, if you go to www.millionairemind 
book.com  and click on “FREE BOOK BONUSES,” we will 
give you a free list of all the declarations in this book presented 
in calligraphy, in a printable format, suitable for framing.

=== CHAPTER 6: "What Is Your Money Blueprint and How Is It Formed?" ===
What Is Your Money Blueprint  
and How Is It Formed?  
Whether I’m appearing on radio or television, I’m well-known 
for making the following statement: “Give me five minutes, 
and I can predict your financial future for the rest of your life.”  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Give me five minutes, and I can predict your financial 
future for the rest of your life.  
 
 
How? In a short conversation, I can identify what’s called your 
money and success “blueprint.” Each of us has a per-
 
 
 
 

sonal money and success blueprint already embedded in our 
subconscious mind. And this blueprint, more than anything 
and everything else combined, will determine your financial 
destiny.  
What is a money blueprint? As an analogy, let’s consider the 
blueprint for a house, which is a preset plan or design for that 
particular home. In the same way, your money blueprint is 
simply your preset program or way of being in relation to 
money.  
I want to introduce you to an  extremely important formula. 
It determines how you create your reality and wealth. Many of 
the most respected teachers in the field of human potential 
have used this formula as a foundation for their teachings. 
Called the Process of Manifestation, it goes like this:

=== CHAPTER 7: "T→F→A = R" ===
T→F→A = R  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Thoughts lead to feelings. Feelings lead to actions. 
Actions lead to results.  
 
 
Your financial blueprint consists of a combination of your 
thoughts, feelings, and actions in the arena of money.  
So how is your money blueprint formed? The answer is 
simple. Your financial blueprint consists primarily of the in-
formation or “programming” you received in the past, and 
especially as a young child.  
Who were the primary sources of this programming or 
conditioning? For most people, the list includes parents, sib-
 

lings, friends, authority figures, teachers, religious leaders, 
media, and your culture, to name a few.  
Let’s take culture. Isn’t it true that certain cultures have one 
way of thinking and dealing with money, while other cultures 
have a different approach? Do you think a child comes out of 
the womb with his or her attitudes toward money, or do you 
believe the child is taught how to deal with money? That’s right. 
Every child is taught how to think about and act in relation to 
money.  
The same holds true for you, for me, for everyone. You 
were taught how to think and act when it comes to money. 
These teachings become your conditioning, which becomes 
automatic responses that run you for the rest of your life. 
Unless, of course, you intercede and revise your mind’s money 
files. This is exactly what we are going to do in this book, and 
what we do for thousands of people each year, on a deeper 
and more permanent level at the Millionaire Mind Intensive 
Seminar.  
We said earlier that thoughts lead to feelings, that feelings 
lead to actions, that actions lead to results. So here’s an inter-esting question: Where do your thoughts come from? Why do 
you think differently from the next person?  
Your thoughts originate from the “files of information” you 
have in the storage cabinets of your mind. So where does this 
information come from? It comes from your past 
programming. That’s right, your past conditioning determines 
every thought that bubbles up in your mind. That’s why it’s 
often referred to as the conditioned mind.  
To reflect this understanding, we can now revise our 
Process of Manifestation in the following manner:  
P→T→F→A = R 

Your programming leads to your thoughts; your thoughts 
lead to your feelings; your feelings lead to your actions; your 
actions lead to your results.  
Therefore, just as is done with a personal computer, by 
changing your programming, you take the first essential step to 
changing your results.  
So how are we conditioned? We are conditioned in three 
primary ways in every arena of life, including money:  
Verbal programming: What did you hear when you were 
young? 
Modeling: What did you see when you were young?  
Specific incidents: What did you experience when you were 
young?

=== CHAPTER 8: "The Three Aspects of Conditioning" ===
The three aspects of conditioning are important to un-
derstand, so let’s go over each of them. In Part II of this book, 
you will learn how to recondition yourself for wealth and 
success.

=== CHAPTER 9: "The First Influence: Verbal Programming" ===
The First Influence: Verbal Programming  
Let’s begin with verbal programming. What did you hear about 
money, wealth, and rich people when you were growing up?  
Did you ever hear phrases like money is the root of all evil, save 
your money for a rainy day, rich people are greedy, rich people are 
criminals, filthy rich, you have to work hard to make money, money 
doesn’t grow on trees, you can’t be rich and spiritual, money doesn’t buy 
happiness, money talks, the rich get richer and the poor get poorer, that’s 
not for people like us, not everyone can be rich, there’s never enough, and 
the infamous we can’t afford it ?  
 
 

In my household, every time I asked my father for any 
money I’d hear him scream, “What am I made of... money?” 
Jokingly I’d respond, “I wish. I’ll take an arm, a hand, even a 
finger.” He never laughed once.  
Here’s the rub. All the statements you heard about money 
when you were young remain in your subconscious mind as 
part of the blueprint that is running your financial life.  
Verbal conditioning is extremely powerful. For example, 
when my son, Jesse, was three years old, he ran over to me and 
excitedly said, “Daddy, let’s go see the Ninja Turtle movie. It’s 
playing near us.” For the life of me, I couldn’t figure out how 
this toddler could already be a master of geography. A couple 
of hours later, I got my answer in the form of a TV 
commercial advertising the movie, which had at the end the 
usual tagline: “Now playing at a theater near you.”  
Another example of the power of verbal conditioning came 
at the expense of one of our Millionaire Mind seminar 
participants. Stephen didn’t have a problem earning money; his 
challenge was keeping it.  
At the time Stephen came to the course he was earning over 
$800,000 a year and had been doing so for the past nine years. 
Yet he was still barely scraping by. Somehow, he managed to 
spend his money, lend it, or lose it all by making poor 
investment decisions. Whatever the reason, his net worth was 
exactly zero!  
Stephen shared with us that when he was growing up, his 
mom always used to say, “Rich people are greedy. They make 
their money off the sweat of the poor. You should have just 
enough to get by. After that you’re a pig.”  
It doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out what was 
going on inside Stephen’s subconscious mind. No wonder he 
was broke. He was verbally conditioned by his mother to 

believe that rich people are greedy. Therefore, his mind linked 
up rich with greedy,  which of course is bad. Since he didn’t 
want to be bad, subconsciously he couldn’t be rich.  
Stephen loved his mom and didn’t want her to disapprove 
of him. Obviously, based on her beliefs, if he were to get rich, 
she wouldn’t approve. Therefore, the only thing for him to do 
was to get rid of any extra money beyond just getting by, 
otherwise he’d be a pig!  
Now, you would think that in choosing between being rich 
and being approved of by Mom or anyone else for that matter, 
most people would take being rich. Not a chance! The mind 
just doesn’t work that way. Sure, riches would seem to be the 
logical choice. But when the subconscious mind must choose between 
deeply rooted emotions and logic, emotions will almost always win.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
When the subconscious mind must choose between 
deeply rooted emotions and logic, emotions will 
almost always win.  
 
 
Let’s get back to our story. In less than ten minutes at the 
course, using some extremely effe ctive experiential techniques, 
Stephen’s money blueprint changed dramatically. In only two 
years, he went from being broke to becoming a millionaire.  
At the course, Stephen began to understand that these 
nonsupportive beliefs were his mom’s, based on her past pro-
gramming, and not his. We then took it a step further and 
helped him to create a strategy whereby he wouldn’t lose his 
mother’s approval if he got rich. It was simple.  
 
 
 

His mom loved Hawaii. So Stephen invested in a beach-
front condo on Maui. He sends her there for the entire winter. 
She’s in heaven, and so is he. First, she now loves that he’s 
rich and tells everyone how generous he is. Second, he doesn’t 
have to deal with her for six months of the year. Brilliant!  
In my own life, after a slow start, I began doing well in 
business but never seemed to make money with my stocks. In 
becoming aware of my money blueprint, I recalled that when I 
was young, each day after work, my dad would sit down at the 
dinner table with the newspaper, check the stock pages, slam 
his fist on the table, and shout, “Those stinkin’ stocks!” He 
then spent the next half hour ranting about how stupid the 
whole system is and how you have a better chance of making 
money playing the slot machines in Las Vegas.  
Now that you understand the power of verbal conditioning, 
can you see that it’s no wonder I couldn’t make any money in 
the stock market? I was literally programmed to fail, 
programmed to unconsciously pick the wrong stock, at the 
wrong price, at the wrong time. Why? To subconsciously 
validate my money blueprint that said, “Stocks stink!”  
All I can say is, by digging out this massive, toxic weed from 
my inner “financial garden,” I began getting inundated with 
more fruits! Virtually the day after I reconditioned myself, the 
stocks I chose began to boom, and I’ve continued to have 
amazing success in the stock market ever since. It seems 
incredibly strange, but when you really understand how the 
money blueprint works, it makes perfect sense.  
Again, your subconscious conditioning determines your 
thinking. Your thinking determines your decisions, and your 
decisions determine your actions, which eventually determine 
your outcomes. 
 

There are four key elements of change, each of which is 
essential in reprogramming your financial blueprint. They are 
simple but profoundly powerful.  
The first element of change is awareness. You can’t change 
something unless you know it exists.  
The second element of change is understanding. By un-
derstanding where your “way of thinking” originates, you can 
recognize that it has to come from outside you.  
The third element of change is disassociation. Once you 
realize this way of thinking isn’t you, you can separate yourself 
from it and choose in the present whether to keep it or let it 
go—based on who you are today, and where you want to be 
tomorrow. You can observe this way of thinking and see it for 
what it is, a “file” of information that was stored in your mind 
a long, long time ago and may not hold any truth or value for 
you anymore.  
The fourth element of change is reconditioning. We will begin 
this process in Part II of this book, where we will introduce 
you to the mental files that generate wealth. Should you want 
to take this a step further, I invite you to attend the Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar, where you will be led through a series 
of powerful experiential techniques that will rewire your 
subconscious on a cellular and permanent level—retraining 
your mind to respond supportively in terms of money and 
success.  
The elements of frequency and ongoing support are also 
important for lasting change to occur, so I’ve got another gift 
to help you. If you go to www.millionairemindbook .com  
and click on “FREE BOOK BONUSES,” you can subscribe 
to the Millionaire Mind “thought of the week.” Every seven 
days you will receive a profound lesson that can assist your 
success. 

 
Meanwhile, let’s go back to our discussion on verbal con-
ditioning and the steps you can take now to begin revising 
your money blueprint.  
Steps for Change: Verbal Programming  
AWARENESS:  Write down all the statements you heard 
about money, wealth, and rich people when you were 
young.  
UNDERSTANDING:  Write down how you believe these 
statements have affected your financial life so far.  
DISASSOCIATION:  Can you see that these thoughts 
represent only what you learned and are not part of your 
anatomy and not who you are? Can you see that you have 
a choice in the present moment to be different?  
DECLARATION:  Place your hand over your heart and say...  
“What I heard about money isn’t necessarily true. I  
choose to adopt new ways of thinking that support my  
happiness and success.”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind.”

=== CHAPTER 10: "The Second Influence: Modeling" ===
The Second Influence: Modeling  
The second way we are conditioned is called modeling. What 
were your parents or guardians like in the arena of money 
when you were growing up? Did one or both of them manage 
their money well or did they mismanage it? Were they 
spenders or savers? Were they shrewd investors or were they 
noninvestors? Were they risk takers or conservative?  
 

Was money consistently there or was the flow more sporadic? 
Did money come easily in your family, or was it always a 
struggle? Was money a source of joy in your household or the 
cause of bitter arguments?  
Why is this information important? You’ve probably heard 
the saying “Monkey see, monkey do.” Well, humans aren’t far 
behind. As kids, we learn just about everything from modeling.  
Although most of us would hate to admit it, there’s more 
than a grain of truth in the old saying “The apple doesn’t fall 
too far from the tree.”  
This reminds me of the story about a woman who prepares 
a ham for dinner by cutting off both ends. Her bewildered 
husband asks why she cuts off the ends. She replies, “That’s 
how my mom cooked it.” Well, it just so happened that her 
mom was coming for dinner that night. So they asked her why 
she cut off the ends of the ham. Mom replies, “That’s how my 
mom cooked it.” So they decide to call Grandma on the phone 
and ask why she cut off the ends of the ham. Her answer? 
“Because my pan was too small!”  
The point is that generally speaking, we tend to be identical 
to one or a combination of our parents in the arena of money.  
For example, my dad was an entrepreneur. He was in the 
home-building business. He built anywhere from a dozen to a 
hundred homes per project. Each project took a huge amount 
of capital investment. My dad would have to put up everything 
we had and borrow heavily from the bank until the homes 
were sold and the cash came through. Consequently, at the 
beginning of each project, we had no money and were in debt 
up to our eyeballs.  
As you can imagine, during this period my dad was not in 
 
 

the best of moods nor was generosity his strong suit. If I asked 
him for anything that cost even a penny, his standard reply 
after the usual “What am I, made of money?” was “Are you 
crazy?” Of course, I wouldn’t get a dime, but what I would get 
was that “Don’t even think of asking again” glare. I’m sure you 
know the one.  
This scenario would last for about a year or two until the 
homes were finally sold. Then, we’d be rolling in dough. All of 
a sudden, my dad was a different person. He’d be happy, kind, 
and extremely generous. He’d come over and ask me if I 
needed a few bucks. I felt like giving him his glare back, but I 
wasn’t that stupid so I just said, “Sure, Dad, thanks,” and 
rolled my eyes.  
Life was good... until that dreaded day when he’d come 
home and announce, “I found a good piece of land. We’re 
going to build again.” I distinctly remember saying, “Great, 
Dad, good luck,” as my heart sank, knowing the struggle that 
was about to unfold again.  
This pattern lasted from the time I could remember, when I 
was about six, until the age of twenty-one, when I moved out of my parents’ house for good. Then it stopped, or so I 
thought.  
At twenty-one years of age, I finished school and became, 
you guessed it, a builder. I then went on to several other types 
of project-based businesses. For some strange reason, I’d 
make a small fortune, but just a short time later, I’d be broke. 
I’d get into another business and believe I was on top of the 
world again, only to hit bottom a year later.  
This up-and-down pattern went on for nearly ten years 
before I realized that maybe the problem wasn’t the type of 
business I was choosing, the partners I was choosing, the 
employees I had, the state of the economy, or my decision to 

take time off and relax when things were going well. I finally 
recognized that maybe, just maybe, I was unconsciously re-
living my dad’s up-and-down income pattern.  
All I can say is, thank goodness I learned what you’re 
learning in this book and was able to recondition myself out of 
that “yo-yo” model and into having a consistently growing 
income. Today, the urge to change when things are going well 
(and to sabotage myself in the process) still comes up. But 
now, there’s another file in my mind that observes this feeling 
and says, “Thank you for sharing; now let’s get refocused and 
back to work.”  
Another example comes from one of my seminars in Or-
lando, Florida. As usual, people were filing up to the stage, one 
by one, to get an autograph and say hello or thank you or 
whatever. I’ll never forget one older gentleman because he 
came up sobbing. He could barely catch his breath and kept 
wiping his tears with his sleeve. I asked him what was wrong. 
He said, “I’m sixty-three years old and I’ve been reading books 
and going to seminars since they were invented. I’ve seen 
every speaker and tried everything they taught. I’ve tried stocks, real estate, and been in over a dozen different 
businesses. I went back to university and got an MBA. I’ve got 
more knowledge than ten average men, yet I’ve never made it 
financially. I’d always get a good start but end up empty-
handed, and in all those years I never knew why. I thought I 
must just be plain old stupid... until today.  
“Finally, after listening to you and doing the processes, it all 
makes sense. There’s nothing wrong with me. I just had my 
dad’s money blueprint stuck in my head and that’s been my 
nemesis. My dad went through the heart of the Depression 
era. Every day he would try getting jobs or selling things and 
come home empty-handed. I wish I would have 

understood modeling and money patterns forty years ago. 
What a waste of time, all that learning and knowledge has 
been.” He began to cry even harder.  
I replied, “No way is your knowledge a waste of time! It has 
just been latent, waiting in a ‘mind’ bank, waiting for the 
opportunity to come out. Now that you’ve formulated a 
‘success blueprint,’ everything you’ve ever learned will become 
usable and you will skyrocket to success.”  
For most of us, when we hear the truth, we know it. He 
started to lighten up and began breathing deeply again. Then a 
big grin came across his face. He gave me the biggest hug and 
said, “Thank you, thank you, thank you.” Last I heard from 
him, everything was booming: he has accumulated more 
wealth in the last eighteen months than in the past eighteen 
years combined. I love it!  
Again, you can have all the knowledge and skills in the 
world, but if your “blueprint” isn’t set for success, you’re fi-
nancially doomed.  
We often get seminar participants whose parents were in-
volved in World War II or who lived through the Depression. These people are often in shock when they realize how much 
their parents’ experiences have influenced their beliefs and 
habits around money. Some spend like crazy because “You 
could easily lose all your money, so you might as well enjoy it 
while you can.” Others go the opposite route: they hoard their 
money and “save for a rainy day.”  
A word of wisdom: Saving for a rainy day might sound like 
a good idea, but it can create big problems. One of the 
principles we teach in another of our courses is the power of 
intention. If you are saving your money for a rainy day, what 
are you going to get? Rainy days! Stop doing that. Instead of 
saving for a rainy day, focus on saving for a joyous day or for 

the day you win your financial freedom. Then, by virtue of the 
law of intention, that’s exactly what you will get.  
Earlier we said that most of us tend to be identical to one or 
both parents in the arena of money, but there’s also the flip 
side of the coin. Some of us end up being exactly the opposite 
of one or both parents. Why would that happen? Do the 
words anger and rebellion ring a bell? In short, it just depends on 
how ticked off you were at them.  
Unfortunately, as little kids we can’t say to our parents, 
“Mom and Dad, have a seat. I’d like to discuss something with 
you. I’m not fond of the way you’re managing your money or, 
for that matter, your lives, and therefore, when I become an 
adult, I’ll be doing things quite differently. I hope you 
understand. Good night now and pleasant dreams.”  
No, no, no, it doesn’t go quite that way. Instead, when our 
buttons are pushed, we generally freak out and what comes 
out sounds more like “I hate you. I’ll never be like you. When 
I grow up, I’m gonna be rich. Then I’ll get whatever I want 
whether you like it or not.” Then we run to our bedroom, slam 
the door, and start pounding our pillow or whatever else is at hand, to vent our frustration.  
Many people who come from poor families become angry 
and rebellious about it. Often they either go out and get rich or 
at least have the motivation to do so. But there’s one little 
hiccup, which is actually a big burp. Whether such people get 
rich or work their buns off trying to become successful, they 
are not usually happy. Why? Because the root of their wealth 
or motivation for money is anger and resentment. 
Consequently, money and anger become linked in their minds, 
and the more money such individuals have or strive for, the 
angrier they get.  
 

Eventually, the higher self says, “I’m tired of being angry 
and stressed out. I just want to be peaceful and happy.” So 
they ask the same mind that created the link what to do about 
this situation. To which their mind answers, “If you want to 
get rid of your anger, you’re going to have to get rid of your 
money.” So they do. They subconsciously get rid of their 
money.  
They overspend or make a poor investment decision or get 
a financially disastrous divorce, or they sabotage their success 
in some other way. But no matter, because now these folks are 
happy. Right? Wrong! Things are even worse because now 
they’re not just angry, they’re broke and angry. They got rid of 
the wrong thing!  
They got rid of the money instead of the anger, the fruit 
instead of the root. Meanwhile, the real issue is, and always 
was, the anger between them and their parents. And until that 
anger is resolved, they will never be truly happy or peaceful 
regardless of how much money they have or don’t have.  
The reason or motivation you have for making money or 
creating success is vital. If your motivation for acquiring money or success comes from a nonsupportive root such as 
fear, anger, or the need to “prove” yourself, your money will 
never bring you happiness.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
If your motivation for acquiring money or success 
comes from a nonsupportive root such as fear, 
anger, or the need to “prove” yourself, your money 
will never bring you happiness. 
_____________________________________________
 
 

Why? Because you can’t solve any of these issues with 
money. Take fear, for instance. During my seminars I ask the 
audience, “How many of you would cite fear as your primary 
motivation for success?” Not many people put up their hand. 
However, then I ask, “How many of you would cite security as 
one of your main motivators for success?” Almost everyone 
puts up his or her hand. But get this—security and fear are 
both motivated by the same thing. Seeking security comes from 
insecurity, which is based in fear.  
So, will more money dissolve the fear? You wish! But the 
answer is absolutely not. Why? Because money is not the root 
of the problem; fear is. What’s even worse is that fear is not 
just a problem, it’s a habit. Therefore, making more money will 
only change the kind of fear we have. When we were broke, 
we were most likely afraid we’d never make it or never have 
enough. Once we make it, however, our fear usually changes 
to “What if I lose what I’ve made?” or “Every-one’s going to 
want what I have” or “I’m going to get creamed in taxes.” In 
short, until we get to the root of this issue and dissolve the 
fear, no amount of money will help.  
Of course, given a choice, most of us would rather worry 
about having money and losing it than not having money at all, 
but neither are overly enlightened ways to live.  
As with those of us driven by fear, many people are moti-
vated to achieve financial success to prove they are “good 
enough.” We’ll cover this challenge in detail in Part II of this 
book, but for now, just realize that no amount of money can 
ever make you good enough. Money can’t make you some-
thing you already are. Again, as with fear, the “always having 
to prove yourself ” issue becomes your habitual way of living. 
You don’t even recognize it’s running you. You call your-
 

self a high achiever, a hard driver, determined, and all these 
traits are fine. The only question is why? What is the root 
engine that drives all this?  
For people who are driven to prove they are good enough, 
no amount of money can ease the pain of that inner wound 
that makes everything and everyone in their life “not enough.” 
No amount of money, or anything else for that matter, will 
ever be enough for people who feel they are not good enough 
themselves.  
Again, it’s all about you. Remember, your inner world re-
flects your outer world. If you believe you are not enough, you 
will validate that belief and create the reality that you don’t 
have enough. On the other hand, if you believe you are plenty, 
you will validate that belief and create plenty of abundance. 
Why? Because “plenty” will be your root, which will then 
become your natural way of being.  
By unlinking your money motivation from anger, fear, and 
the need to prove yourself, you can install new links for 
earning your money through purpose, contribution, and joy. That 
way, you’ll never have to get rid of your money to be happy.  
Being a rebel or the opposite of your parents is not always a 
problem. To the contrary, if you were a rebel (often the case 
with second-born children) and your folks had poor money 
habits, it’s probably a good thing that you are their opposite. 
On the other hand, if your parents were successful and you’re 
rebelling against them, you could be in for serious financial 
difficulties.  
Either way, what’s important is to recognize how your way 
of being relates to one or both of your parents in the arena of 
money.  
 

Steps for Change: Modeling  
AWARENESS:  Consider the ways of being and habits each 
of your parents had around money and wealth. Write 
down how you may be identical or opposite to either of 
them.  
UNDERSTANDING:  Write down the effect this modeling 
has had on your financial life.  
DISASSOCIATION:  Can you see this way of being is only 
what you learned and isn’t you? Can you see you have a 
choice in the present moment to be different?  
DECLARATION:  Place your hand over your heart and say...  
“What I modeled around money was their way. I 
choose my way.”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”

=== CHAPTER 11: "The Third Influence: Specific Incidents" ===
The Third Influence: Specific Incidents  
The third primary way in which we are conditioned is by 
specific incidents. What did you experience when you were 
young around money, wealth, and rich people? These ex-
periences are extremely important because they shape the 
beliefs—or rather, the illusions—you now live by.  
Let me give you an example. A woman who was an 
operating-room nurse attended the Millionaire Mind Intensive 
Seminar. Josey had an excellent income, but somehow she 
always spent all of her money. When we dug a little deeper, 
she revealed that when she was eleven years old, she 
 
 
 

remembers being at a Chinese restaurant with her parents and 
her sister. Her mom and dad were having yet another bitter 
argument about money. Her dad was standing up, screaming 
and slamming his fist on the table. She remembers him turning 
red, then blue, then falling to the floor from a heart attack. She 
was on the swim team at school and had CPR training, which 
she administered, but to no avail. Her father died in her arms.  
And so, from that day forth, Josey’s mind linked money 
with pain. It’s no wonder then that as an adult, she subcon-
sciously got rid of all of her money in an effort to get rid of 
her pain. It’s also interesting to note that she became a nurse. 
Why? Is it possible that she was still trying to save her dad?  
At the course, we helped Josey identify her old money 
blueprint and revise it. Today she’s well on her way to be-
coming financially free. She’s also not a nurse anymore. Not 
that she didn’t enjoy her job. It’s just that she was in the 
nursing profession for the wrong reason. She’s now a financial 
planner, still helping people, but this time one-on-one, to 
understand how their past programming runs every aspect of 
their financial lives.  
Let me give you another example of a specific incident, one 
that’s closer to home. When my wife was eight years old, she 
would hear the clanging bells of the ice cream truck coming 
down the street. She would run to her mom and ask for a 
quarter. Her mom would reply, “Sorry, dear, I don’t have any 
money. Go ask Dad. Dad’s got all the money.” My wife would 
then go ask her dad. He’d give her a quarter, she’d go get her 
ice cream cone, and she was a happy camper.  
Week after week, the same incident would repeat itself. So 
what did my wife learn about money?  
 
 

First, that men have all the money. So once we got married, 
what do you think she expected of me? That’s right: money. 
And I’ll tell you what, she wasn’t asking for quarters anymore! 
Somehow she’d graduated.  
Second, she learned that women don’t have money. If her 
mom (the deity) didn’t have money, obviously this is the way 
she should be. To validate that way of being, she would sub-
consciously get rid of all her money. She was quite precise 
about it too. If you gave her $100, she’d spend $100. If you 
gave her $200, she’d spend $200. If you gave her $500, she’d 
spend $500, and if you gave her $1,000, she’d spend $1,000. 
Then she took one of my courses and learned all about the art 
of leverage. I gave her $2,000, she spent $10,000! I tried to 
explain, “No, honey, leverage means we’re the ones who are 
supposed to get the ten thousand dollars, not spend it.” 
Somehow it just wasn’t sinking in.  
The only thing we ever fought about was money. It almost 
cost us our marriage. What we didn’t know at the time was 
that the meanings each of us attributed to money were 
radically different. To my wife, money meant immediate pleasure (as in enjoying her ice cream). I, on the other hand, 
grew up with the belief that money was meant to be accu-
mulated as the means to create freedom.  
As far as I was concerned, whenever my wife spent money, 
she wasn’t spending money, she was spending our future 
freedom. And as far as she was concerned, whenever I held 
her back from spending, I was taking away her pleasure in life.  
Thank goodness we learned how to revise each of our 
money blueprints and, more importantly, create a third money 
blueprint specifically for the relationship. 
 
 

 
 
 Success Story from Deborah Chamitoff 
 
From: Deborah Chamitoff  
To: T. Harv Eker Subject: Financially free!  
Harv,  
Today, I have 18 sources of passive income and I no 
longer need a J.O.B. Yes, I am rich, but more importantly, 
my life is enriched, joyful, and abundant! But it wasn’t 
always this way.  
Money used to be a burden to me. I trusted strangers to 
manage my financial affairs just so I wouldn’t have to deal 
with it. I lost almost everything during the last stock market 
crash, and I didn’t even realize it until it was too late.  
More importantly, I lost my self-respect. Paralyzed with 
fear, shame, and hopelessness, I withdrew from everyone 
and everything around me. I continued to punish myself 
right up until I was dragged to the Millionaire Mind.  
During that transformational weekend, I reclaimed my 
power and resolved to take control of my own financial 
destiny. I embraced the Declarations of Wealth and forgave 
myself for past mistakes, truly believing that I deserved to 
be wealthy.  
And now, I’m actually having fun managing my own 
money! I am financially free and know I always will be 
because I have a Millionaire Mind!  
Thank you, Harv . . . thank you. 

Does all this work? Let me put it this way; I’ve witnessed 
three miracles in my life:  
1.  The birth of my daughter.  
2.  The birth of my son.  
3.  My wife and I not fighting about money anymore!  
 
Statistics show that the number one cause of all relationship 
breakups is money. The biggest reason behind the fights 
people have about money is not the money itself, but the 
mismatch of their “blueprints.” It doesn’t matter how much 
money you have or don’t have. If your blueprint doesn’t match 
that of the person you’re dealing with, you’ll have a major 
challenge. This goes for married couples, dating couples, 
family relationships, and even business associates. The key is 
to comprehend that you are dealing with blueprints, not 
money. Once you recognize a person’s money blueprint, you 
can deal with your partner in a way that works for both of you. 
You can begin by becoming aware that your partner’s money 
files are probably not the same as yours. Instead of getting 
upset, choose understanding. Do your best to find out what’s 
important to your partner in the arena of money and identify 
his or her motivations and fears. In this way, you’ll be dealing 
with the roots instead of the fruits and have a good shot of 
making it work. Otherwise, no way, Jose!  
One of the most important things you will learn, should you 
decide to attend the Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar, is 
how to recognize your partner’s money blueprint as well as 
how to create a brand-new blueprint between both of you that 
helps you as partners get what you really want. It is truly a 
blessing to be able to do this, as it alleviates one of the biggest 
causes of pain for most people.  
 

Steps for Change: Specific Incidents  
Here’s an exercise you can do with your partner. Sit down and 
discuss the history each of you brings to your thoughts about 
money—what you heard when you were young, what was 
modeled in your family, and any emotional incidents that 
occurred. Also, find out what money really means to your 
partner. Is it pleasure or freedom or security or status? This 
will assist you in identifying each other’s current money 
blueprint and may help you discover why you might be dis-
agreeing in this arena.  
Next, discuss what you want today not as individuals, but as 
a partnership. Decide and agree upon your general goals and 
attitudes with regard to money and success. Then create a list 
of these attitudes and actions you both agree to live by and 
write them down. Post them on the wall, and if ever there’s an 
issue, gently, very gently, remind each other what you decided 
together when you were both objective, unemotional, and 
outside the grip of your old money blueprints.  
AWARENESS:  Consider a specific emotional incident you 
experienced around money when you were young.  
UNDERSTANDING:  Write down how this incident may 
have affected your current financial life.  
DISASSOCIATION:  Can you see this way of being is only 
what you learned and isn’t you? Can you see you have a 
choice in the present moment to be different?  
DECLARATION:  Place your hand on your heart and say... 
  
 
 

“I release my nonsupportive  money experiences from 
the past and create a new and rich future.”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”

=== CHAPTER 12: "So What Is Your Money Blueprint Set For?" ===
So What Is Your Money Blueprint Set For?  
Now, it’s time to answer the “million dollar” question. What is 
your current money and success blueprint, and what results is 
it subconsciously moving you toward? Are you set for success, 
mediocrity, or financial failure? Are you programmed for 
struggle or for ease around money? Are you set for working 
hard for your money or working in balance?  
Are you conditioned for having a consistent income or an 
inconsistent income? You know the scoop: “First you have it, 
then you don’t, then you have it, then you don’t.” It always 
appears as though the reasons for these drastic fluctuations 
come from the outside world. For instance: “I got a great-
paying job but then the company folded. Then I started my 
own business and things were booming, but the market dried 
up. My next business was doing super, but then my partner 
left, et cetera.” Don’t be fooled, this is your blueprint at work.  
Are you set for having a high income, a moderate income, 
or a low income? Did you know there are actual dollar 
amounts for which many of us are programmed? Are you set 
for earning $20,000 to $30,000 a year? $40,000 to $60,000? 
$75,000 to $100,000? $150,000 to $200,000? $250,000 a year or 
more?  
A few years ago, I had an un usually well-dressed gentleman 
in the audience during one of my two-hour evening 
 
 

seminars. When the seminar was complete, he came over and 
asked if I thought the three-day Millionaire Mind course could 
do anything for him, considering he was already earning 
$500,000 a year. I asked him how long he’d earned that kind of 
money. He responded, “Consistently, for about seven years 
now.”  
That was all I needed to hear. I asked him why he wasn’t 
earning $2 million a year. I told him that the program was for 
people who want to reach their full financial potential and asked 
him to consider why he was “stuck” at half a million. He 
decided to come to the program.  
I got an e-mail from him a year later that said, “The pro-
gram was incredible but I made a mistake. I only reset my 
money blueprint to earn the $2 million a year as we discussed. 
I’m already there, so I’m attending the course again to reset it 
for earning $10 million a year.”  
The point I want to make is that the actual amounts don’t 
matter. What matters is whether you are reaching your full 
financial potential. I know many of you might be asking, why 
on earth would anyone need that kind of money? First, that very question is not overly supportive to your wealth and is a 
sure sign you’ll want to revise your money blueprint. Second, 
the main reason this gentleman wanted to earn massive 
amounts of money was to support his work as a huge donor to 
a charity that assists AIDS victims in Africa. So much for the 
belief that rich people are “greedy”!  
Let’s go on. Are you programmed for saving money or for 
spending money? Are you programmed for managing your 
money well or mismanaging it?  
Are you set for picking winning investments or picking 
losers? You might wonder, “How could whether or not I make 
money in the stock market or in real estate be part of 

my blueprint?” Simple. Who picks the stock or the property? 
You do. Who picks when you buy it? You do. Who picks 
when you sell it? You do. I guess you’ve got something to do 
with the equation.  
I have an acquaintance in San Diego named Larry. Larry is a 
magnet when it comes to making money: he definitely has a 
high income blueprint. But he has the kiss of death when it 
comes to investing his money. Whatever he buys drops like a 
rock. (Would you believe his dad had the exact same problem? 
Duh!) I keep in close touch with Larry so I can ask him for 
investment advice. It is always perfect... perfectly wrong! 
Whatever Larry suggests, I go the other way. I love Larry!  
On the other hand, notice how other people seem to have 
what we termed earlier the Midas touch. Everything they get 
involved with turns to gold. Both the Midas-touch and the 
kiss-of-death syndromes are nothing more than the manifes-
tations of money blueprints.  
Once again, your money blueprint will determine your fi-
nancial life—and even your personal life. If you are a woman 
whose money blueprint is set for low, chances are you will attract a man who is also set for low so you can stay in your 
financial “comfort zone” and validate your blueprint. If you 
are a man who is set for low, chances are you will attract a 
woman who is a spender and gets rid of all your money, so 
you can stay in your financial “comfort zone” and validate 
your blueprint.  
Most people believe the success of their business is pri-
marily dependent on their business skills and knowledge or at 
least their timing of the marketplace. I hate to be the one to 
break it to you, but that’s la-la land, which is another way of 
saying, not a chance!  
 

How well your business does is a result of your money 
blueprint. You will always validate your blueprint. If you have 
a blueprint that is set for earning $100,000 a year, that’s exactly 
how well the business will do, enough to earn you about 
$100,000 a year.  
If you are a salesperson and your blueprint is set for earning 
$50,000 a year and somehow you make a huge sale that makes 
you $90,000 that year, either the sale will cancel or if you do 
end up with $90,000, get ready for a crummy year to follow to 
make up for it and bring you back to the level of your financial 
blueprint.  
On the other hand, if you’re set for earning $50,000 and 
you’ve been in a slump for a couple of years, don’t worry, 
you’ll get it all back. You have to, it’s the subconscious law of 
the mind and money. Someone in this position would prob-
ably walk across the street, get hit by a bus, and end up with 
exactly $50,000 a year in insurance! It’s simple: one way or 
another, if you’re set for $50,000 a year, eventually that’s what 
you’ll get.  
So again, how can you tell what your money blueprint is set 
for? One of the most obvious ways is to look at your results. 
Look at your bank account. Look at your income. Look at 
your net worth. Look at your success with investments. Look 
at your business success. Look at whether you’re a spender or 
a saver. Look at whether you manage money well. Look at 
how consistent or inconsistent you are. Look at how hard you 
work for your money. Look at your relationships that involve 
money.  
Is money a struggle or does it come to you easily? Do you 
own a business or do you have a job? Do you stick with one 
business or job for a long time or do you jump around a lot?  
Your blueprint is like a thermostat. If the temperature in 

the room is seventy-two degrees, chances are good that the 
thermostat is set for seventy-two degrees. Now here’s where it 
gets interesting. Is it possible that because the window is open 
and it is cold outside, the temperature in the room can drop to 
sixty-five degrees? Of course, but what will eventually happen? 
The thermostat will kick in and bring the temperature back to 
seventy-two.  
Also, is it possible that because the window is open and it’s 
hot outside, the temperature in the room can go up to seventy-
seven degrees? Sure it could, but what will eventually happen? 
The thermostat will kick in and bring the temperature back to 
seventy-two.  
The only way to permanently change the temperature in the 
room is to reset the thermostat. In the same way, the only way 
to change your level of financial success “permanently” is to 
reset your financial thermostat, otherwise known as your 
money blueprint.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
The only way to permanently change the  
temperature in the room is to reset the  
thermostat. In the same way, the only way to  
change your level of financial success  
“permanently” is to reset your financial  
thermostat.  
 
 
You can try anything and everything else you want. You can 
develop your knowledge in business, in marketing, in sales, in 
negotiations, and in management. You can become an expert 
in real estate or the stock market. All of these are tremendous 
“tools.” But in the end, without an inner “tool-
 

box” that is big enough and strong enough for you to create 
and hold on to large amounts of money, all the tools in the 
world will be useless to you.  
Once again, it’s simple arithmetic: “Your income can grow 
only to the extent that you do.”  
Fortunately or unfortunately, your personal money and 
success blueprint will tend to stay with you for the rest of your 
life—unless you identify and change it. And that is exactly 
what we will continue to do in Part II of this book and do 
even further with you at the Millionaire Mind Intensive 
Seminar.  
Remember that the first element of all change is awareness. 
Watch yourself, become conscious, observe your thoughts, 
your fears, your beliefs, your habits, your actions, and even 
your inactions. Put yourself under a microscope. Study 
yourself.  
Most of us believe that we live our lives based on choice. Not 
usually! Even if we’re really enlightened, we might make just a 
few choices during the average day that reflect our awareness 
of ourselves in the present moment. But for the most part, we’re like robots, running on automatic, ruled by our past 
conditioning and old habits. That’s where consciousness 
comes in. Consciousness is observing your thoughts and 
actions so that you can live from true choice in the present 
moment rather than being run by programming from the past.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Consciousness is observing your thoughts and 
actions so that you can live from true choice in the 
present moment rather than being run by 
programming from the past.  
 

By achieving consciousness, we can live from who we are 
today rather than who we were yesterday. In this way, we can 
respond appropriately to situations, tapping the full range and 
potential of our skills and talents, rather than inappropriately 
reacting to events, driven by the fears and insecurities of the 
past.  
Once you are conscious, you can see your programming for 
what it is: simply a recording of information you received and 
believed in the past, when you were too young to know any 
better. You can see that this conditioning is not who you are 
but who you learned to be. You can see that you are not the 
“recording” but the “recorder.” You are not the “content” in 
the glass but the “glass” itself. You are not the software but 
the hardware.  
Yes, genetics may play a role, and, yes, spiritual aspects may 
come into play, but much of what shapes who you are comes 
from other people’s beliefs and information. As I suggested 
earlier, beliefs are not necessarily true or false or right or 
wrong, but regardless of their validity, beliefs are opinions that 
are passed around and around and then down from generation to generation to you. Knowing this, you can consciously 
choose to release any belief or way of being that is not 
supportive to your wealth, and you can replace it with one that 
is.  
In our courses we teach that “no thought lives in your head 
rent-free.” Each thought you have will either be an investment 
or a cost. It will either move you toward happiness and success 
or away from it. It will either empower you or disempower 
you. That’s why it is imperative you choose your thoughts and 
beliefs wisely.  
Realize that your thoughts and beliefs aren’t who you are, 
and they are not necessarily attached to you. As precious as  

you believe them to be, they have no more importance and 
meaning than you give them. Nothing has meaning except for the 
meaning you give it.  
Recall how at the beginning of this book I suggested you 
don’t believe a word I say? Well, if you really want to take off 
in your life, don’t believe a word you say. And if you want in-
stant enlightenment, don’t believe a thought you think.  
Meanwhile, if you’re like most people, you’re going to be-
lieve something, so you might as well adopt beliefs that sup-
port you, rich beliefs. Remember, thoughts lead to feelings, 
which lead to actions, which lead to results. You can choose to 
think and act like rich people do and therefore create the 
results that rich people create.  
The question is, “How do rich people think and act?” 
That’s exactly what you’ll discover in Part II of this book.  
If you want to change your financial life forever, read on!  
DECLARATION:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I observe my thoughts and entertain only those that  
empower me.”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!” 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Success Story from Rhonda & Bob Baines  
From: Rhonda & Bob Baines To: T. Harv Eker Subject: We feel 
free!  
We went to the Millionaire Mind Intensive not really knowing 
what to expect. We were very impressed with the results. Before attending the seminar, we were having a lot of money problems. We never seemed to get ahead. We would continually be in debt and not know why. We would pay off our credit cards (usually from a large bonus at work), only to get back into debt within six months. It did not matter how much money we made. We were very frustrated and argued a lot.  
Then we attended Millionaire Mind. While listening to Harv, my 
husband and I kept squeezing each other’s leg and smiling and looking at each other. We heard so much information that had us saying, “No wonder,” “Oh, so that’s why,” “Everything makes sense now.” We were very excited.  
We learned how he and I think so differently when it comes to 
money. How he is a “spender” and how I am an “avoider.” What a horrible combination! After hearing the information, we stopped blaming each other and started understanding each other and 
ultimately started to appreciate and love each other more.  
It is almost a year later and we still do not argue about money—
we just talk about what we learne d. We are no longer in debt; in 
fact we have money in savings, the first time in our 16-year relationship—yeah! We now not only have money for our future, but we also have enough money for our normal everyday expenses, playing, education, long-term savings for a home, and we even have money to share and give away. It feels wonderful knowing that we can use money in those areas and not feel guilty because we allocated and dedic ated it for that purpose.  
We feel free.  Thank you very much, Harv.  
 

 
PART TWO  
_________________ 
 
 
The Wealth Files  
Seventeen Ways Rich People Think  
 
and Act Differently from Poor  
 
and Middle-Class People  
  
IN PART I OF THIS BOOK WE DISCUSSED THE PROCESS  
of Manifestation. Recall that thoughts lead to feelings, feelings 
lead to actions, and actions lead to results. Everything begins 
with your thoughts—which are produced by your mind. Isn’t 
it amazing that our mind is pretty much the basis for our life 
and yet most of us have no clue as to how this powerful 
apparatus functions? So let’s start by taking a simple look at 
how your mind works. Metaphorically, your mind is nothing 
more than a big file cabinet, similar to what you’d find in your 
office or home. All information that comes in is labeled and 
filed in folders so that it’s easy to retrieve to help you survive. 
Did you hear that? I didn’t say thrive, I said survive.  
In every situation, you go to the files of your mind to de-
termine how to respond. Say, for example, you’re considering 
a financial opportunity. You automatically go to your file 
labeled money and from there decide what to do. The only 
thoughts you can have about money will be what are stored  
 
 
 

in your money file. That’s all you can think about, because 
that’s all that is in your mind under that category.  
You decide based on what you believe is logical, sensible, 
and appropriate for you at the time. You make what you think 
is the right choice. The problem, however, is that your right 
choice may not be a successful choice. In fact, what makes 
perfect sense to you may consistently produce perfectly poor 
results.  
For instance, let’s say my wife is in the mall. That shouldn’t 
be too hard for me to imagine. She sees this green purse. It’s 
on sale for 25 percent off. She immediately goes to her mind 
files with the question “Should I get this purse?” In a 
nanosecond, her mind files come back with the answer: 
“You’ve been looking for a green  purse to go with those green 
shoes you bought last week. Plus it’s just the right size. Buy it!” 
As she rushes to the checkout counter, her mind is not only 
thrilled that she’s going to have this beautiful purse, but 
glowing with pride that she got it for 25 percent off.  
To her mind, this purchase makes perfect sense. She wants 
it, she believes she needs it, and it is “such a deal.” However, at no point did her mind come up with the thought “True, this 
is a really nice purse, and true, this is a great deal, but right 
now I’m three thousand dollars in debt, so I’d better hold off.”  
She didn’t come up with that information because no file in 
her head contains that. The file of “When you’re in debt, don’t 
buy any more” was never installed in her and doesn’t exist, 
which means that particular choice is not an option.  
Do you catch my drift? If you’ve got files in your cabinet 
that are nonsupportive to financial success, those will be the 
only choices you can make. They’ll be natural, automatic, 
 
 

and make perfect sense to you. But in the end, they will still 
produce financial failure or mediocrity at best. Conversely, if 
you’ve got mind files that support financial success, you will 
naturally and automatically make decisions that produce 
success. You won’t have to think about it. Your normal way of 
thinking will result in success, kind of like Donald Trump. His 
normal way of thinking produces wealth.  
When it comes to money, wouldn’t it be incredible if you 
could inherently think how rich people think? I sure hope you 
said “absolutely” or something to that effect.  
Well, you can!  
As we stated previously, the first step to any change is 
awareness, meaning the first step to thinking the way rich 
people think is to know how rich people think.  
Rich people think very differently from poor and middle-
class people. They think differently about money, wealth, 
themselves, other people, and pretty well every other facet of 
life. In Part II of this book, we’re going to examine some of 
these differences and, as part of your reconditioning, install 
seventeen alternative “wealth files” into your mind. With new files come new choices. You can then catch yourself when you 
are thinking like poor and middle-class people and consciously 
shift your focus to how rich people think. Remember, you can 
choose to think in ways that will support you in your happiness 
and success instead of ways that don’t.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
You can choose to think in ways that will  
support you in your happiness and success  
instead of ways that don’t. 
 
 
 

A few caveats to begin. First, in no way, shape, or form do I 
mean to degrade poor people or want to appear to be without 
compassion for their situation. I do not believe that rich 
people are better than poor people. They’re just richer. At the 
same time, I want to make sure  you get the message, so I’m 
going to make the distinctions between the rich and poor as 
extreme as possible.  
Second, when I discuss rich, poor, and middle-class people, 
what I am referring to is their mentality —how different folks 
think and act rather than the actual amount of money they’ve 
got or their value to society.  
Third, I will be generalizing “big time.” I understand that 
not all rich and not all poor people are the way I’m describing 
them to be. Again, my objective is to make sure you get the 
point of each principle and use it.  
Fourth, for the most part, I will not always be referring to 
the middle class specifically, because middle-class people 
usually have a mix of rich and poor mentalities. Again, my goal 
is for you to become aware of where you fit on the scale and 
to think more like the rich if you want to create more wealth.  
Fifth, several of the principles in this section may appear to 
deal more with habits and actions than with ways of thinking. 
Remember, our actions come from our feelings, which come 
from our thoughts. Consequently, every rich action is preceded 
by a rich way of thinking.  
Finally, I’m going to ask you to be willing to let go of being 
right ! What I mean by that is, be willing to let go of having to 
do it your way. Why? Because your way has gotten you exactly 
what you’ve got right now. If you want more of the same, keep 
doing it your way. If you’re not yet rich, however, maybe it’s 
time you consider a different way, especially  
 

one that comes from someone who is really, really rich and has 
put thousands of others on the road to wealth too. It’s up to 
you.  
The concepts you are about to learn are simple but pro-
found. They make real changes for real people in the real 
world. How do I know? At my company, Peak Potentials 
Training, we get thousands of letters and e-mails each year 
telling us how each individual wealth file has transformed 
people’s lives. If you learn them and use them, I am confident 
they will transform your life too.  
At the end of each section you will find a declaration and a 
physical movement with which to “anchor” it into your body.  
You will also find actions to take to support you in adopting 
this wealth file. It is imperative you put each file into action in 
your life as quickly as possible so that the knowledge can move 
to a physical, cellular level and create lasting and permanent 
change.  
Most people understand we are creatures of habit, but what 
they don’t realize is that there are actually two kinds of habits: 
doing habits and not-doing habits. Everything you are not doing 
right now, you are in the habit of not doing. The only way to 
change these not-doing habits into doing habits is to do them. 
Reading will assist you, but it’s a whole different world when 
you go from reading to doing. If you are truly serious about 
success, prove it, and do the actions suggested.

=== CHAPTER 13: "Wealth File #1: Rich people believe "I create my life." Poor people believe "Life happens to me."" ===
Wealth File #1  
Rich people believe “I create my life.”  
Poor people believe “Life happens to me.”  
 
If you want to create wealth, it is imperative that you believe 
that you are at the steering wheel of your life, especially your 
financial life. If you don’t believe this, then you must inher-
ently believe that you have little or no control over your life, 
and therefore you have little or no control over your financial 
success. That is not a rich attitude.  
Did you ever notice that it’s usually poor people who spend 
a fortune playing the lottery? They actually believe their wealth 
is going to come from someone picking their name out of a 
hat. They spend Saturday night glued to the TV, excitedly 
watching the draw, to see if wealth is going to “land” on them 
this week.  
Sure, everyone wants to win the lottery, and even rich 
people play for fun once in a while. But first, they don’t spend 
half their paycheck on tickets, and second, winning the lotto is 
not their primary “strategy” for creating wealth.  
You have to believe that you are the one who creates your 
success, that you are the one who creates your mediocrity, and 
that you are the one creating your struggle around money and 
success. Consciously or unconsciously, it’s still you.  
Instead of taking responsibility for what’s going on in their 
lives, poor people choose to play the role of the victim. A 
victim’s predominant thought is often “poor me.” So presto, 
by virtue of the law of intention, that’s literally what victims 
get: they get to be “poor.”  
Notice that I said they play the role of victim. I didn’t say 
they are victims. I don’t believe anyone is a victim. I believe 

people play the victim because they think it gets them some-
thing. We’ll discuss this in more detail shortly.  
That said, how can you tell when people are playing the 
victim? They leave three obvious clues.  
Now, before we talk about these clues, I want you to realize 
that I fully understand that none of these ways of being has 
anything to do with anyone reading this book. But maybe, just 
maybe, you might know someone who can relate. And maybe, 
just maybe, you might know that person intimately! Either 
way, I suggest you pay close attention to this section.  
Victim Clue #1: Blame  
When it comes to why they’re not rich, most victims are 
professionals at the “blame game.” The object of this game is 
to see how many people and circumstances you can point the 
finger at without ever looking at yourself. It’s fun for victims 
at least. Unfortunately it’s not such a blast for anyone else who 
is unlucky enough to be around them. That’s because those in 
close proximity to victims become easy targets.  
Victims blame the economy, they blame the government, 
they blame the stock market, they blame their broker, they 
blame their type of business, they blame their employer, they 
blame their employees, they blame their manager, they blame 
the head office, they blame their up-line or their down-line, 
they blame customer service, they blame the shipping 
department, they blame their partner, they blame their spouse, 
they blame God, and of course they always blame their 
parents. It’s always someone else or something else that is to 
blame. The problem is anything or anyone but them. 
 
 

Victim Clue #2: Justifying  
If victims aren’t blaming, you’ll often find them justifying or 
rationalizing their situation by saying something like “Money’s 
not really important.” Let me ask you this question: If you said 
that your husband or your wife, or your boyfriend or your 
girlfriend, or your partner or your friend, weren’t all that 
important, would any of them be around for long? I don’t 
think so, and neither would money!  
At my live seminars, some participants always come up to 
me and say, “You know, Harv, money’s not really that im-
portant.” I look them directly in the eyes and say, “You’re 
broke! Right?” They usually look down at their feet and 
meekly reply with something like “Well, right now I’m having 
a few financial challenges, but . . .” I interrupt, “No, it’s not 
just right now, it’s always; you’ve always been broke or close to 
it, yes or yes?” At this point they usually nod their head in 
agreement and woefully return to their seats, ready to listen 
and learn, as they finally realize what a disastrous effect this 
one belief has had on their lives.  
Of course they’re broke. Would you have a motorcycle if it 
wasn’t important to you? Of course not. Would you have a pet 
parrot if it wasn’t important to you? Of course not. In the 
same way, if you don’t think money is important, you simply 
won’t have any.  
You can actually dazzle your friends with this insight. 
Imagine you’re in a conversation with a friend who tells you, 
“Money’s not important.” Put your hand on your forehead 
and look up as though you are getting a message from the 
heavens, then exclaim, “You’re broke!” To which your 
shocked friend will undoubtedly respond, “How did you 
know?” Then you stretch out your palm and you reply, 
 

“What else do you want to know? That’ll be fifty bucks, 
please!”  
Let me put it bluntly: anyone who says money isn’t im-
portant doesn’t have any! Rich people understand the im-
portance of money and the place it has in our society. On the 
other hand, poor people validate their financial ineptitude by 
using irrelevant comparisons. They’ll argue, “Well, money isn’t 
as important as love.” Now, is that comparison dumb or what? 
What’s more important, your arm or your leg? Maybe they’re 
both important.  
Listen up, my friends: Money is extremely important in the 
areas in which it works, and extremely unimportant in the 
areas in which it doesn’t. And although love may make the 
world go round, it sure doesn’t pay for the building of any 
hospitals, churches, or homes. It also doesn’t feed anybody.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Money is extremely important in the areas  
in which it works, and extremely unimportant  
in the areas in which it doesn’t.  
 
 
Not convinced? Try paying your bills with love. Still not 
sure? Then pop on over to the bank and try depositing some 
love and see what happens. I’ll save you the trouble. The teller 
will look at you as if you’ve just gone AWOL from the loony 
bin and scream only one word: “Security!”  
No rich people believe money is not important. And if I’ve 
failed to persuade you and you still somehow believe that 
money’s not important, then I have only two words for you, 
you’re broke, and you always will be until you eradicate that 
nonsupportive file from your financial blueprint.  
 

Victim Clue #3: Complaining  
Complaining is the absolute worst possible thing you could do 
for your health or your wealth. The worst! Why?  
I’m a big believer in the universal law that states, “What you 
focus on expands.” When you are complaining, what are you 
focusing on, what’s right with your life or what’s wrong with 
it? You are obviously focusing on what’s wrong with it, and 
since what you focus on expands, you’ll keep getting more of 
what’s wrong.  
Many teachers in the personal development field talk about 
the Law of Attraction. It states that “like attracts like,” 
meaning that when you are complaining, you are actually at-
tracting “crap” into your life.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
When you are complaining, you become a living, 
breathing “crap magnet.”  
 
 
Have you ever noticed that complainers usually have a 
tough life? It seems that everything that could go wrong does 
go wrong for them. They say, “Of course I complain— look 
how crappy my life is.” And now that you know better, you 
can explain to them, “No, it’s because you complain that your 
life is so crappy. Shut up... and don’t stand near me!”  
Which brings us to another point. You have to make darn 
sure not to put yourself in the proximity of complainers. If you 
absolutely have to be nearby, make sure you bring a steel 
umbrella or the crap meant for them will get you too!  
I stay as far away from complainers as possible because 
negative energy is infectious. Plenty of people, however, love 
 

to hang out and listen to complainers. Why? It’s simple: they’re 
waiting for their turn! “You think that’s bad? Wait till you hear 
what happened to me!”  
Here’s some homework that I promise will change your life. 
For the next seven days, I challenge you to not complain at all. 
Not just out loud, but in your head as well. But you have to do 
it for the full seven days. Why? Because for the first few days, 
you may still have some “residual crap” coming to you from 
before. Unfortunately, crap doesn’t travel at the speed of light, 
you know, it travels at the speed of crap, so it might take a 
while to clear out.  
I’ve given this challenge to thousands of people, and I’m 
blown away at how many of them have told me that this one, 
teensy-weensy exercise has transformed their lives. I guarantee 
you’ll be astonished at how amazing your life will be when you 
stop focusing on—and thereby stop attracting—crap into your 
life. If you’ve been a complainer, forget about attracting 
success for now; for most people, just getting to “neutral” 
would be a great start!  
Blame, justification, and complaining are like pills. They are 
nothing more than stress reducers. They alleviate the stress of 
failure. Think about it. If a person weren’t failing in some way, 
shape, or form, would he or she need to blame, justify, or 
complain? The obvious answer is no.  
From now on, as you hear yourself disastrously blaming, 
justifying, or complaining, cease and desist immediately. Re-
mind yourself that you are creati ng your life and that at every 
moment you will be attracting either success or crap into your 
life. It is imperative you choose your thoughts and words 
wisely!  
Now you’re ready to hear one of the greatest secrets in the 
world. Are you ready? Read this carefully: There is no such 

thing as a really rich victim! Did you get that? I’ll say it again: 
There is no such thing as a really rich victim. Besides, who 
would listen? “Tsk, tsk, I got a scratch in my yacht.” To which 
almost anyone would respond, “Who gives a hoot?”  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
There is no such thing as a really rich victim!  
 
 
Meanwhile, being a victim definitely has its rewards. What 
do people get out of being a victim? The answer is attention. Is 
attention important? You bet it is. In some form or another 
it’s what almost everyone lives for. And the reason people live 
for attention is that they’ve made a critical mistake. It is the 
same error that virtually all of us have made. We’ve confused 
attention with love.  
Believe me, it is virtually impossible to be truly happy and 
successful when you’re constantly yearning for attention. Be-
cause if it’s attention you want, you’re at the mercy of others. 
You usually end up as a “people pleaser” begging for approval. 
Attention-seeking is also a problem because people tend to do 
stupid things to get it. It is imperative to “unhook” attention 
and love, for a number of reasons.  
First, you will be more successful; second, you will be hap-
pier; and third, you can find “true” love in your life. For the 
most part, when people confuse love and attention, they don’t 
love each other in the true spiritual sense of the word. They 
love each other largely from the place of their own ego, as in 
“I love what you do for me.” Therefore, the relationship is 
really about the individual, and not about the other person or 
at least the both of you.  
By disconnecting attention from love, you will be freed 
 

up to love another for who they are, rather than what they do 
for you.  
Now, as I said, there is no such thing as a rich victim. So to 
stay a victim, attention seekers make darn sure they never get 
rich.  
It’s time to decide. You can be a victim or you can be rich, 
but you can’t be both. Listen up! Every time, and I mean every 
time, you blame, justify, or complain, you are slitting your 
financial throat. Sure, it would be nice to use a kinder and gentler 
metaphor, but forget it. I’m not interested in kind or gentle 
right now. I’m interested in helping you see exactly what the 
heck you’re doing to yourself ! Later, once you get rich, we can 
be kinder and gentler, how’s that?  
It’s time to take back your power and acknowledge that you 
create everything that is in your life and everything that is not 
in it. Realize that you create your wealth, your non-wealth, and 
every level in between.  
DECLARATION:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I create the exact level of my financial success!”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
1. Every time you catch yourself blaming, justifying, or 
complaining, slide your index finger across your neck, as 
a trigger to remind yourself that you are slitting your 
financial throat. Once again, even though this gesture 
may seem a little crude to do to yourself, it’s no more 
crude than what you’re doing to yourself by blaming, 
 

justifying, or complaining, and it will eventually work  
to alleviate these destructive habits.  
2. Do a “debrief.” At the end of each day, write down one 
thing that went well and one thing that didn’t. Then write 
the answer to the following question: “How did I create 
each of these situations?” If others were involved, ask 
yourself, “What was my part in creating each of these 
situations?” This exercise will keep you accountable for 
your life and make you aware of the strategies that are 
working for you and the strategies that are not.  
Special Bonus: Go to www.millionairemindbook.com and click 
on “FREE BOOK BONUSES” to receive your free 
Millionaire Mind “action reminders.”

=== CHAPTER 14: "Wealth File #2: Rich people play the money game to win. Poor people play the money game not to lose." ===
Wealth File #2  
Rich people play the money game to win.  
Poor people play the money game to not lose.  
 
Poor people play the money game on defense rather than of-fense. Let me ask you: If you were to play any sport or any 
game strictly on defense, what are the chances of your winning 
that game? Most people would agree, slim and none.  
Yet that’s exactly how most people play the money game. 
Their primary concern is survival and security instead of 
creating wealth and abundance. So, what is your goal? What is 
your objective? What is your true intention?  
The goal of truly rich people is to have massive wealth and 
abundance. Not just some money, but lots of money. So what 
is the big goal of poor people? To “have enough to pay 
 

the bills... and on time would be a miracle!” Again, let me 
remind you of the power of intention. When your intention is 
to have enough to pay the bills, that’s exactly how much you’ll 
get—just enough to pay the bills and not a dime more.  
Middle-class people at least go a step further... too bad it’s a 
tiny step. Their big goal in life also happens to be their favorite 
word in the whole wide world. They just want to be 
“comfortable.” I hate to break the news to you, but there’s a 
huge difference between being comfortable and being rich.  
I have to admit, I didn’t always know that. But one of the 
reasons I believe I have the right to even write this book is 
that I’ve had the experience of being on all three sides of the 
proverbial fence. I’ve been extremely broke, as in having to 
borrow a dollar for gas for my car. But let me qualify that. 
First, it wasn’t my car. Second, that dollar came in the form of 
four quarters. Do you know how embarrassing it is for an 
adult to pay for gas with four quarters? The kid at the pump 
looked at me as if I were some kind of vending-machine rob-
ber and then just shook his head and laughed. I don’t know if 
you can relate, but it was definitely one of my financial low points and unfortunately just one of them.  
Once I got my act together, I graduated to the level of being 
comfortable. Comfortable is nice. At least you go out to decent 
restaurants for a change. But pretty much all I could order was 
chicken. Now, there’s nothing wrong with chicken, if that’s 
what you really want. But often it’s not.  
In fact, people who are only financially comfortable usually 
decide on what to eat by looking at the right-hand side of the 
menu—the price side. “What would you like for dinner 
tonight, dear?” “I’ll have this $7.95 dish. Let’s see what it is. 
Surprise, surprise, it’s the chicken,” for the nineteenth time 
this week!  

When you’re comfortable, you don’t dare allow your eyes to 
look at the bottom of the menu, for if you did, you might 
come across the most forbidden words in the middle-class 
dictionary: market price ! And even if you were curious, you’d 
never ask what the price actually is. First, because you know 
you can’t afford it. Second, it’s downright embarrassing when 
you know the waiter doesn’t believe you when he tells you the 
dish is $49 with side dishes extra and you say, “You know 
what, for some reason, I have a real craving for chicken 
tonight!”  
I have to say that for me personally, one of the best things 
about being rich is not having to look at the prices on the 
menu anymore. I eat exactly what I want to eat regardless of 
the price. I can assure you, I didn’t do that when I was broke or 
comfortable.  
It boils down to this: If your goal is to be comfortable, 
chances are you’ll never get rich. But if your goal is to be rich, 
chances are you’ll end up mighty comfortable.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
If your goal is to be comfortable, chances are  
you’ll never get rich. But if your goal is to be rich, 
chances are you’ll end up mighty comfortable.  
 
 
One of the principles we teach in our programs is “If you 
shoot for the stars, you’ll at least hit the moon.” Poor people 
don’t even shoot for the ceiling in their house, and then they 
wonder why they’re not successful. Well, they just found out. 
You get what you truly intend to get. If you want to get rich, 
your goal has to be rich. Not to have enough to pay the bills, 
and not just to have enough to be comfortable. Rich means 
rich! 

DECLARATION:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“My goal is to become a millionaire and more!”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
1. Write down two financial objectives that demonstrate 
your intention to create abundance, not mediocrity or 
poverty. Write “play to win” goals for your:  
 a. Annual income  
 b. Net worth  
 
Make these goals achievable with a realistic time  
frame, yet at the same time remember to “shoot for  
the stars.”  
2. Go to an upscale restaurant and order a meal at “market 
price” without asking how much it costs. (If funds are 
tight, sharing is acceptable.)  
P.S. No chicken!

=== CHAPTER 15: "Wealth File #3: Rich people are committed to being rich. Poor people want to be rich." ===
Wealth File #3  
Rich people are committed to being rich.  
Poor people want to be rich.  
 
Ask most people if they want to be rich and they’d look at you 
as if you were crazy. “Of course I want to be rich,” they’d say. 
The truth, however, is that most people don’t really want to be 
rich. Why? Because they have a lot of negative wealth 
 
 

files in their subconscious mind that tell them there is some-
thing wrong with being rich.  
At our Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar, one of the 
questions we ask people is “What are some of the possible 
negatives about being rich or trying to get rich?”  
Here’s what some people have to say. See if you can relate 
to any of these.  
“What if I make it and lose it? Then I’ll really be a failure.”  
“I’ll never know if people like me for myself or for my 
money.”  
“I’ll be at the highest tax bracket and have to give half my 
money to the government.”  
“It’s too much work.”  
“I could lose my health trying.”  
“My friends and family will say, ‘Who do you think you 
are?’ and criticize me.”  
“Everyone’s going to want a handout.”  
“I could be robbed.”  
“My kids could be kidnapped.”  
“It’s too much responsibility. I’ll have to manage all that 
money. I’ll have to really understand investments. I’ll have to 
worry about tax strategies and asset protection and have to 
hire expensive accountants and lawyers. Yuck, what a hassle.”  
And on and on it goes....  
As I mentioned earlier, each of us has a wealth file inside 
the cabinet called our mind. This file contains our personal 
beliefs that include why being rich would be wonderful. 
However, for many people, this file also includes information 
as to why being rich might not be so wonderful. This means 
they have mixed internal messages about wealth. One part of 
them gleefully says, “Having more money will make 
 

life a lot more fun.” But then another part screams, “Yeah, but 
I’m going to have to work like a dog! What fun is that?” One 
part says, “I’ll be able to travel the world.” Then the other part 
chirps in, “Yeah, and everyone in the world will want a 
handout.” These mixed messages may seem innocent enough, 
but in reality, they are one of the major reasons most people 
never become rich.  
You can look at it like this. The universe, which is another 
way of saying “higher power,” is akin to a big mail-order de-
partment. It is constantly delivering people, events, and things 
to you. You “order” what you get by sending energetic 
messages out to the universe based on your predominant be-
liefs. Again, based on the Law of Attraction, the universe will 
do its best to say yes and support you. But if you have mixed 
messages in your file, the universe can’t understand what you 
want.  
One minute the universe hears that you want to be rich, so 
it begins sending you opportunities for wealth. But then it 
hears you say, “Rich people are greedy,” so the universe begins 
to support you in not having much money. But then you think, 
“Having a lot of money makes life so much more enjoyable,” 
so the poor universe, dazed and confused, restarts sending you 
opportunities for more money. The next day you’re in an 
uninspired mood so you think, “Money’s not that important.” 
The frustrated universe finally screams, “Make up your frickin’ 
mind! I’ll get you what you want, just tell me what it is!”  
The number one reason most people don’t get what they want is that 
they don’t know what they want. Rich people are totally clear that 
they want wealth. They are unwavering in their desire. They 
are fully committed to creating wealth. As long as it’s legal, 
moral, and ethical, they will do whatever it takes 
 

to have wealth. Rich people do not send mixed messages to 
the universe. Poor people do.  
(By the way, when you read that last paragraph, if a little 
voice inside your head said something to the effect of “Rich 
people don’t care if it’s legal, moral, or ethical,” you are defi-
nitely doing the right thing in reading this book. You’ll soon 
find out what a detrimental way of thinking that is.)  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
The number one reason most people  
don’t get what they want is that they  
don’t know what they want.  
 
 
Poor people have plenty of good reasons as to why getting 
and actually being rich might be a problem. Consequently, they 
are not 100 percent certain they really want to be rich. Their 
message to the universe is confusing. Their message to others 
is confusing. And why does all of this confusion happen? 
Because their message to themselves is confusing.  
Earlier we talked about the power of intention. I know it 
might be hard to believe, but you always get what you want—
what you subconsciously want, not what you say you want. You 
might emphatically deny this and respond, “That’s crazy! Why 
would I want to struggle?” And my question for you is exactly 
the same: “I don’t know. Why would you want to struggle?”  
If you want to discover the reason, I invite you to attend the 
Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar, where you will identify 
your money blueprint. The answer will be staring you in the 
face. Put bluntly, if you are not achieving the wealth you say 
you desire, there’s a good chance it’s because,  
 

first, you subconsciously don’t really want wealth, or second, 
you’re not willing to do what it takes to create it.  
Let’s explore this further. There are actually three levels of 
so-called wanting. The first level is “I want to be rich.” That’s 
another way of saying, “I’ll take it if it falls in my lap.” Wanting 
alone is useless. Have you noticed that wanting doesn’t 
necessarily lead to “having”? Notice also that wanting without 
having leads to more wanting. Wanting becomes habitual and 
leads only to itself, creating a perfect circle that goes exactly 
nowhere. Wealth does not come from merely wanting it. How 
do you know this is true? With a simple reality check: billions 
of people want to be rich, relatively few are.  
The second level of wanting is “I choose to be rich.” This 
entails deciding to become rich. Choosing is a much stronger 
energy and goes hand in hand with being responsible for 
creating your reality. The word decision comes from the Latin 
word decidere, which means “to kill off any other alternatives.” 
Choosing is better but not best.  
The third level of wanting is “I commit to being rich.” The 
definition of the word commit is “to devote oneself unre-
servedly.” This means holding absolutely nothing back; giving 
100 percent of everything you’ve got to achieving wealth. It 
means being willing to do whatever it takes for as long as it 
takes. This is the warrior’s way. No excuses, no ifs, no buts, no 
maybes—and failure is not an option. The warrior’s way is 
simple: “I will be rich or I will die trying.”  
“I commit to being rich.” Try saying that to yourself.... 
What comes up for you? For some, it feels empowering. For 
others, it feels daunting.  
Most people would never truly commit to being rich. If you 
asked them, “Would you bet your life that in the next 
 

ten years you will be wealthy?” most would say, “No way!” 
That’s the difference between rich people and poor people. It’s 
precisely because people won’t truly commit to being rich that 
they are not rich and most likely never will be.  
Some might say, “Harv, what are you talking about? I work 
my butt off, I’m trying real ha rd. Of course I’m committed to 
being rich.” And I would reply, “That you’re trying means 
little. The definition of commitment is to devote oneself 
unreservedly.” The key word is unreservedly. Which means 
you’re putting everything, and I mean everything, you’ve got 
into it. Most people I know who are not financially successful 
have limits on how much they are willing to do, how much 
they are willing to risk, and how much they are willing to 
sacrifice. Although they think they’re willing to do whatever it 
takes, upon deeper questioning I always find they have plenty 
of conditions around what they are willing to do and not do to 
succeed!  
I hate to have to be the one to tell you this, but getting rich 
is not a stroll in the park, and anyone who tells you it is either 
knows a heck of a lot more than me or is a little out of in-tegrity. In my experience, getting rich takes focus, courage, 
knowledge, expertise, 100 percent of your effort, a never-give-
up attitude, and of course a rich  mind-set. You also have to 
believe in your heart of hearts that you can create wealth and 
that you absolutely deserve it. Again, what this means is that, if 
you are not fully, totally, and truly committed to creating 
wealth, chances are you won’t.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
If you are not fully, totally, and truly committed  
to creating wealth, chances are you won’t.  
 

Are you willing to work sixteen hours a day? Rich people 
are. Are you willing to work seven days a week and give up 
most of your weekends? Rich people are. Are you willing to 
sacrifice seeing your family, your friends, and give up your 
recreations and hobbies? Rich people are. Are you willing to 
risk all your time, energy, and start-up capital with no guar-
antee of returns? Rich people are.  
For a time, hopefully a short time but often a long time, rich 
people are ready and willing to do all of the above. Are you?  
Maybe you’ll be lucky and you won’t have to work long or 
hard or sacrifice anything. You can wish for that, but I sure 
wouldn’t count on it. Again, rich people are committed 
enough to do whatever it takes. Period.  
It’s interesting to note, however, that once you do commit, 
the universe will bend over backward to support you. One of 
my favorite passages is by explorer W. H. Murray, who wrote 
the following during one of the first Himalayan expeditions:  
Until one is committed, there is hesitancy, the chance to draw back, 
always ineffectiveness. Concerning all acts  of initiative (and creation), there 
is one elementary truth, the ignorance of which kills countless ideas and 
splendid plans: that the moment on e definitely commits oneself, then 
providence moves too. A whole stream of events issues from the decision, 
raising in one’s favor all manner of unforeseen incidents, meetings, and 
material assistance, which no man could have dreamt would have come his 
way.  
In other words, the universe will assist you, guide you, 
support you, and even create miracles for you. But first, you 
have to commit! 
 
 
 

DECLARATION:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I commit to being rich.”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
1.  Write a short paragraph on exactly why creating wealth is 
important to you. Be specific.  
2.  Meet with a friend or family member who is willing to 
support you. Tell that person you want to evoke the power of 
commitment for the purpose of creating greater success. Put 
your hand on your heart, look that person in the eye, and 
repeat the following statement:  
 
“I, ____________ [your name], do hereby commit to becoming a millionaire or more by ________ [date].” 
Tell your partner to say, “I believe in you.” Then you say, 
“Thank you.”  
P.S. To strengthen your commitment, I invite you to 
commit directly to me at www.millionairemindbook 
.com , then print out your commitment and post it on 
your wall.  
P.P.S. Check in as to how you feel before your com -
mitment and how you feel after it. If you feel a sense of 
freedom, you’re on your way. If you feel a tinge of fear, 
you’re on your way. If you didn’t bother doing it, you’re 
still in “not being willing to do whatever it takes” mode 
or “I don’t need to do any of this weird stuff ” mode. 
Either way, let me remind you, your way has gotten you 
exactly where you are right now.

=== CHAPTER 16: "Wealth File #4: Rich people think big. Poor people think small." ===
Wealth File #4 
Rich people think big. Poor people think small. 
We once had a trainer teaching at one of our seminars who 
went from a net worth of $250,000 to over $600 million in 
only three years. When asked his secret, he said, “Everything 
changed the moment I began to think big.” I refer you to the 
Law of Income, which states, “You will be paid in direct pro-
portion to the value you deliver according to the marketplace.”  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
The Law of Income: You will be paid in  
direct proportion to the value you deliver  
according to the marketplace.  
 
 
The key word is value. It’s important to know that four 
factors determine your value in the marketplace: supply, demand, 
quality, and quantity. In my experience, the factor that presents 
the biggest challenge for most people is the quantity. The 
quantity factor simply means, how much of your value do you 
actually deliver to the marketplace?  
Another way of stating this is, how many people do you 
actually serve or affect?  
In my business, for instance, some trainers prefer teaching 
small groups of twenty people at a time, others are com-
fortable with a hundred participants in the room, others like an 
audience of five hundred, and still others love audiences of a 
thousand to five thousand or more. Is there a difference in  
 
 

income among these trainers? Yo u better believe there is!  
Consider the network marketing business. Is there a dif-
ference in income between someone who has ten people in his 
or her down-line and someone who has ten thousand people? 
I would think so!  
Near the beginning of this book, I mentioned that I owned 
a chain of retail fitness stores. From the moment I even 
considered going into this business, my intention was to have 
one hundred successful stores and affect tens of thousands of 
people. My competitor, on the other hand, who started six 
months after me, had the intention of owning one successful 
store. In the end, she earned a decent living. I got rich!  
How do you want to live your life? How do you want to 
play the game? Do you want to play in the big leagues or in the 
little leagues, in the majors or the minors? Are you going to 
play big or play small? It’s your choice.  
Most people choose to play small. Why? First, because of 
fear. They’re scared to death of failure and they’re even more 
frightened of success. Second, people play small because they 
feel small. They feel unworthy. They don’t feel they’re good enough or important enough to make a real difference in 
people’s lives.  
But hear this: Your life is not just about you. It’s also about 
contributing to others. It’s about living true to your mission 
and reason for being here on this earth at this time. It’s about 
adding your piece of the puzzle to the world. Most people are 
so stuck in their egos that everything revolves around me, me, 
and more me. But if you want to be rich in the truest sense of 
the word, it can’t only be about you. It has to include adding 
value to other people’s lives.  
 
 

One of the greatest inventors and philosophers of our time, 
Buckminster Fuller, said, “The purpose of our lives is to add 
value to the people of this generation and those that follow.”  
We each came to this earth with natural talents, things we’re 
just naturally good at. These gifts were given to you for a 
reason: to use and share with others. Research shows that the 
happiest people are those who use their natural talents to the 
utmost. Part of your mission in life then must be to share your 
gifts and value with as many people as possible. That means 
being willing to play big.  
Do you know the definition of an entrepreneur? The def-
inition we use in our programs is “a person who solves prob-
lems for people at a profit.” That’s right, an entrepreneur is 
nothing more than a “problem solver.”  
So I ask you, would you rather solve problems for more 
people or fewer people? If you replied more, then you need to 
start thinking bigger and decide to help massive numbers of 
people—thousands, even millions. The by-product is that the 
more people you help, the “richer” you become, mentally, 
emotionally, spiritually, and definitely financially.  
Make no mistake, every person on this planet has a mission. 
If you are living right now, there’s a reason for it. Richard 
Bach, in his book Jonathan Livingston Seagull, is asked, “How will 
I know when I’ve completed my mission?” The answer? “If 
you are still breathing, you are not done.”  
What I have witnessed is too many people not doing their 
job, not fulfilling their duty, or dharma as it’s called in Sanskrit. I 
watch too many people playing far too small, and too many 
people allowing their fear-based ego selves to rule them. The 
result is that too many of us are not living up to  
 
 

our full potential, in terms of both our own lives and our  
contribution to others.  
It comes down to this: If not you, then who?  
Again, everyone has his or her unique purpose. Maybe 
you’re a real estate investor and buy properties to rent them 
out and make money on cash flow and appreciation. What’s 
your mission? How do you help? There’s a good chance you 
add value to your community by helping families find af-
fordable housing they may not otherwise be able to find. Now 
the question is how many families and people can you assist? 
Are you willing to help ten instead of one, twenty instead of 
ten, one hundred instead of twenty? This is what I mean by 
playing big.  
In her wonderful book A Return to Love, author Marianne 
Williamson puts it this way:  
You are a child of God. Your playing small does not serve the  
world. There is nothing enlightened about shrinking so that  
other people won’t feel insecure around you. We are all meant  
to shine, as children do. We were born to make manifest the  
glory of God that is within us. It is not just in some of us; it is  
in everyone. And as we let our own light shine, we uncon-  
sciously give other people permission to do the same. As we are  
liberated from our own fear, our presence automatically liber-  
ates others.  
The world doesn’t need more people playing small. It’s time 
to stop hiding out and start stepping out. It’s time to stop 
needing and start leading. It’s time to start sharing your gifts 
instead of hoarding them or pretending they don’t exist. It’s 
time you started playing the game of life in a “big” way.  
In the end, small thinking and small actions lead to being 
both broke and unfulfilled. Big thinking and big actions 
 
 

 
lead to having both money and meaning. The choice is yours!  
DECLARATION:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I think big! I choose to help thousands and 
thousands of people!”  
 Success Story from Jim Rosemary 
 
From: Jim Rosemary To: T. Harv Eker  
If someone had said to me I would have doubled my 
income and simultaneously doubled my time off, I would 
have said that was not possible. But that is exactly what has 
happened.  
In one year our business grew 175 percent, and in that 
same year we took a total of seven weeks of vacation time 
(much of that spent at additional Peak Potentials’ seminars)! 
This is astounding considering we had experienced minimal 
growth over the previous five years and struggled to get 
even two weeks of time off a year.  
As a result of knowing Harv Eker and being involved with 
Peak Potentials, I have a deeper understanding of myself 
and a greater appreciation for t he abundance in my life. My 
relationship with my wife and children has been 
immeasurably enhanced. I now see more opportunities than 
I ever thought possible. I feel that I truly am on the right path 
to success in all its facets.  

Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
1.  Write down what you believe to be your “natural talents.”  
     These are things you’ve always been naturally good at. Also  
     write how and where you can use more of these gifts in  
     your life and especially your work life.  2.  Write down or brainstorm with a group of people how you 
    can solve problems for ten times the number of people you 
    affect in your job or business now. Come up with at least     three different strategies. Think “leverage.”

=== CHAPTER 17: "Wealth File #5: Rich people focus on opportunities. Poor people focus on obstacles." ===
Wealth File #5  
Rich people focus on opportunities.  
Poor people focus on obstacles.  
 
Rich people see opportunities. Poor people see obstacles. Rich 
people see potential growth. Poor people see potential loss. 
Rich people focus on the rewards. Poor focus on the risks.  
It comes down to the age-old question, “Is the glass half 
empty or half full?” We’re not talking positive thinking here, 
we’re talking about your habitual perspective on the world. Poor people make choices based upon fear. Their minds are 
constantly scanning for what is wrong or could go wrong in 
any situation. Their primary mind-set is “What if it doesn’t 
work?” or, more often, “It won’t work.”  
Middle-class people are slightly more optimistic. Their 
mind-set is “I sure hope this works.”  
 
 

Rich people, as we’ve said earlier, take responsibility for the 
results in their lives and act upon the mind-set “It will work 
because I’ll make it work.”  
Rich people expect to succeed. They have confidence in 
their abilities, they have confidence in their creativity, and they 
believe that should the doo-doo hit the fan, they can find 
another way to succeed.  
Generally speaking, the higher the reward, the higher the 
risk. Because they constantly see opportunity, rich people are 
willing to take a risk. Rich people believe that, if worse comes 
to worst, they can always make their money back.  
Poor people, on the other hand, expect to fail. They lack 
confidence in themselves and in their abilities. Poor people 
believe that should things not work out, it would be cata-
strophic. And because they constantly see obstacles, they are 
usually unwilling to take a risk. No risk, no reward.  
For the record, being willing to risk doesn’t necessarily 
mean that you are willing to lose. Rich people take educated 
risks. This means that they research, do their due diligence, 
and make decisions based on solid information and facts. Do rich people take forever to get educated? No. They do what 
they can in as short a time as possible, then make an informed 
decision to go for it or not.  
Although poor people claim to be preparing for an 
opportunity, what they’re usually doing is stalling. They’re 
scared to death, hemming and hawing for weeks, months, and 
even years on end, and by then the opportunity usually 
disappears. Then they rationalize the situation by saying, “I 
was getting ready.” Sure enough, but while they were “getting 
ready,” the rich guy got in, got out, and made another fortune. 
 
 

I know what I’m about to say may sound a little strange 
considering how much I value self-responsibility. However, I 
do believe a certain element of what many people call luck is 
associated with getting rich, or, for that matter, with being 
successful at anything.  
In football, it might be the opposing team’s player fumbling 
on your own one-yard line with less than a minute to go, 
allowing your team to win the game. In golf it could be the 
errant shot that hits an out-of-bounds tree and bounces back 
onto the green, just three inches from the hole.  
In business, how many times have you heard of a guy who 
plops some money down on a piece of land in the boonies, 
and ten years later, some conglomerate decides it wants to 
build a shopping center or office building on it? This investor 
gets rich. So, was it a brilliant business move on his part or 
sheer luck? My guess is that it’s a bit of both.  
The point, however, is that no luck—or anything else 
worthwhile—will come your way unless you take some form 
of action. To succeed financially, you have to do something, 
buy something, or start something. And when you do, is it luck or is it the universe or a higher power supporting you in its 
miraculous ways for having the courage and commitment to 
go for it? As far as I’m concerned, who cares what it is. It 
happens!  
Another key principle, pertinent here, is that rich people 
focus on what they want, while poor people focus on what 
they don’t want. Again, the universal law states, “What you 
focus on expands.” Because rich people focus on the oppor-
tunities in everything, opportunities abound for them. Their 
biggest problem is handling all the incredible moneymaking 
possibilities they see. On the other hand, because 
 

poor people focus on the obstacles in everything, obstacles 
abound for them and their biggest problem is handling all the 
incredible obstacles they see.  
It’s simple. Your field of focus determines what you find in 
life. Focus on opportunities and that’s what you find. Focus on 
obstacles and that’s what you find. I’m not saying that you 
don’t take care of problems. Of course, handle problems as 
they arise, in the present. But keep your eye on your goal, keep 
moving toward your target. Put your time and energy into 
creating what you want. When obstacles arise, handle them, 
then quickly refocus on your vision. You do not make your life 
about solving problems. You don’t spend all your time fighting 
fires. Those who do, move backward! You spend your time 
and energy in thought and deed, moving steadily forward, 
toward your goal.  
Do you want some simple but extremely rare advice? Here 
it is: If you want to get rich, focus on making, keeping, and 
investing your money. If you want to be poor, focus on 
spending your money. You can read a thousand books and 
take a hundred courses on success, but it all boils down to that. Remember, what you focus on expands.  
Rich people also understand that you can never know all the 
information beforehand. In another of our programs, 
Enlightened Warrior Training, we train people to access their 
inner power and succeed in spite of anything. In this course 
we teach a principle known as “Ready, fire, aim!” What do we 
mean? Get ready the best you can in as short a time as 
possible; take action; then correct along the way.  
It’s nuts to think you can know everything that may happen 
in the future. It’s delusional to believe you can prepare for 
every circumstance that might someday occur and pro-
 

tect yourself from it. Did you know that there are no straight 
lines in the universe? Life doesn’t travel in perfectly straight 
lines. It moves more like a winding river. More often than not, 
you can only see to the next bend, and only when you reach 
that next turn can you see more.  
The idea is to get in the game with whatever you’ve got, 
from wherever you are. I call this entering the corridor. For 
example, years ago I was planning on opening an all-night 
dessert café in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. I studied location 
options, the marketplace, and found out what equipment I’d 
need. I also researched the kinds of cakes, pies, ice creams, and 
coffees available. The first big problem—I got really fat! 
Eating my research wasn’t helpful. So I asked myself, “Harv, 
what would be the best way to study this business?” Then I 
heard this guy named Harv, who was obviously a lot smarter 
than me, answer, “If you really want to learn a business, get 
into it. You don’t have to own the darn thing from day one. 
Get in the corridor by getting a job in the arena. You’ll learn 
more by sweeping up a restaurant and washing dishes than by 
ten years of research from the outside.” (I told you he was a lot smarter than me.)  
And that’s what I did. I got a job at Mother Butler’s Pie 
Shop. I wish I could tell you that they immediately recognized 
my superb talents and started me as CEO. But alas, somehow 
they just didn’t see, nor did they care about, my executive 
leadership skills, and so I began as a busboy. That’s right, 
sweeping the floor and clearing dishes. Funny how the power 
of intention works, isn’t it?  
You might think that I must really have had to swallow my 
pride to do this, but the truth is, I never looked at it that way. I 
was on a mission to learn the dessert business; I was 
 

grateful for the opportunity to learn it on someone else’s 
“ticket” and make some pocket change to boot.  
During my tenure as the pie busboy, I spent as much time 
as possible shootin’ the doo-doo with the manager about rev-
enues and profits, checking boxes to find out the names of the 
suppliers, and helping the baker at 4:00 a.m., to learn about 
equipment, ingredients, and problems that could occur.  
A full week went by and I guess I was pretty good at my 
job, because the manager sat me down, fed me some pie 
(yuck!), and promoted me to...(drumroll please) cashier ! I 
thought about it long and hard, for exactly a nanosecond, and 
replied, “Thanks but no thanks.”  
First, there was no way I could learn much being stuck 
behind a cash register. Second, I’d already learned what I came 
to learn. Mission accomplished!  
So that’s what I mean by being in the “corridor.” It means 
entering the arena where you want to be in the future, in any 
capacity, to get started. This is far and away the best way to 
learn about a business, because you see it from the inside. 
Second, you can make the contacts you need, which you could never have made from the outside. Third, once you’re in the 
corridor, many other doors of opportunity may open to you. 
That is, once you witness what’s really going on, you may 
discover a niche for yourself that you hadn’t recognized 
before. Fourth, you may find that you don’t really like this 
field, and thank goodness you found out before you got in too 
deep!  
So which of the above happened for me? By the time I was 
done with Mother Butler’s, I couldn’t stand the smell or sight 
of pie. Second, the baker quit the day after I left, phoned me, 
and explained that he had just found out about a hot, new 
 

piece of exercise equipment known as Gravity Guidance in-
version boots (you may have seen Richard Gere hang upside 
down in these in the movie American Gigolo ) and wanted to 
know if I was interested in looking at them. I checked things 
out and decided the boots were dynamite, but he wasn’t, so I 
got involved on my own.  
I began selling the boots to sporting-goods and department 
stores. I noticed these retail outlets all had one thing in 
common—crummy exercise equipment. My brain bells went 
berserk—“Opportunity, opportunity, opportunity.” Funny 
how things happen. This was my first experience selling 
exercise equipment, which eventually led me to opening one of 
the first retail fitness stores in North America and making my 
very first million. And to think it all started with me being a 
busboy at Mother Butler’s Pies Shop! The moral is simple: get 
in the corridor. You never know what doors will open unto 
you.  
I have a motto: “Action always beats inaction.” Rich people 
get started. They trust that once they get in the game, they can 
make intelligent decisions in the present moment, make corrections, and adjust their sails along the way.  
Poor people don’t trust in themselves or their abilities, so 
they believe they have to know everything in advance, which is 
virtually impossible. Meanwhile they don’t do squat! In the 
end, with their positive, “ready, fire, aim,” attitude, rich people 
take action and usually win.  
In the end, by telling themselves, “I’m not doing anything 
until I’ve identified every possible problem and know exactly 
what to do about it,” poor people never take action and 
therefore always lose.  
Rich people see an opportunity, jump on it, and get even 
richer. As for poor people? They’re still “preparing”! 

DECLARATIONS:  Place your hand on your heart and say . . .  
“I focus on opportunities over obstacles.”  
“I get ready, I fire, I aim!”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
1.  Get in the game. Consider a situation or project you’ve  
    wanted to start. Whatever you’ve been waiting for, forget it.     Begin now from wherever you are with whatever you’ve 
    got. If possible, do it while working for or with someone 
    else, first, to learn the ropes. If you’ve already learned, no     more excuses. Go for it!  
2.  Practice optimism. Today, whatever anyone says is a 
    problem or an obstacle, reframe it into an opportunity.  
    You’ll drive negative people nuts, but, hey, what’s the  
    difference? That’s what they’re constantly doing to      themselves anyway!  
3.  Focus on what you have, not on what you don’t have. Make  
    a list of ten things you are grateful for in your life and read      the list aloud. Then read it each morning for the next thirty  
    days. If you don’t appreciate what you’ve got, you won’t get  
    any more and you don’t need any more.

=== CHAPTER 18: "Wealth File #6: Rich people admire other rich and successful people. Poor people resent rich and successful people." ===
Wealth File #6  
Rich people admire other rich and  
successful people. Poor people resent rich  
and successful people.  
 
Poor people often look at other people’s success with resent-
ment, jealousy, and envy. Or they snip, “They’re so lucky,” or 
whisper under their breath, “Those rich jerks.”  
You have to realize that if you view rich people as bad in any 
way, shape, or form, and you want to be a good person, then 
you can never be rich. It’s impossible. How can you be 
something you despise?  
It’s amazing to witness the resentment and even outright 
anger that many poor people have toward the rich. As if they 
believe that rich people make them poor. “Yup, that’s right, 
rich people took all the money so there’s none left for me.” Of 
course, this is perfect victim talk.  
I want to tell you a story, not to complain, but simply to re-
late a real-world experience I had with this principle. In the old 
days, when I was, let’s say, financially challenged, I used to 
drive a clunker. Changing lanes in traffic was never a problem. 
Almost everybody would let me in. But when I got rich and 
bought a gorgeous, new, black Jaguar, I couldn’t help but 
notice how things changed. All of a sudden I started getting 
cut off and sometimes given the finger for added measure. I 
even got things thrown at me, all for one reason: I drove a Jag.  
One day, I was driving through a lower-end neighborhood 
in San Diego, delivering turkeys for a charity at Christmastime. 
I had the sunroof open and I noticed four grimy guys perched 
in the back of a pickup truck behind me. Out of nowhere, they 
started playing basketball with 

my car, by attempting to shoot beer cans into my open sun-
roof. Five dents and several deep scratches later, they passed 
me screaming, “You rich bastard!”  
Of course, I figured this to be an isolated incident, until just 
two weeks later, in a different lower-end neighborhood, I 
parked my car on the street and returned to it less than ten 
minutes later, to discover that the entire side of my car had 
been keyed.  
The next time I went to that area of town, I rented a Ford 
Escort, and amazingly, I didn’t have a single problem. I’m not 
implying that poorer neighborhoods have bad people, but in 
my experience, they sure seem to have plenty of folks who 
resent the rich. Who knows, maybe it’s some kind of chicken-
and-egg thing: Is it because they’re broke that they resent the 
rich, or because they resent rich people that they’re broke. As 
far as I’m concerned, who cares? It’s all the same, they’re still 
poor!  
It’s easy to talk about not resenting the rich, but depending 
on your mood, falling into the trap can happen to anyone, 
even me. Recently, I was eating dinner in my hotel room, about an hour before going onstage to teach an evening 
session of the Millionaire Mind seminar. I turned on the tube 
to check the sports scores and found that Oprah was on. 
Although I’m not a big fan of television, I love Oprah. That 
woman has affected more people in a positive way than almost 
anyone else on the planet, and consequently she deserves every 
penny she’s got... and more!  
Meanwhile, she’s interviewing actress Halle Berry. They’re 
discussing how Halle has just received one of the largest film 
contracts in history for a female actor—$20 million. Halle then 
says that she doesn’t care about the money, and that she 
fought for this humongous contract to blaze a trail for other 

women to follow. I heard myself say skeptically, “Yeah, right! 
Do you think I and everyone else watching this show is an 
idiot? You should take a hunk of that dough and give your 
public relations agent a raise. That’s the best sound-bite 
writing I’ve ever heard.”  
I felt the negativity welling up inside me, and just in the nick 
of time I caught myself, before the energy took me over. 
“Cancel, cancel, thank you for sharing,” I yelled out loud to 
my mind, to drown out that voice of resentment.  
I couldn’t believe it. Here I was, Mr. Millionaire Mind 
himself, actually resenting Halle Berry for the money she 
made. I quickly turned it around and began screaming at the 
top of my lungs, “Way to go, girl! You rock! You let ’em off 
too cheap, you should’ve got thirty million dollars! Good for 
you. You’re incredible and you deserve it.” I felt a lot better.  
Regardless of her reason for wanting all that money, the 
problem wasn’t her, it was me. Remember, my opinions make 
no difference to Halle’s happiness or wealth, but they do make 
a difference to my happiness and wealth. Also remember that 
thoughts and opinions aren’t good or bad, right or wrong, as they enter your mind, but they can sure be empowering or 
disempowering to your happiness and success, as they enter 
your life.  
The moment I felt that negative energy run through me, my 
“observation” alarms went off, and as I’ve trained myself to 
do, I immediately neutralized the negativity in my mind. You 
don’t have to be perfect to get rich, but you do need to 
recognize when your thinking isn’t empowering to yourself or 
others, then quickly refocus on more supportive thoughts. The 
more you study this book, the faster and easier this process 
will be, and if you attend the Millionaire Mind Intensive 
Seminar, you will dramatically accelerate 

your progress. I know I keep mentioning the Millionaire Mind 
course, but please understand, I wouldn’t be so adamant about 
this program if I didn’t see for myself the phenomenal results 
people get in their lives.  
In their outstanding book The One Minute Millionaire, my 
good friends Mark Victor Hansen and Robert Allen quote the 
poignant story of Russell H. Conwell in his book, Acres of 
Diamonds, which was written over a hundred years ago:  
I say that you ought to get rich, and it is your duty to get rich.  
How many of my pious brethren say to me, “Do you, a Chris  
tian minister, spend your time going up and down the country  
advising young people to get rich, to get money?” Yes, of course  
I do.  
They say, “Isn’t that awful! Why don’t you preach the gospel 
instead of preaching about man’s making money?” Because to make 
money honestly is to preach the gospel. That is the reason. The men 
who get rich may be the most honest men you find in the community.  
“Oh,” but says some young man here tonight, “I have been told all 
my life that if a person has money he is very dishonest and dishonorable 
and mean and contemptible.” My friend, that is the reason you have 
none, because you have that idea of people. The foundation of your 
faith is altogether false. Let me say clearly... ninety-eight out of one 
hundred of the rich men (and women) of America are honest. That is 
why they are rich. That is why they are trusted with money. That is 
why they carry on great enterprises and find plenty of people to work 
with them.  
Says another young man, “I hear sometimes of men that get 
millions of dollars dishonestly.” Yes, of course you do, and so do  
 
  
 

I. But they are so rare a thing in fact that the newspapers talk about 
them all the time as a matter of news until you get the idea that all 
the other rich men got rich dishonestly.  
My friend, you... drive me... out into the suburbs of Philadelphia, 
and introduce me to the people who own their homes around this great 
city, so beautiful homes with gardens and flowers, those magnificent 
homes so lovely in their art, and I will introduce you to the very best 
people in character as well as in enterprise in our city.... They that own 
their homes are made more honorable and honest and pure, and true 
and economical and careful, by owning them.  
We preach against covetousness...in the pulpit...and use the 
terms...“filthy lucre” so extremely that Christians get the idea that...it 
is wicked for any man to have money. Money is power, and you ought 
to be reasonably ambitious to have it! You ought because you can do 
more good with it than you can without it. Money printed your Bibles, 
money builds your churches, money sends your missionaries, and money 
pays your preachers....I say, then, you ought to have money. If you can 
honestly attain unto riches...it is your... godly duty to do so. It is an 
awful mistake of these pious people to think you must be awfully poor 
in order to be pious.  
Conwell’s passage makes several excellent points. The first 
refers to the ability to be trusted. Of all the attributes necessary 
for getting rich, having others trust you has to be near the top 
of the list. Think about it, would you do business with a 
person you didn’t trust at least to some extent? No way! 
Meaning that to get rich, there’s a good chance many, many, 
many people must trust you, and there’s a good chance that 
for that many people to trust you, you have to be quite 
trustworthy. 
 
 

What other traits does a person need to get rich and, even 
more importantly, stay rich? No doubt there are always 
exceptions to any rule, but for the most part, who do you have 
to be to succeed at anything? Try some of these characteristics 
on for size: positive, reliable, focused, determined, persistent, 
hardworking, energetic, good with people, a competent 
communicator, semi-intelligent, and an expert in at least one 
area.  
Another interesting element in Conwell’s passage is that so 
many people have been conditioned to believe that you can’t 
be rich and a good person or rich and spiritual. I too used to 
think this way. Like many of us, I was told by friends, teachers, 
media, and the rest of society that rich people were somehow 
bad, that they were all greedy. Once again, another way of 
thinking that ended up being pure crapola! Backed by my own 
real-world experience, rather than old, fear-based myth, I have 
found that the richest people I know are also the nicest.  
When I moved to San Diego, we moved into a home in one 
of the richest parts of town. We loved the beauty of the home 
and the area, but I had some trepidation because I didn’t know anyone and felt I didn’t yet fit in. My plan was to stay low-key 
and not mix much with these rich snobs. As the universe 
would have it, however, my kids, who were five and seven 
years old at the time, made friends with the other kids in the 
neighborhood, and pretty soon I was driving them to these 
mansions to drop them off to play. I remember knocking on a 
stunningly carved wooden door that was at least twenty feet 
high. The mom opened it up and, with the friendliest voice I’d 
ever heard, said, “Harv, it’s so great to meet you, come on in.” 
I was a bit bewildered as she poured me some iced tea and got 
me a bowl of fruit. “What’s the  
 

catch?” my skeptical mind kept wanting to know. Then her 
husband came in from playing with his kids in the pool. He 
was even friendlier: “Harv, we’re so happy to have you in the 
neighborhood. You have to com e to our BBQ tonight with 
the rest of your family. We’ll introduce you to everybody, and 
we’re not taking no for an answer. By the way, do you golf ? 
I’m playing tomorrow at the club, why don’t you come as my 
guest.” By now I was in shock. What happened to the snobs I 
was sure I was going to meet? I left and went back home to 
tell my wife we were going to the BBQ.  
“Oh, my,” she said, “what will I wear?” “No, honey, you 
don’t understand,” I said, “these people are incredibly nice and 
totally informal. Just be who you are.”  
We went and that evening met some of the warmest, 
kindest, most generous, most loving people of our lives. At 
one point the conversation shifted to a charity drive that one 
of the guests was heading up. One after another, the check-
books came out. I couldn’t believe it, I was actually watching a 
lineup to give this woman money. But each check came with a 
catch. The agreement was that there would be reciprocity and that the woman would support the charity the donor was 
involved in. That’s right, to a T, every person there either 
headed up or was a major player in a charity.  
Our friends who had invited us were involved in several. In 
fact, each year they made it their goal to be the single largest 
donor in the entire city to the Children’s Hospital Fund. They 
not only gave tens of thousands of dollars themselves, but 
every year they organized a dinner gala that raised hundreds of 
thousands more.  
Then there was the “vein” doctor. We became quite close 
with his family too. He was among the top varicose vein 
doctors in the world and made a fortune; somewhere in the 

range of $5,000 to $10,000 per surgery, doing four or five 
surgeries per day.  
I bring him up because every Tuesday was “free” day, when 
he would do surgeries on people in the city who couldn’t 
afford to pay. On this day, he would work from  
6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. doing as many as ten surgeries, all for 
free. On top of this, he headed up his own organization whose 
mission was to get other doctors to do free days for people in 
their communities too.  
Needless to say, my old, conditioned belief that rich people 
were greedy snobs dissipated in the light of reality. Now I 
know the opposite to be true. In my experience, the richest 
people I know are the nicest people I know. They are also the 
most generous. Not to say that people who aren’t rich aren’t 
nice or generous. But I can safely say the idea that all rich 
people are somehow bad is nothing more than ignorance.  
The fact is, resenting the rich is one of the surest ways to 
stay broke. We are creatures of habit, and to overcome this or 
any other habit, we need to practice. Instead of resenting rich 
people, I want you to practice admiring rich people, I want you 
to practice blessing rich people, and I want you to practice loving 
rich people. That way, unconsciously you know that when you 
become rich, other people will admire you, bless you, and love 
you instead of resent the heck out of you the way you might 
do them now.  
One of the philosophies I live by comes from ancient Huna 
wisdom, the original teachings of the Hawaiian elders. It goes 
like this: bless that which you want. If you see a person with a 
beautiful home, bless that person and bless that home. If you 
see a person with a beautiful car, bless that person and bless 
that car. If you see a person with a loving family, bless that 
person and bless that family. If you see a  

person with a beautiful body, bless that person and bless their 
body.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
“Bless that which you want.” —Huna philosophy  
 
 
The point is, if you resent what people have, in any way, shape, 
or form, you can never have it. Regardless: if you see a person 
in a gorgeous black Jaguar with the sunroof open, don’t throw 
beer cans at it!  
DECLARATIONS:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I admire rich people!”  
“I bless rich people!”  
“I love rich people!”  
“And I’m going to be one of those rich people too!”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
1.  Practice the Huna philosophy “bless that which you want.”  
    Drive around or buy magazines, look at beautiful homes,     gorgeous cars, and read about successful businesses. 
    Whatever you see that you like, bless it, and bless the 
    owners or the people involved.  2.  Write and send a short letter or e-mail to someone you  
    know of (not necessarily personally) who is highly successful 
    in any arena, telling them how much you admire and honor 
    them for their achievements.

=== CHAPTER 19: "Wealth File #7: Rich people associate with positive, successful people. Poor people associate with negative or unsuccessful people." ===
Wealth File #7 
Rich people associate with positive,  
successful people. Poor people associate  
with negative or unsuccessful people. 
 
Successful people look at other successful people as a means 
to motivate themselves. They see other successful people as 
models to learn from. They say to themselves, “If they can do 
it, I can do it.” As I mentioned earlier, modeling is one of the 
primary ways that people learn.  
Rich people are grateful that others have succeeded before 
them so that they now have a blueprint to follow that will 
make it easier to attain their own success. Why reinvent the 
wheel? There are proven methods for success that work for 
virtually everyone who applies them.  
Consequently, the fastest and easiest way to create wealth is 
to learn exactly how rich people, who are masters of money, 
play the game. The goal is to simply model their inner and 
outer strategies. It just makes sense: if you take the exact same 
actions and have the exact same mind-set, chances are good 
you will get the exact same results. That’s what I did and that’s 
what this entire book is about.  
Contrary to the rich, when poor people hear about other 
people’s success, they often judge them, criticize them, mock 
them, and try to pull them down to their own level. How many 
of you know people like this? How many of you know family 
members like this? The question is, how can you possibly learn 
from or be inspired by someone you put down?  
Whenever I’m introduced to an extremely rich person, I 
create a way to get together with them. I want to talk to them, 
learn how they think, exchange contacts, and if we 

have other things in common, possibly become personal 
friends with them.  
By the way, if you think I’m wrong for preferring to be 
friends with rich people, perhaps you’d rather I pick friends 
who are broke? I don’t think so! As I’ve mentioned before, 
energy is contagious, and I have no interest in subjecting 
myself to theirs!  
I was recently doing a radio interview and a woman called in 
with an excellent question: “What do I do if I’m positive and 
want to grow, but my husband is a downer? Do I leave him? 
Do I try and get him to change? What?” I hear this question at 
least a hundred times a week when I’m teaching our courses. 
Almost everyone asks the same question: “What if the people 
I’m closest to aren’t into personal growth and even put me 
down for it?”  
Here’s the answer I gave the woman on the call, what I tell 
people at our courses, and what I’m suggesting to you.  
First, don’t bother trying to get negative people to change 
or come to the course. That’s not your job. Your job is to use 
what you’ve learned to better yo urself and your life. Be the 
model, be successful, be happy, then maybe—and I stress 
maybe —they’ll see the light (in you) and want some of it. Again, 
energy is contagious. Darkness dissipates in light. People 
actually have to work hard to stay “dark” when light is all 
around them. Your job is simply to be the best you can be. If 
they choose to ask you your secret, tell them.  
Second, keep in mind another principle that we feature in 
our Wizard Training, which is a course about manifesting what 
you want while staying calm, centered, and peaceful. It states, 
“Everything happens for a reason and that reason is there to 
assist me.” Yes, it’s much more difficult to be posi- 
 

tive and conscious around people and circumstances that are 
negative, but that’s your test! Just as steel is hardened in the 
fire, if you can remain true to your values while others around 
you are full of doubt and even condemnation, you’ll grow 
faster and stronger.  
Also remember that “nothing has meaning except for the 
meaning we give it.” Recall in Part I of this book, we discussed 
how we usually end up identifying with or rebelling against one 
or both of our parents, depending on how we “framed” their 
actions. From now on, I want you to practice reframing other 
people’s negativity as a reminder of how not to be. The more 
negative they are, the more reminders you have about how ugly 
that way of being really is. I’m not suggesting you tell them 
this. Just do it, without condemning them for how they are. 
For if you do begin to judge, criticize, and put them down for 
who they are and what they do, then you are no better than 
them.  
Worse comes to worst, if you just can’t handle their non-
supportive energy anymore, if it’s bringing you down to a 
point where you’re not able to grow, you may have to make some courageous decisions about who you are and how you 
want to live the rest of your life. I’m not suggesting you do 
anything rash, but I for one would never live with a person 
who was negative and pooh-poohed my desire to learn and 
grow, be it personally, spiritually, or financially. I wouldn’t do 
that to myself because I respect myself and my life and I 
deserve to be as happy and successful as possible. The way I 
figure it, there are over 6.3 billion people in the world and 
there’s no way I’m going to saddle myself with a downer. Ei-
ther they move up or I move on!  
Again, energy is contagious: either you affect people or 
 

infect people. The same holds true the opposite way around; 
either people affect or infect you. Let me ask you a question: 
Would you hug and hold a person you knew had a severe case 
of the measles? Most people would say, “No way, I don’t want 
to catch the measles.” Well, I believe negative thinking is like 
having measles of the mind. Instead of itching, you get bitching; 
instead of scratching, you get bashing; instead of irritation, you 
get frustration. Now, do you really want to be close to people 
like that?  
I’m sure you’ve heard the saying “Birds of a feather flock 
together.” Did you know that most people earn within 20 
percent of the average income of their closest friends? That’s 
why you’d better watch whom you associate with and choose 
whom you spend your time with carefully.  
From my experience, rich people don’t just join the country 
club to play golf; they join to connect with other rich and 
successful people. There’s another saying that goes “It’s not 
what you know, it’s who you know.” As far as I’m concerned, 
you can take that to the bank. In short, “If you want to fly 
with the eagles, don’t swim with the ducks!” I make it a point to only associate with successful, positive people, and just as 
importantly, I disassociate from negative ones.  
I also make it a point to remove myself from toxic situa-
tions. I see no reason for infecting myself with poisonous en-
ergy. Among these I would include arguing, gossiping, and 
backstabbing. I would also include watching “mindless” 
television, unless you use it specifically as a relaxation strategy 
instead of your sole form of entertainment. When I watch TV, 
it’s usually sports. First, because I enjoy seeing masters at 
anything at work or in this case play, and second because I 
enjoy listening to the interviews after the games. I 
 

love listening to the mind-set of champions, and to me, any-
one who has made it as far as the big leagues in any sport is a 
champion. Any athlete at that level has outcompeted tens of 
thousands of other players to get there at all, which makes 
each of them incredible to me. I love hearing their attitude 
when they win: “It was a great effort from the entire team. We 
did well but we still have improvements to make. It goes to 
show you that hard work pays off.” I also love listening to 
their attitude when they lose: “It’s only one game. We’ll be 
back, we’re just going to forget about this one and put our 
focus on the next game. We’ll go back and talk about where 
we can do better, and then do whatever it takes to win.”  
During the 2004 Olympic Games, Perdita Felicien, a 
Canadian and the reigning world champion in the hundred-
meter hurdles, was heavily favored to win the gold medal. In 
the final race, she hit the first hurdle and fell hard. She wasn’t 
able to complete the race. Extremely upset, she had tears in 
her eyes as she lay there in bewilderment. She had prepared for 
this moment six hours a day, ev ery day of the week, for the 
past four years. The next morning, I saw her news conference. I wish I had taped it. It was amazing to listen to her 
perspective. She said something to the effect of “I don’t know 
why it happened but it did, and I’m going to use it. I’m going 
to focus even more and work even harder for the next four 
years. Who knows what my path would have been had I won? 
Maybe it would have dulled my desire. I don’t know, but I do 
know that now I’m hungrier than ever. I’ll be back even 
stronger.” As I heard her speak, all I could say was “Wow!” 
You can learn a lot from listening to champions.  
Rich people hang around with winners. Poor people hang 
around with losers. Why? It’s a matter of comfort. Rich peo-
 

ple are comfortable with other successful people. They feel 
fully worthy of being with them. Poor people are uncom-
fortable with highly successful people. They’re either afraid 
they’ll be rejected or feel as if they don’t belong. To protect 
itself, the ego then goes into judgment and criticism.  
If you want to get rich, you will have to change your inner 
blueprint to fully believe you are every bit as good as any 
millionaire or multimillionaire out there. I’m shocked in my 
seminars when people come up to me and ask if they can 
touch me. They say, “I’ve never touched a multimillionaire 
before.” I’m usually polite and smile, but in my mind I’m 
saying, “Get a frickin’ life! I’m no better or different from you, 
and unless you start to understand that, you’ll stay broke 
forever!”  
My friends, it’s not about “touching” millionaires, it’s about 
deciding that you are just as good and worthy as they are, and 
then acting like it. My best advice is this: if you really want to 
touch a millionaire, become one!  
I hope you get the point. Instead of mocking rich people, 
model them. Instead of shying away from rich people, get to know them. Instead of saying, “Wow, they’re so special,” say, 
“If they can do it, I can do it.” Eventually, if you want to 
touch a millionaire, you’ll be able to touch yourself !  
DECLARATIONS:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I model rich and successful people.”  
“I associate with rich and successful people.”  
“If they can do it, I can do it!”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!” 
 
 
  

 
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
1.  Go to the library, a bookstore, or the Internet and read a  
    biography of someone who is or was extremely rich and 
    successful. Andrew Carnegie, John D. Rockefeller, Mary 
    Kay, Donald Trump, Warren Buffett, Jack Welch, Bill     Gates, and Ted Turner are some good examples. Use their 
    story for inspiration, for learning specific success strategies, 
    and most importantly, for copying their mind-set.  
 
2.  Join a high-end club, such as for tennis, health, business, or     golf. Mingle with rich people in a rich environment. Or, if 
    there’s no way you can afford to join a high-end club, have 
    coffee or tea in the classiest hotel in your city. Get     comfortable in this atmosphere and watch the patrons, 
    noticing they’re no different from you.  
 
3.  Identify a situation or a person who is a downer in your life. 
    Remove yourself from that situation or association. If it’s      family, choose to be around them less.  
 
4.  Stop watching trash TV and stay away from bad news.

=== CHAPTER 20: "Wealth File #8: Rich people are willing to promote themselves and their value. Poor people think negatively about selling and promotion." ===
Wealth File #8  
Rich people are willing to promote themselves and 
their value. Poor people think negatively about 
selling and promotion.  
My company, Peak Potentials Training, offers over a dozen 
different programs. During the initial seminar, usually the  
 
 

Millionaire Mind Intensive, we briefly mention a few of our 
other courses, then offer the participants special “at seminar” 
tuition rates and bonuses. It’s interesting to note the reactions.  
Most people are thrilled. They appreciate getting to hear 
what the other courses are about and to receive the special 
pricing. Some people, however, are not so thrilled. They resent 
any promotion regardless of how it might benefit them. If this 
sounds in any way like you, it’s an important characteristic to 
notice about yourself.  
Resenting promotion is one of the greatest obstacles to 
success. People who have issues with selling and promotion 
are usually broke. It’s obvious. How can you create a large 
income in your own business or as a representative of one if 
you aren’t willing to let people know that you, your product, or 
your service exists? Even as an employee, if you aren’t willing 
to promote your virtues, someone who is willing will quickly 
bypass you on the corporate ladder.  
People have a problem with promotion or sales for several 
reasons. Chances are you might recognize one or more of the 
following.  
First, you may have had a bad experience in the past with 
people promoting to you inappropriately. Maybe you per-
ceived they were doing the “hard” sell on you. Maybe they 
were bothering you at an inopportune time. Maybe they 
wouldn’t take no for an answer. In any case, it’s important to 
recognize that this experience is in the past and that holding 
on to it may not be serving you today.  
Second, you may have had a disempowering experience 
when you tried to sell something to someone and that person 
totally rejected you. In this instance, your distaste for 
promotion is merely a projection of your own fear of failure 
 

and rejection. Again, realize the past does not necessarily equal 
the future.  
Third, your issue might come from past parental pro-
gramming. Many of us were told that it’s impolite to “toot 
your own horn.” Well, that’s great if you make a living as Miss 
Manners. But in the real world, when it comes to business and 
money, if you don’t toot your horn, I guarantee nobody will. 
Rich people are willing to extol their virtues and value to 
anyone who will listen and hopefully do business with them as 
well.  
Finally, some people feel that promotion is beneath them. I 
call this the high-and-mighty syndrome, otherwise known as 
the “Aren’t I so special?” attitude. The feeling in this case is 
that if people want what you have, they should somehow find 
and come to you. People who have this belief are either broke 
or soon will be, that’s for sure. They can hope that everyone’s 
going to scour the land searching for them, but the truth is 
that the marketplace is crowded with products and services, 
and even though theirs may be the best, no one will ever know 
that because they’re too snooty to tell anyone.  
You’re probably familiar with the saying “Build a better 
mousetrap and the world will beat a path to your door.” Well, 
that’s only true if you add five words: “if they know about it.”  
Rich people are almost always excellent promoters. They 
can and are willing to promote their products, their services, 
and their ideas with passion and enthusiasm. What’s more, 
they’re skilled at packaging their value in a way that’s extremely 
attractive. If you think there’s something wrong with that, then 
let’s ban makeup for women, and while we’re at it, we might as 
well get rid of suits for men. All that is nothing more than 
“packaging.” 
 

Robert Kiyosaki, best-selling author of Rich Dad, Poor Dad (a 
book I highly recommend), points out that every business, 
including writing books, depends on selling. He notes that he 
is recognized as a best- selling author, not a best- writing author. 
One pays a lot more than the other.  
Rich people are usually leaders, and all great leaders are 
great promoters. To be a leader, you must inherently have 
followers and supporters, which means that you have to be 
adept at selling, inspiring, and motivating people to buy into 
your vision. Even the president of the United States of 
America has to continuously sell his ideas to the people, to 
Congress, and even to his own party, to have them imple-
mented. And way before all of that takes place, if he doesn’t 
sell himself in the first place, he’ll never even get elected.  
In short, any leader who can’t or won’t promote will not be 
a leader for long, be it in politics, business, sports, or even as a 
parent. I’m harping on this because leaders earn a heck of a lot 
more money than followers !  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Leaders earn a heck of a lot more money than 
followers!  
 
 
The critical point here isn’t whether you like to promote or 
not, it is why you’re promoting. It boils down to your beliefs. 
Do you really believe in your value? Do you really believe in 
the product or service you’re offering? Do you really believe 
that what you have will be of benefit to whomever you’re 
promoting it to?  
If you believe in your value, how could it possibly be ap-
 

propriate to hide it from people who need it? Suppose you had 
a cure for arthritis, and you met someone who was suffering 
and in pain with the disease. Would you hide it from him or 
her? Would you wait for that person to read your mind or 
guess that you have a product that could help? What would 
you think of someone who didn’t offer suffering people their 
opportunity because they were too shy, too afraid, or too cool 
to promote?  
More often than not, people who have a problem with 
promotion don’t fully believe in their product or don’t fully 
believe in themselves. Consequently, it’s difficult for them to 
imagine that other people believe so strongly in their value that 
they want to share it with everyone who comes their way and 
in any way they can.  
If you believe that what you have to offer can truly assist 
people, it’s your duty to let as many people as possible know 
about it. In this way, you not only help people, you get rich!  
DECLARATION:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I promote my value to others with passion and 
enthusiasm.”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
1. Rate the product or service you are currently offering (or 
you are planning to offer) from  1 to 10 in terms of how 
much you believe in its value (1 being the lowest, 10 
being the highest). If your rating result is 7–9,  
 
 

revise your product or service to increase the value. If  
your result is 6 or below, stop offering that product or  service and start representing something you truly  
believe in.  
2. Read books, listen to audios and CDs, and take courses 
on marketing and sales. Become an expert in both of 
these arenas to a point where you can promote your 
value successfully and with 100 percent integrity.

=== CHAPTER 21: "Wealth File #9: Rich people are bigger than their problems. Poor people are smaller than their problems." ===
Wealth File #9  
Rich people are bigger than their problems.  
Poor people are smaller than their problems. 
  
As I said earlier, getting rich is not a stroll in the park. It is a 
journey that is full of twists, turns, detours, and obstacles. The 
road to wealth is fraught with traps and pitfalls, and that’s 
precisely why most people don’t take it. They don’t want the 
hassles, the headaches, and the responsibilities. In short, they 
don’t want the problems.  
Therein lies one of the biggest differences between rich 
people and poor people. Rich and successful people are bigger 
than their problems, while poor and unsuccessful people are 
smaller than their problems.  
Poor people will do almost anything to avoid problems. 
They see a challenge and they run. The irony is that in their 
quest to make sure they don’t have problems, they have the 
biggest problem of all... they’re broke and miserable. The 
secret to success, my friends, is not to try to avoid or get rid of 
or shrink from your problems; the secret is to grow yourself so 
that you are bigger than any problem.  

 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
The secret to success is not to try to avoid  
or get rid of or shrink from your problems;  
the secret is to grow yourself so that  
you are bigger than any problem.  
 
 
On a scale of 1 to 10, 1 being the lowest, imagine you are a 
person with a level 2 strength of character and attitude looking 
at a level 5 problem. Would this problem appear to be big or 
little? From a level 2 perspective, a level 5 problem would 
seem like a big problem.  
Now imagine you’ve grown yourself and become a level 8 
person. Would the same level 5 problem be a big problem or a 
little problem? Magically, the identical problem is now a little 
problem.  
Finally, imagine you’ve really worked hard on yourself and 
become a level 10 person. Now, is this same level 5 problem a 
big problem or a little problem? The answer is that it’s no 
problem. It doesn’t even register in your brain as a problem. 
There’s no negative energy around it. It’s just a normal 
occurrence to handle, like brushing your teeth or getting 
dressed.  
Note that whether you are rich or poor, playing big or 
playing small, problems do not go away. If you’re breathing, 
you will always have so-called problems and obstacles in your 
life. Let me make this short and sweet. The size of the 
problem is never the issue—what matters is the size of you!  
This may be painful, but if you’re ready to move to the next 
level of success, you’re going to have to become conscious of 
what’s really going on in your life. Ready? Here goes. 
 
 

If you have a big problem in your life, all that means is that 
you are being a small person! Don’t be fooled by appearances. 
Your outer world is merely a reflection of your inner world. If 
you want to make a permanent change, stop focusing on the 
size of your problems and start focusing on the size of you!  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
If you have a big problem in your life, all that  
means is that you are being a small person!  
 
 
One of the not-so-subtle reminders I give participants at my 
seminar is this: whenever you feel as if you’ve got a big 
problem, point to yourself and scream, “Mini me, mini me, 
mini me!” That will abruptly wake you up and move your 
attention back to where it belongs—on yourself. Then, coming 
from your “higher self ” (rather than your ego-based, victim 
self ), take a deep breath and decide right now, in this very 
moment, you will be a bigger person and not allow any 
problem or obstacle to take you out of either your happiness 
or success.  
The bigger the problems you can handle, the bigger the 
business you can handle; the bigger the responsibility you can 
handle, the more employees you can handle; the more 
customers you can handle, the more money you can handle, 
and ultimately, the more wealth you can handle.  
Again, your wealth can only grow to the extent that you do! 
The objective is to grow yourself to a place where you can 
overcome any problems or obstacles that get in the way of 
your creating wealth and keeping it once you have it.  
By the way, keeping your wealth is a whole other world. 
 

Who knew? I sure didn’t. I thought that once you made it, you 
made it! Boy, was I in for a rude awakening as I proceeded to 
lose my first million almost as fast as I made it. Now, in 
hindsight, I understand what the issue was. At the time, my 
“toolbox” wasn’t yet big and strong enough to hold the wealth 
I had achieved. Again, thank goodness I practiced the 
principles of the Millionaire Mind and was able to recondition 
myself ! Not only did I make that million back, but because of 
my new “money blueprint,” I’ve made millions and millions 
more. Best of all, I’ve not only kept it, but it keeps growing at a 
phenomenal rate!  
Think of yourself as your container for wealth. If your 
container is small and your money is big, what’s going to 
happen? You will lose it. Your container will overflow and the 
excess money will spill out all over the place. You simply 
cannot have more money than the container. Therefore you 
must grow to be a big container so you cannot only hold more 
wealth but also attract more wealth. The universe abhors a 
vacuum and if you have a very large money container, it will 
rush in to fill the space.  
One of the reasons rich people are bigger than their prob-
lems goes back to what we discussed earlier. They don’t focus 
on the problem; they focus on their goal. Again, the mind 
generally focuses on one predominant thing at a time. Meaning 
that either you are whining about the problem or you are 
working on the solution. Rich and successful people are 
solution-oriented; they spend their time and energy strategizing 
and planning the answers to challenges that come up, and 
creating systems to make certain that problem doesn’t occur 
again.  
Poor and unsuccessful people are problem-oriented. They 
spend their time and energy bitching and complaining and 

seldom come up with anything creative to alleviate the prob-
lem, let alone make sure it doesn’t happen again.  
Rich people do not back away from problems, do not avoid 
problems, and do not complain about problems. Rich people 
are financial warriors. In our Enlightened Warrior Training 
Camp, the definition of a warrior we use is “one who conquers 
oneself.”  
The bottom line is that if you become a master at handling 
problems and overcoming any obstacle, what can stop you 
from success? The answer is nothing ! And if nothing can stop 
you, you become unstoppable ! And if you become unstoppable, 
what choices do you have in your life? The answer is all 
choices. If you are unstoppable, anything and everything is 
available to you. You simply choose it and it’s yours! How’s 
that for freedom!  
DECLARATIONS:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I am bigger than any problems.”  
“I can handle any problems.”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
1.  Whenever you are feeling upset over a “big” problem, point  
    to yourself and say, “Mini me, mini me.” Then take a deep     breath and say to yourself, “I can handle this. I am bigger 
    than any problem.”  
 2.  Write down a problem you are having in your life. Then list 
    ten specific actions you can take to resolve or at least  
    improve this situation. This will move you from problem  
    thinking into solution thinking.  
 

First, there’s a good chance you’ll solve the problem. Second, 
you’ll feel a heck of a lot better.

=== CHAPTER 22: "Wealth File #10: Rich people are excellent receivers. Poor people are poor receivers." ===
Wealth File #10  
Rich people are excellent receivers.  
Poor people are p oor receivers.  
 
If I had to nail down the number one reason most people do 
not reach their full financial potential, it would be this: most 
people are poor “receivers.” They may or may not be good at 
giving, but they are definitely bad at receiving. And because 
they are poor at receiving, they don’t!  
People are challenged by receiving for several reasons. First, 
many people feel unworthy or undeserving. This syndrome 
runs rampant in our society. I would guess that over 90 
percent of individuals have feelings of not being good enough 
running through their veins.  
Where does this low self-esteem come from? The usual— 
our conditioning. For most of us it comes from hearing twenty 
nos for every yes, ten “You’re doing it wrong”s for every 
“You’re doing it right,” and five “You’re stupid”s for every 
“You’re awesome.”  
Even if our parents or guardians were incredibly supportive, 
many of us end up with feelings of not being able to 
continually measure up to their accolades and expectations. So 
once again, we’re not good enough.  
In addition, most of us grew up with the element of pun-
ishment in our lives. This unwritten rule simply states that if 
you do something wrong, you will or should be punished. 
Some of us were punished by our parents, some by our 

teachers... and some of us in certain religious circles were 
threatened with the mother of all punishments, not getting 
into heaven.  
Of course, now that we’re adults, all this is over. Right? 
Wrong! For most people, the conditioning of punishment is so 
ingrained that, because there’s no one around to punish them, 
when they make a mistake or just aren’t perfect, they 
subconsciously punish themselves. When they were young, 
this punishment might have come in the form of “You were 
bad, so no candy.” Today, however, it could take the form of 
“You were bad, so no money.” This explains why some people 
limit their earnings, and why others will subconsciously 
sabotage their success.  
No wonder people have difficulty receiving. One tiny 
mistake and you’re doomed to carry the burden of misery and 
poverty for the rest of your life. “A little harsh,” you say? Since 
when did the mind become logical or compassionate? Again, 
the conditioned mind is a file folder filled with past 
programming, made-up meanings, and stories of drama and 
disaster. “Making sense” is not its strong suit.  
Here’s something I teach in my seminars that might make 
you feel better. In the end, it doesn’t matter whether you feel 
worthy or not, you can be rich either way. Plenty of wealthy 
people don’t feel overly worthy. In fact, it’s one of the major 
motivations for people to get rich...to prove themselves and 
their worth to themselves or to others. The idea that self-
worth is necessary for net worth is just that, an idea, but it 
doesn’t necessarily hold water in the real world. As we said 
earlier, getting rich to prove yourself may not make you the 
happiest camper, so you’re better off creating wealth for other 
reasons. But what’s important here is for you to realize 
 

that your feeling of unworthiness won’t prevent you from 
getting rich; from a strictly financial point of view this could 
actually be a motivational asset.  
Having said that, I want you to get what I’m going to share 
with you, loud and clear. This could easily be one of the most 
important moments of your life. Are you ready? Here goes.  
Recognize that whether you are worthy or not is all a made-
up “story.” Again, nothing has meaning except for the 
meaning we give it. I don’t know about you, but I’ve never 
heard of anybody who went through the “stamping” lineup at 
birth. Can you imagine God stamping each person’s forehead 
as he or she came through? “Worthy...unworthy... worthy, 
worthy...unworthy. Yuck...definitely unworthy.” Sorry, I don’t 
think it works that way. There’s no one who comes around 
and stamps you “worthy” or “unworthy.” You do that. You 
make it up. You decide it. You and you alone determine if 
you’re going to be worthy. It’s simply your perspective. If you 
say you’re worthy, you are. If you say you’re not worthy, you’re 
not. Either way you will live into your story. This is so critical, 
I’m going to repeat that again: you will live into your story. It’s 
that simple.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
If you say you’re worthy, you are.  
If you say you’re not worthy, you’re not.  
Either way you will live into your story.  
 
 
So why would people do this to themselves? Why would 
people make up the story that they’re not worthy? It’s just 
 
 

the nature of the human mind, the protective part of us that’s 
always looking for what’s wrong. Ever notice that a squirrel 
doesn’t worry about these things? Can you imagine a squirrel 
saying, “I’m not going to collect many nuts this year to prepare 
for winter because I’m not worthy?” Doubtful, because these 
low-intelligence creatures would never do that to themselves. 
Only the most evolved creature on the planet, the human 
being, has the ability to limit itself like this.  
One of my own sayings is “If a hundred-foot oak tree had 
the mind of a human, it would only grow to be ten feet tall!” 
So here’s my suggestion: since it’s a lot easier to change your 
story than your worthiness, instead of worrying about 
changing your worthiness, change your story. It’s a lot faster 
and cheaper. Simply make up a new and much more sup-
portive story and live into that.  
“Oh, but I couldn’t do that,” you say. “I’m not qualified to 
decide that I’m worthy. That has to come from someone else.” 
Sorry, I say, that’s not quite accurate, which is a nice way of 
saying “Bullpoo!” It wouldn’t make a difference what anyone 
says or said in the past, because you have to believe it and buy into it for it to have any effect and that can’t come from 
anyone else but you. But just to make you feel better, let’s play 
the game and I’ll do for you what I do for thousands of 
participants at the Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar: I will 
personally anoint you.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
“If a hundred-foot oak tree had the mind of a  
human, it would only grow to be ten feet tall!”  
—T. Harv Eker  
 
 

This is a special ceremony, so I’m going to ask you to 
eliminate any distractions right now. Stop munching, stop 
talking on the phone, and stop whatever you’re doing. Men, if 
you like, you can change into a suit and tie, although a tuxedo 
would be best. Women, a formal evening gown and heels 
would be perfect. And if you don’t have anything that’s classy 
or new enough, this would definitely be an occasion to go buy 
yourself a brand-new dress, designer label preferred.  
If you’re all ready, let’s begin. Please kneel down on one 
knee and bow your head in respect. Ready, here goes. “BY 
THE POWER INVESTED IN ME, I HEREBY ANOINT 
YOU AS ‘WORTHY’ FROM NOW UNTIL FOREVER 
MORE!”  
Okay we’re done. You can stand up now and hold your 
head high because you are finally worthy. Here’s some sage 
advice: stop buying into that “worthiness” or “unworthiness” 
crap and start taking the actions you need to take to get rich!  
The second major reason most people have a problem with 
receiving is that they have bought into the adage “It’s better to 
give than to receive.” Let me put this as elegantly as possible: “What a crock !” That statement is total hogwash, and in case 
you haven’t noticed, it’s usually propagated by people and 
groups who want you to give and them to receive.  
The whole idea is ludicrous. What’s better, hot or cold, big 
or small, left or right, in or out? Giving and receiving are two 
sides of the same coin. Whoever decided that it is better to 
give than to receive was simply bad at math. For every giver 
there must be a receiver, and for every receiver there must be a 
giver. 
 
 

 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
For every giver there must be a receiver,  
and for every receiver there must be a giver.  
 
 
Think about it! How could you give if there weren’t 
someone or something there to receive? Both have to be in 
perfect balance to work one to one, fifty-fifty. And since giv-
ing and receiving must always equal each other, they must also 
be equal in importance.  
Besides, how does it feel to give? Most of us would agree 
that giving feels wonderful and fulfilling. Conversely, how 
does it feel when you want to give and the other person isn’t 
willing to receive? Most of us would agree that it feels terrible. 
So know this: if you are not willing to receive, then you are “ripping off 
” those who want to give to you.  
You are actually denying them the joy and pleasure that 
comes from giving; instead, they feel lousy. Why? Again, 
everything is energy, and when you want to give but can’t, that 
energy cannot be expressed and gets stuck in you. That 
“stuck” energy then turns into negative emotions.  
To make matters worse, when you are not willing to fully 
receive, you are training the universe not to give to you! It’s 
simple: if you aren’t willing to receive your share, it will go to 
someone else who is. That’s one of the reasons the rich get 
richer and the poor get poorer. Not because they’re any more 
worthy, but because they are willing to receive while most 
poor people are not.  
I learned this lesson in a big way while camping by myself in 
the forest. In preparation for my two-day sojourn I made 
what’s called a lean-to. This means tying the top part of a tarp 
to a tree and then fastening the bottom to the ground to 

create a forty-five-degree roof over my head when I slept. 
Thank goodness I prepared this mini-condo because it rained 
all night. When I came out of my shelter that morning, I was 
noticing how dry I and everything else under the tarp was. At 
the same time, however, I couldn’t help but notice this 
unusually deep puddle that had c ollected at the bottom of the 
tarp. All of a sudden I heard this inner voice say to me, 
“Nature is totally abundant but not discriminating. When the 
rain falls, it has to go somewhere. If one part is dry, another 
part will be doubly wet.” As I stood over the puddle, I realized 
this is exactly the way it works with money. There’s plenty of 
it, trillions of trillions of dollars floating around, it’s in definite 
abundance, and it has to go somewhere. The deal is this: if 
somebody isn’t willing to receive his or her share, it must go to 
whoever will. The rain doesn’t care who gets it and neither 
does money.  
At this point in the Millionaire Mind seminar I teach people 
the special prayer I created after my experience under the tarp. 
Of course it’s a little tongue-in-cheek, but the lesson is 
obvious. It goes like this: “Universe, if anyone has something great coming to them and they’re not willing to take it, send it 
to me! I am open and willing to receive all of your blessings. 
Thank you.” I have the entire audience repeat this with me and 
they go crazy! They’re excited because it feels amazing to be 
totally willing to receive, and it feels great because it’s totally 
natural to do so. Anything you’ve made up to the contrary is, 
again, just a “story” that isn’t serving you or anyone else. Let 
your story go and your money come.  
Rich people work hard and believe it’s perfectly appropriate 
to be well rewarded for their efforts and the value they provide 
for others. Poor people work hard, but due to their  
 

feelings of unworthiness, they believe that it is inappropriate 
for them to be well rewarded for their efforts and the value 
they provide. This belief sets them up to be perfect victims, 
and of course, how can you be a “good” victim if you are well 
rewarded?  
Many poor people actually believe they are better people 
because they are poor. Somehow they believe they’re more 
pious or spiritual or good. Baloney! The only thing poor 
people are, is poor. I had a gentleman at the course come to 
me in tears. He said, “I just don’t see how I could feel good 
about having a lot of money when others have so little.” I 
asked him a few simple questions: “What good do you do for 
poor people by being one of them? Whom do you help by 
being broke? Aren’t you just another mouth to feed? Wouldn’t 
it be more effective for you to create wealth for yourself and 
then be able to really help others from a place of strength 
instead of weakness?”  
He stopped crying and said, “For the first time, I got it. I 
can’t believe what garbage I’ve been thinking. Harv, I believe 
the time has come for me to get rich and, along the way, help others. Thank you.” He went back to his seat a new man. I got 
an e-mail from him not long ago telling me he’s making ten 
times what he used to earn and that he’s feeling awesome 
about it. Best of all, he says, it feels tremendous to be able to 
assist some of his friends and family who are still struggling.  
This leads me to an important point: if you have the 
wherewithal to have a lot of money, have it. Why? Because the 
truth is that we are extremely fortunate to be living in this 
society, a society whereby each person is in fact rich compared 
to many other parts of the world. Some people just don’t ever 
have the opportunity to have a lot of money. If you are one of 
the lucky people who do have that ability, 

and each of you is or you wouldn’t be reading a book like this, 
then use your wherewithal for all it’s worth. Get really rich and 
then help people who don’t have the opportunity you did. 
That makes a lot more sense to me than being broke and 
helping no one.  
Of course there are the p eople who will say, “Money will 
change me. If I get rich, I might turn into some kind of greedy 
jerk.” First, the only people who say that are poor people. It’s 
just another justification for their failure, and it comes from 
just another one of the many “inner” weeds in their financial 
garden. Don’t buy it!  
Second, let me set the record straight. Money will only make 
you more of what you already are. If you’re mean, money will afford 
you the opportunity to be meaner. If you’re kind, money will 
afford you the opportunity to be kinder. If you’re a jerk at 
heart, with money you can be jerkier. (I know there’s no such 
word, but if you were a real jerk, you’d find a way.) If you’re 
generous, more money will simply allow you to be more 
generous. And anyone who tells you different is broke !  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Money will only make you  
more of what you already are.  
 
 
So what to do? How do you become a good receiver?  
First, begin to nurture yourself. Remember, people are 
creatures of habit, and therefore you will have to consciously 
practice receiving the best life has to offer.  
One of the key elements in the money management system 
we teach in the Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar is 
 

having a “play” account where you get to blow a designated 
amount of money on things that nurture you and allow you to 
“feel like a million.” The idea of this account is to help you 
validate your worthiness and strengthen your “receiving 
muscle.”  
Second, I want you to practice going crazy with excitement 
and gratitude anytime you find or receive any money. It’s 
funny, when I was broke and I saw a penny on the ground, I 
would never stoop so low as to pick up a lowly penny. Now 
that I’m rich, however, I pick up anything that even looks like 
money. Then I give it a kiss for good luck and declare out 
loud, “I am a money magnet. Thank you, thank you, thank 
you.”  
I don’t stand there judging the denomination. Money is 
money, and finding money is a blessing from the universe. 
Now that I’m fully willing to receive anything and everything 
that comes my way, I do!  
Being open and willing to receive is absolutely critical if you 
want to create wealth. It’s also critical if you want to keep it. If 
you are a poor receiver and you somehow fall into a sub-stantial amount of money, chances are it’ll be gone quickly. 
Again, “first the inner, then the outer.” First, expand your re-
ceiving “box.” Then watch as the money comes in to fill it.  
Again, the universe abhors a vacuum. In other words, an 
empty space will always be filled. Have you ever noticed what 
happens with an empty closet or garage? It usually doesn’t stay 
empty for long, does it? Have you also noticed how strange it 
is that the time taken for any task will always be equal to the 
time given? Once you expand your capacity to receive, you 
will.  
Also, once you become truly open to receiving, the rest of 
your life will open up. Not only will you receive more 

money, but you’ll also receive more love, more peace, more 
happiness, and more fulfillment. Why? Because of another 
principle I constantly use that states, “How you do anything is 
how you do everything.”  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
How you do anything is how you do everything.  
 
 
The way you are in one area is usually the way you are in all 
areas. If you’ve been blocking yourself from receiving money, 
chances are you’ve been blocking  yourself from receiving 
everything else that’s good in life. The mind doesn’t usually 
delineate specifically where you are a poor receiver. In fact, it’s 
just the opposite: the mind has a habit of overgeneralizing and 
says, “The way it is, is the way it is, everywhere and always.”  
If you’re a poor receiver, you’re a poor receiver in all areas. 
The good news is that when you become an excellent receiver, 
you’ll be an excellent receiver everywhere...and open to 
receiving all that the universe has to offer in all areas of your 
life.  
Now the only thing you’ll have to remember is to keep 
saying “Thank you” as you receive all of your blessings.  
DECLARATION:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I am an excellent receiver.  I am open and willing to 
receive massive amounts of money into my life.”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
 

MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
   1.  Practice being an excellent receiver. Each time someone 
       gives you a compliment of any sort, simply say, “Thank        you.” Do not return a compliment to that person at the 
       same time. This allows you to fully receive and own the 
       compliment instead of “deflecting” it, as most people do. 
      This also allows the giver of the compliment the joy of 
      giving the gift without it being thrown back at them.   
   2.  Any, and I mean any, money you find or receive should 
      enthusiastically be celebrated. Go ahead and scream out,       “I’m a money magnet. Thank you, thank you, thank you.” 
      This goes for money you find on the ground, for money 
      you get as gifts, for money you get from the government,  
      for money you get as a paycheck, and for money you get 
      from your business. Remember, the universe is set up to       support you. If you keep declaring that you are a money 
      magnet, and especially if you have the proof, the universe 
      will simply say, “Okay,” and send you more.   
   3.  Pamper yourself. At least once a month do something 
       special to nurture yourself and your spirit. Get a massage, 
       a manicure, or a pedicure, take yourself for an extravagant 
      lunch or dinner, rent a boat or a weekend cottage, have       someone bring you breakfast in bed. (You might have to 
      trade with a friend or family member.) Do things that will 
      allow you to feel rich and deserving. Again, the vibrational        energy you emit from this kind of experience will send a 
      message to the universe that you live abundantly, and 
      again, the universe will simply do its job and say, “Okay,” 
      and give you opportunities for more.

=== CHAPTER 23: "Wealth File #11: Rich people prefer to be paid based on their results. Poor people prefer to be paid based on their time." ===
Wealth File #11  
Rich people choose to get paid based on results. 
Poor people choose to ge t paid based on time.  
Have you ever heard this advice: “Go to school, get good 
grades, get a good job, get a steady paycheck, be on time, work 
hard . . . and you’ll live happily ever after”? I don’t know about 
you, but I’d sure love to see the written guarantee on that one. 
Unfortunately, this sage advice comes directly from the Book of 
Fairy Tales, Volume I, right after the tooth fairy story.  
I’m not going to bother debunking the entire statement. 
You can do that for yourself by checking your own experience 
and the lives of everyone around you. What I will discuss is the 
idea behind the “steady” paycheck. There’s nothing wrong 
with getting a steady paycheck, unless it interferes with your 
ability to earn what you’re worth. There’s the rub. It usually 
does.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
There’s nothing wrong with getting a steady 
paycheck, unless it interferes with your ability  
to earn what you’re worth. There’s the rub.  
It usually does.  
 
 
Poor people prefer to be paid a steady salary or hourly wage. 
They need the “security” of knowing that exactly the 
 
 
 

same amount of money is coming in at exactly the same time, 
month in, month out. What they don’t realize is that this 
security comes with a price, and the cost is wealth.  
Living based in security is living based in fear. What you’re 
actually saying is “I’m afraid I won’t be able to earn enough 
based on my performance, so I’ll settle for earning just enough 
to survive or to be comfortable.”  
Rich people prefer to get paid based on the results they 
produce, if not totally, then at least partially. Rich people 
usually own their own business in some form. They make their 
income from their profits. Rich people work on commission 
or percentages of revenue. Rich people choose stock options 
and profit sharing in lieu of higher salaries. Notice there are no 
guarantees with any of the above. As stated earlier, in the 
financial world the rewards are usually proportionate to the 
risk.  
Rich people believe in themselves. They believe in their 
value and in their ability to deliver it. Poor people don’t. That’s 
why they need “guarantees.”  
Recently, I dealt with a public relations consultant who 
wanted me to pay her a fee of $4,000 per month. I asked her 
what I’d receive for my $4,000. She replied that I’d see at least 
$20,000 of coverage per month in the media. I said, “What if 
you don’t produce those results or anything close to it?” She 
answered that she would still be putting in the time, so she 
deserved to get paid.  
I replied, “I’m not interested in paying for your time. I’m 
interested in paying you for a specific result, and if you don’t 
produce that result, why should I pay you? On the other hand, 
if you produce even greater results, you should get paid more. 
Tell you what: I’ll give you fifty percent of whatever media 
value you produce. According to your figures, 

that would mean paying you ten thousand dollars per month, 
which is more than double your fee.”  
Did she go for it? Nope! Is she broke? Yup! And she will be 
for the rest of her life or until she figures out that to get rich 
you will need to be paid based on results.  
Poor people trade their time for money. The problem with 
this strategy is that your time is limited. This means that you 
invariably end up breaking Wealth Rule #1, which states, 
“Never have a ceiling on your income.” If you choose to get 
paid for your time, you are pretty much killing your chances 
for wealth.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Never have a ceiling on your income.  
 
 
This rule also applies to personal service businesses, where, 
again, you generally get paid for your time. That’s why lawyers, 
accountants, and consultants who are not yet partners in their 
firm—and therefore don’t share in the business profits—make 
a moderate living at best.  
Suppose you are in the pen business and you get an order 
for fifty thousand pens. If this were the case, what would you 
do? You’d simply call your supplier, order fifty thousand pens, 
send them off, and happily count your profits. On the other 
hand, suppose you are a massage therapist and you’re 
fortunate enough to have fifty thousand people lined up 
outside your door all wanting a massage from you. What do 
you do? You kill yourself for not being in the pen business. 
What else can you do? Try explaining to the last person in line 
that you may be running “a little late,” as in their appointment 
is Tuesday at 3:15, four decades from now!  

I’m not suggesting there’s anything wrong with being in a 
personal service business. Just do n’t expect to get rich anytime 
soon unless you create a way to duplicate or leverage yourself.  
At my seminars, I often meet salaried or hourly wage em-
ployees who complain to me that they’re not getting paid what 
they’re worth. My response is “In whose opinion? I’m sure 
your boss thinks you’re being compensated fairly. Why don’t 
you get off the salary treadmill and ask to be paid based fully 
or partially on your performance? Or, if that is not possible, 
why not work for yourself ? Then you’ll know you’re making 
exactly what you’re worth.” Somehow, this advice doesn’t 
seem to appease these people, who are obviously terrified of 
testing their “true” value in the marketplace.  
The fear most people have of being paid based on their 
results is often just a fear of breaking out of their old condi-
tioning. In my experience, most people who are stuck in the 
steady-paycheck rut have past programming that tells them 
this is the “normal” way to get paid for your work.  
You can’t blame your parents. (I guess you can if you’re a 
good victim.) Most parents tend to be overly protective, so it’s only natural for them to want their kids to have a secure 
existence. As you’ve probably already found out, any work that 
doesn’t provide a steady paycheck usually produces the 
infamous parental response “When are you going to get a real 
job?”  
I remember, when my parents asked me that question, 
thank goodness my reply was “Hopefully never!” My mother 
was devastated. My father, however, said, “Good for you. 
You’ll never get rich working on straight salary for someone 
else. If you’re going to get a job, make sure you get paid on 
percentage. Otherwise, go work for yourself !”  
 

I too encourage you to work “for yourself.” Start your own 
business, work on commission, get a percentage of revenue or 
company profits, or get stock options. Whatever your vehicle, 
make certain you create a situation that allows you to get paid 
based on your results.  
Personally, I believe just about everyone should own their 
own business, be it full-time or part-time. The first reason is 
that by far, the vast majority of millionaires became rich by being in their 
own business.  
Secondly, it’s extremely difficult to create wealth when the 
tax man is grabbing almost half of everything you earn. When 
you own a business, you can save a small fortune in taxes by 
writing off a portion of your expenses for such things as your 
car, travel, education, and even your home. For that reason 
alone, it’s worth having your own business.  
If you don’t have a brilliant business idea, not to worry: you 
can use someone else’s. First, you can become a commissioned 
salesperson. Selling is one of the world’s highest-paid 
professions. If you’re good, you can earn a fortune. Second, 
you can join a network marketing company. There are dozens of excellent ones, and they have in place all of the products 
and systems you need to get started immediately. For just a 
few bucks, you can become a distributor and have all the 
benefits of owning a business with few of the administrative 
hassles.  
If it resonates with you, network marketing can be a dy-
namite vehicle for wealth. But, and this is a big but, don’t think 
for a minute that you’re going to get a free ride. Network 
marketing will only work if you do. It will take training, time, 
and energy to succeed. But if you do, incomes in the range of 
$20,000 to $50,000 per month—that’s right, per month—are 
not uncommon. In any case, just signing 

up and becoming a part-time distributor will give you some 
excellent tax advantages, and who knows, maybe you’ll enjoy 
the product enough to offer it to others and end up making a 
nice income to boot.  
Another option is exchanging your “job” for a “contract” 
position. If your employer is willing, he or she can hire your 
company instead of you to do basically what you’re doing now. 
A few legal requirements have to be fulfilled, but for the most 
part, if you add one or two more clients, even part-time, you 
can get paid as a business owner instead of an employee and 
enjoy business-owner tax benefits. Who knows, those part-
time clients may grow to become full-time clients, which 
would then give you the opportunity to leverage yourself, hire 
other people to get all the work done, and eventually you’ll be 
running your own full-on business.  
You might think, “My employer would never go for that.” I 
wouldn’t be too sure about that. You have to understand, it 
costs a company a fortune to have an employee. Not only do 
they have to pay salary or wages, but they have to pay a whack 
of money on top of that to the government, often to the tune of 25 percent or more above what the employee earns. Add to 
that the cost of the benefits package that most employees get, 
and you’ve probably got a 50 percent savings to a company 
that chooses to hire you as an independent consultant. Of 
course you won’t be eligible for  many of the benefits you got 
as an employee, but for what you save in taxes alone, you can 
buy the best of what you need on your own.  
In the end, the only way to earn what you’re really worth is 
to get paid based on your results. Once again, my dad said it 
best: “You’ll never get rich working on straight salary for  
 
 

someone else. If you’re going to get a job, make sure you get 
paid on percentage. Otherwise, go work for yourself !”  
Now that’s sage advice!  
DECLARATION:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I choose to get paid based on my results.”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
1. If you are currently in a job getting paid based on an 
hourly wage or salary, create and propose a compensa-
tion plan to your employer that would allow you to get 
paid at least partly based on your individual results as well 
as the results of the company.  
If you own your own business, create a compensation  
plan that allows your employees or even primary sup 
pliers to get paid based more on their results and the  
results of your company.  
Put these plans into action immediately.  
2. If you are currently in a job and not being paid what 
you are worth based on the results you are producing, 
consider starting start your own business. You can 
begin part-time. You could easily join a network mar-
keting company or become a coach, teaching others 
what you know, or offer your independent consulting 
services back to the company you originally worked for, 
but this time, paid on performance and results rather 
than only for your time. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Success Story from Sean Nita  
Dear Harv,  
I can’t explain how grateful we are that we were in-
troduced to you by one of my wi fe’s friends. At the time I’d 
just received a $10,000 cut in pay. We were desperately 
looking for options, as we were not making ends meet 
anymore.  
At the Millionaire Mind Intensive, we learned the tools 
that helped us create financial freedom. Once we put the 
tools in place, miracles started to happen. We were able to 
purchase five homes within the next year. All with a 
minimum profit of at least $ 18,000 each. The fifth house had 
a profit of $300,000, six times my previous yearly salary! I 
was able to quit my job of fourteen years and become a full-
time real estate investor, givi ng me the free time to be with 
my family and friends.  
Your method of teaching at the cellular level has been a 
great key to our success. I cann ot wait for what is ahead. I 
only wish I’d learned this when I was in my twenties.  
Thank you.  
Sincerely,  
Sean Nita  
Seattle, WA

=== CHAPTER 24: "Wealth File #12: Rich people think "both". Poor people think "either/or"." ===
Wealth File #12 
Rich people think “both.” 
Poor people think “either/or.” 
 
Rich people live in a world of abundance. Poor people live in a 
world of limitations. Of course, both live in the same physical 
world, but the difference is in their perspective. Poor and most 
middle-class people come from scarcity. They live by mottos 
such as “There’s only so much to go around, there’s never 
enough, and you can’t have everything.” And although you 
may not be able to have “everything,” as in all the things in the 
world, I do think you can certainly have “everything you really 
want.”  
Do you want a successful career or a close relationship with 
your family? Both! Do you want to focus on business or have 
fun and play? Both! Do you want money or meaning in your 
life? Both! Do you want to earn a fortune or do the work you 
love? Both! Poor people always choose one, rich people 
choose both.  
Rich people understand that with a little creativity you can 
almost always figure out a way to have the best of both worlds. 
From now on, when confronted with an either/or alternative, 
the quintessential question to ask yourself is “How can I have 
both?” This question will change your life. It will take you 
from a model of scarcity and limitation to a universe of 
possibilities and abundance.  
This doesn’t just pertain to things you want, it pertains to all 
areas of life. For example, right now, I’m preparing to deal 
with an unhappy supplier that believes my company, Peak 
Potentials, should pay for certain expenses they’ve had that 
weren’t originally agreed to. My feeling is that estimat-
 

ing his costs is his business not mine, and if he’s incurred 
higher expenses, that’s something he has to deal with. I’m 
more than willing to negotiate a new agreement for next time, 
but I’m big on keeping agreements that were already made. 
Now in my “broke” days, I’d go into this discussion with the 
goal of making my point and making sure I don’t pay this guy 
one cent more than we agreed upon. And even though I’d like 
to keep him as a supplier, this would probably end up in a 
huge argument. I’d go in thinking either he wins or I win.  
Today, however, because I’ve trained myself to think in 
terms of “both,” I’m going into this discussion completely 
open to creating a situation where I’m not going to pay him 
any more money and he’s going to be extremely happy with the 
arrangements we do make. In other words, my goal is to have 
both !  
Here’s another example. Several months ago I decided to 
purchase a vacation home in Arizona. I scoured the area I was 
interested in, and every real estate agent told me, if I wanted 
three bedrooms plus a den in that vicinity, I’d have to pay over 
a million dollars. My intention was to keep my investment in this home under a million. Most people would either lower 
their expectations or raise their budget. I held out for both. I 
recently got a call that the owners of a house in the exact 
location I wanted, with the number of rooms I wanted, had 
reduced their price $200,000 to under a million. Here is 
another tribute to the intention of having both!  
Finally, I always told my parents that I didn’t want to slave 
away at work I didn’t enjoy and that I would “get rich doing 
what I love.” Their response was the usual: “You’re living in a 
dream world. Life is not a bowl of cherries.” They said,  
 
 

“Business is business, pleasure is pleasure. First you take 
care of making a living, then, if there’s any time left over, you 
can enjoy your life.”  
I remember thinking to myself, “Hmm, if I listen to them, 
I’ll end up like them. No. I’m gonna have both!” Was it tough? 
You bet. Sometimes I’d have to work at a job I hated for a 
week or two so I could eat and pay the rent. But I never lost 
my intention of having “both.” I never got stuck long-term in 
a job or business I didn’t like. Eventually I did become rich 
doing what I loved. Now that I know it can be done, I 
continue to pursue only the work and projects that I love. Best 
of all, I now have the privilege of teaching others to do the 
same.  
Nowhere is “both” thinking more important than when it 
comes to money. Poor and many middle-class people believe 
that they have to choose between money and the other aspects 
of life. Consequently they’ve rationalized a position that 
money is not as important as other things.  
Let’s set the record straight. Money is important! To say 
that it’s not as important as any of the other things in life is ludicrous. What’s more important, your arm or your leg? 
Could it be that both are important?  
Money is a lubricant. It enables you to “slide” through life 
instead of having to “scrape” by. Money brings freedom— 
freedom to buy what you want, and freedom to do what you 
want with your time. Money allows you to enjoy the finer 
things in life as well as giving you the opportunity to help 
others have the necessities in life. Most of all, having money 
allows you not to have to spend your energy worrying about 
not having money.  
Happiness is important too. Again, here’s where poor and 
middle-class people get confused. Many believe money and 

happiness are mutually exclusive, that either you can be rich or 
you can be happy. Again, this is nothing more than “poor” 
programming.  
People who are rich in every sense of the word understand 
that you have to have both. Just as you have to have both your 
arms and your legs, you have to have money and happiness.  
You Can Have Your Cake and Eat It Too!  
So here’s another major difference between rich people, 
middle-class people, and poor people:  
Rich people believe “You can have your cake and eat it 
too.”  
Middle-class people believe “Cake is too rich, so I’ll only 
have a little piece.”  
Poor people don’t believe they deserve cake, so they order a 
doughnut, focus on the hole, and wonder why they have 
“nothing.”  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Rich people believe  
“You can have your cake and eat it too.”  
Middle-class people believe  
“Cake is too rich, so I’ll only have a little piece.”  
Poor people don’t believe they deserve cake,  
so they order a doughnut, focus on the hole,  
and wonder why they have “nothing.”  
 
 
I ask you, what is the use of having your “cake” if you can’t eat 
it? What exactly are you supposed to do with it? Put 
 
 
 

it on your mantel and look at it? Cake is meant to be eaten and 
enjoyed.  
Either/or thinking also trips up people who believe that “if 
I have more, then someone else will have less.” Again, this is 
nothing more than fear-based, self-defeating programming. 
The notion that the wealthy people of the world have and are 
somehow hoarding all the money, so there’s none left for 
anyone else, is preposterous. First, this belief assumes that 
there is a limited supply of money. I’m not an economist, but 
from what I can see, they just keep printing more of the stuff 
every day. The actual money supply hasn’t been tied to any real 
asset for decades. So even if the wealthy had all the money 
today, tomorrow there’d be millions, if not billions, more 
available.  
The other thing people with this limited belief don’t seem to 
realize is that the same money can be used over and over, to 
create value for everyone. Let me give you an example I’ve 
used in our seminars. I’ll ask five people to come onstage and 
bring an item with them. I ask them to stand in a circle. Then I 
give a $5 bill to the first person and ask them to buy something from person number 2 for that money. Suppose 
they buy a pen. So now person number 1 has a pen and person 
number 2 has the $5. Person 2 now uses the same $5 bill to 
buy, say, a clipboard from person number 3. Then number 3 
uses the same $5 bill to buy a notebook from number  
4. I hope you get the picture and the point. The exact same $5 
was used to bring value to each person that had it. That same 
$5 went through five different people and created $5 worth of 
value for each and a total of $25 in value for the group. That 
$5 did not get depleted and as it circled around, created value 
for everyone.  
 

The lessons are clear. First, money does not get depleted; 
you can use the same money again and again for years and 
years and thousands and thousands of people. Second, the 
more money you have, the more you can put into the circle, 
which means other people then have more money to trade for 
more value.  
This is exactly the opposite of either/or-based thinking. To 
the contrary, when you have money and use it, you and the 
person you spend it with both have the value. Put bluntly, if 
you’re so worried about other people and making sure they get 
their share (as if there is a share), do what it takes to get rich so 
you can spread more money around.  
If I can be an example for anything, it would be that you 
can be a kind, loving, caring, generous, and spiritual person and 
be really frickin’ rich. I strongly urge you to dispel the myth 
that money is in any way bad or that you will be less “good” or 
less “pure” if you are wealthy. That belief is absolute “salami” 
(in case you’re tired of baloney), and if you keep eating it, you 
won’t just be fat, you’ll be fat and broke. Hey, what do you 
know, another example of both!  
My friends, being kind, generous, and loving has nothing to 
do with what is or isn’t in your wallet. Those attributes come 
from what is in your heart. Being pure and spiritual have 
nothing to do with what is or isn’t in your bank account; those 
attributes come from what’s in your soul. To think money 
makes you good or bad, one way or another, is either/or 
thinking and just plain “programmed garbage” that is not 
supportive to your happiness and success.  
It’s also not supportive to those around you, especially to 
children. If you’re that adamant about being a good person, 
then be “good” enough not to infect the next generation  
 

with the disempowering beliefs you may inadvertently have 
adopted.  
If you really want to live a life without limits, whatever the 
situation, let go of either/or thinking and maintain the 
intention to have “both.”  
DECLARATION:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I always think ‘both.’ ”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
   1.   Practice thinking and creating ways of having “both.”  
        Whenever alternatives are presented to you, ask yourself,         “How can I have both?”  
2. Become aware that money in circulation adds to     
      everyone’s life. Each time you spend money, say to 
      yourself, “This money will go through hundreds of  
      people and create value for all of them.”  
   3.   Think of yourself as a role model for others—showing  
         that you can be kind, generous, loving, and rich!

=== CHAPTER 25: "Wealth File #13: Rich people focus on their net worth. Poor people focus on their working income." ===
Wealth File #13  
Rich people focus on their net worth.  
Poor people focus on their working income.  
 
When it comes to money, people in our society typically ask, 
“How much do you make?” Seldom do you hear the ques-
 
 

tion “What is your net worth?” Few people talk this way, ex-
cept of course at the country club.  
In country clubs, the financial discussion almost always 
centers around net worth: “Jim just sold his stock options; he’s 
worth over three million. Paul’s company just went public; he’s 
worth eight million. Sue just sold her business; she’s now 
worth twelve million.” At the country club, you’re not going to 
hear, “Hey, did you hear that Joe got a raise? Yeah, and a two 
percent cost-of-living allowance to boot?” If you did hear that, 
you’d know you’re listening to a guest for the day.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
The true measure of wealth is net worth,  
not working income.  
 
 
The true measure of wealth is net worth, not working in-
come. Always has been, always will be. Net worth is the fi-
nancial value of everything you own. To determine your net 
worth, add up the value of everything you own, including your 
cash and investments such as stocks, bonds, real estate, the 
current value of your business if you own one, the value of 
your residence if you own it, and then subtract everything you 
owe. Net worth is the ultimate measure of wealth because, if 
necessary, what you own can eventually be liquidated into 
cash.  
Rich people understand the huge distinction between 
working income and net worth. Working income is important, 
but it is only one of the four factors that determine your net 
worth. The four net worth factors are:  
 
 

   1.  Income  
   2.  Savings     3.  Investments  
   4.  Simplification  
 
Rich people understand that building a high net worth is an 
equation that contains all four elements. Because all of these 
factors are essential, let’s examine each one.  
Income comes in two forms: working income and passive 
income. Working income is the money earned from active 
work. This includes a paycheck from a day-to-day job, or for 
an entrepreneur, the profits or income taken from a business. 
Working income requires that you are investing your own time 
and labor to earn money. Working income is important 
because, without it, it is almost impossible to address the other 
three net worth factors.  
Working income is how we fill up our financial “funnel,” so 
to speak. All things being equal, the more working income you 
earn, the more you can save and invest. Although working 
income is critical, again it is only valuable as a part of the entire 
net worth equation.  
Unfortunately, poor and many middle-class people focus 
exclusively on working income, out of the four factors. Con-
sequently, they end up with a low or no net worth.  
Passive income is money earned without you actively 
working. We will discuss passive income in greater detail a 
little later, but for now, consider it another stream of income 
filling up the funnel, which can then be used for spending, 
saving, and investing.  
Savings is also imperative. You can earn wads of money.  
 
  

But if you don’t keep any of it, you will never create wealth. 
Many people have a financial blueprint that is wired for 
spending. Whatever money they have, they spend. They 
choose immediate gratification over long-term balance. 
Spenders have three mottoes. Their first motto is “It’s only 
money.” Therefore, money is something they don’t have much 
of. Their second motto is “What goes around, comes around.” 
At least they hope so, because their third motto is “Sorry, I 
can’t right now. I’m broke.” Without creating income to fill 
the funnel and savings to keep it there, it is impossible to 
address the next net worth factor.  
Once you’ve begun saving a decent portion of your income, 
then you can move to the next stage and make your money 
grow through investing. Generally, the better you are at 
investing, the faster your money will grow and generate a 
greater net worth. Rich people take the time and energy to 
learn about investing and investments. They pride themselves 
on being excellent investors or at least hiring excellent 
investors to invest for them. Poor people think investing is 
only for rich people, so they never learn about it and stay broke. Again, every part of the equation is important.  
Our fourth net worth factor may well be the “dark horse” 
of the bunch, because few people recognize its importance in 
creating wealth. This is the factor of “simplification.” It goes 
hand in hand with saving money, whereby you consciously 
create a lifestyle in which you need less money to live on. By 
decreasing your cost of living, you increase your savings and 
the amount of funds available for investing.  
To illustrate the power of simplification, here’s the story of 
one of our Millionaire Mind participants. When Sue was only 
twenty-three, she made a wise choice: she purchased a home. 
She paid just under $300,000 at the time. Seven years 

later, in a sizzling hot market, Sue sold her home for over 
$600,000, meaning she profited over $300,000. She considered 
buying a new home, but after attending the Millionaire Mind 
Intensive Seminar, she recognized that if she invested her 
money in a secure second mortgage at 10 percent interest and 
simplified her lifestyle, she could actually be quite comfortable 
living on the earnings from her investments and not have to 
work ever again. Instead of purchasing a new home, she 
moved in with her sister. Now, at thirty years of age, Sue is 
financially free. She won her independence not through 
earning a ton of money, but by consciously scaling back her 
personal overhead. Yes, she still works—because she enjoys 
it—but she doesn’t have to. In fact, she only works six months 
of the year. The rest of the time she spends in Fiji, first 
because she loves it, and second, she says, her money goes 
even further there. Because she lives with the locals rather than 
the tourists, she doesn’t spend a lot. How many people do you 
know who would love to spend six months of each year living 
on a tropical island, never having to work again, at the ripe old 
age of thirty? How about forty? Fifty? Sixty? Ever? It’s all because Sue created a simple lifestyle and, consequently, 
doesn’t need a fortune to live on.  
So, what will it take for you to be happy financially? If you 
need to live in a mansion, have three vacation homes, own ten 
cars, take annual trips around the world, eat caviar, and drink 
the finest champagne to enjoy your life, that’s fine, but 
recognize you’ve set your bar pretty darn high, and it may take 
you a long, long time to get to a point where you’re happy.  
On the other hand, if you don’t need all the “toys” to be 
happy, you’ll probably reach your financial goal a lot sooner.  
Again, building your net worth is a four-part equation. As 
 

an analogy, imagine driving a bus with four wheels. What 
would the ride be like if you were driving on one wheel only? 
Probably slow, bumpy, full of struggle, sparks, and going in 
circles. Does that sound familiar? Rich people play the money 
game on all four wheels. That’s why their ride is fast, smooth, 
direct, and relatively easy.  
By the way, I use the analogy of a bus because once you are 
successful, your goal might be to bring others along on the 
ride with you.  
Poor and most middle-class people play the money game on 
one wheel only. They believe that the only way to get rich is to 
earn a lot of money. They believe that only because they’ve 
never been there. They don’t understand Parkinson’s Law, 
which states, “Expenses will always rise in direct proportion to 
income.”  
Here’s what’s normal in our society. You have a car, you 
make more money, and you get a better car. You have a house, 
you make more money, and you get a bigger house. You have 
clothes, you make more money, and you get nicer clothes. You 
have holidays, you make more money, and you spend more on holidays. Of course there are a few exceptions to this 
rule...very few! In general, as income goes up, expenses almost 
invariably go up too. That’s why income alone will never 
create wealth.  
This book is called Secrets of the Millionaire Mind. Does 
millionaire refer to income or net worth? Net worth. Therefore, 
if your intention is to be a millionaire or more, you must focus 
on building your net worth, which, as we’ve discussed, is based 
on much more than just your income.  
Make it a policy to know your net worth to the penny. 
Here’s an exercise that can change your financial life forever.  
Take a blank sheet of paper and title it “Net Worth.” 

Then create a simple chart that begins with zero and ends with 
whatever your net worth objective is. Note your current net 
worth as it is today. Then every ninety days, enter your new 
net worth. That’s it. If you do this, you will find yourself 
getting richer and richer. Why? Because you will be “tracking” 
your net worth.  
Remember: what you focus on expands. As I often say in 
our training, “Where attention goes, energy flows and results 
show.”  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
“Where attention goes, energy flows  
and results show.”  
 
 
By tracking your worth, you are focusing on it, and because 
what you focus on expands, your net worth will expand. By 
the way, this law goes for every other part of your life: what 
you track increases.  
To that end, I encourage you to find and work with a good 
financial planner. These professionals can help you track and 
build your net worth. They will assist you in organizing your 
finances and introduce you to a variety of vehicles for saving 
and growing your money.  
The best way to find a good planner is to seek a referral 
from a friend or associate who is happy with the person he or 
she uses. I’m not saying to take everything your planner says as 
gospel. But I am suggesting that you find a qualified 
professional with the skills to help you plan and track your 
finances. A good planner can provide you with the tools, 
software, knowledge, and recommendations to help you build 
the kind of investing habits that will produce wealth. 

Generally, I recommend finding a planner who works with an 
array of financial products rather than just insurance or just 
mutual funds. In that way, you can find out about a variety of 
options, then decide what’s right for you.  
DECLARATION:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I focus on building my net worth!”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
   1.  Focus on all four net worth factors: increasing your in 
       come, increasing your savings, increasing your investment        returns, and decreasing your cost of living by simplifying 
       your lifestyle.  
    2.  Create a net worth statement. To do this, add the current 
       dollar value of everything you own (your assets) and 
       subtract the total value of everything you owe (your 
       liabilities). Commit to tracking and revising this statement 
       each quarter. Again, by virtue of the law of focus, what        you track will increase.  
 
   3.  Hire a financial planner who is highly successful and        works with a well-known, reputable company. Again, the 
       best way to find a great financial planner is to ask friends 
       and associates for their referrals.  
 
Special Bonus: Go to www.millionairemindbook.com  and 
click on “FREE BOOK BONUSES” to receive your free “net 
worth tracking sheet.”

=== CHAPTER 26: "Wealth File #14: Rich people manage their money well. Poor people mismanage their money well." ===
Wealth File #14  
Rich people manage their money well.  
Poor people mismanage their money well.  
 
Thomas Stanley, in his best-selling book, The Millionaire Next 
Door, surveyed millionaires from across North America and 
reported on who they are and how they attained their wealth. 
The results can be summarized in one short sentence: “Rich 
people are good at managing their money.” Rich people 
manage their money well. Poor people mismanage their 
money.  
Wealthy people are not any smarter than poor people; they 
just have different and more supportive money habits. As we 
discussed in Part I of this book, these habits are primarily 
based on our past conditioning. So first, if you’re not 
managing your money properly, you were probably pro-
grammed not to manage money. Second, there’s a better than 
good chance you don’t know how to manage your money in a 
way that’s easy and effective. I don’t know about you, but 
where I went to school, Money Management 101 wasn’t 
offered. Instead we learned about the War of 1812, which of 
course is something I use every single day.  
It may not be the most glamorous of topics, but it comes 
down to this: the single biggest difference between financial 
success and financial failure is how well you manage your 
money. It’s simple: to master money, you must manage 
money.  
Poor people either mismanage their money or they avoid 
the subject of money altogether. Many people don’t like to 
manage their money because, first, they say it restricts their 
 

freedom, and second, they say they don’t have enough money 
to manage.  
As for the first excuse, managing money does not restrict 
your freedom—to the contrary, it promotes it. Managing your 
money allows you to eventually create financial freedom so 
that you never have to work again. To me, that’s real freedom.  
As for those who use the “I don’t have enough money to 
manage” rationale, they’re looking through the wrong end of 
the telescope. Rather than say “when I have plenty of money, 
I’ll begin to manage it,” the reality is “when I begin to manage 
it, I’ll have plenty of money.”  
Saying “I’ll start managing my money as soon as I get 
caught up” is like an overweight person saying “I’ll start ex-
ercising and dieting as soon as I lose twenty pounds.” It’s 
putting the cart before the horse, which leads to going 
nowhere...or even backward! First you start properly handling 
the money you have, then you’ll have more money to handle.  
In the Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar, I tell a story that 
hits most people right between the eyes. Imagine you’re 
walking along the street with a five-year-old. You come across an ice cream store and go inside. You get the child a single 
scoop of ice cream on a cone because they don’t have any 
cups. As the two of you walk outside, you notice the cone 
wobbling in the child’s tiny hands and, all of a sudden, plop. 
The ice cream falls out of the cone onto the pavement.  
The child begins to cry. So back you go into the store, and 
just as you’re about to order for the second time, the child 
notices a colorful sign with a picture of the “triple scooper” 
cone. The child points to the picture and excitedly screams, “I 
want that one!”  
 
 

Now here’s the question. Being the kind, loving, and 
generous person that you are, would you go ahead and get this 
child the triple scooper? Your initial response might be “sure.” 
However, when considering the question a little more deeply, 
most of our seminar participants respond, “No.” Because why 
would you want to set the child up to fail? The child couldn’t 
even handle a single scoop, how could the child possibly 
handle a triple scoop?  
The same holds true when it comes to the universe and you. 
We live in a kind and loving universe, and the rule is “Until 
you show you can handle what you’ve got, you won’t get any 
more!”  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Until you show you can handle what you’ve got,  
you won’t get any more!  
 
 
You must acquire the habits and skills of managing a small 
amount of money before you can have a large amount. 
Remember, we are creatures of habit, and therefore the habit 
of managing your money is more important than the amount.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
The habit of managing your money  
is more important than the amount.  
 
 
So how exactly do you manage your money? At the 
Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar, we teach what many 
believe to be an amazingly simple and effective money man-
 

agement method. It’s beyond the scope of this book to go 
over every detail; however, let me give you a couple of the 
basics so you can get started.  
Open a separate bank account designated your Financial 
Freedom Account. Put 10 percent of every dollar you receive 
(after taxes) into this fund. This money is only to be used for 
investments and buying or creating passive-income streams. 
The job of this account is to build a golden goose that lays 
golden eggs called passive income. And when do you get to 
spend this money? Never! It is never spent—only invested. 
Eventually, when you retire, you get to spend the income from 
the fund (the eggs), but never the principal itself. In this way, it 
always keeps growing and you can never go broke.  
One of our students, named Emma, recently told me her 
story. Two years ago Emma was about to claim bankruptcy. 
She didn’t want to; however, she felt she had no other option. 
She was in debt beyond what she could handle. Then she 
attended the Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar and learned 
about the money management system. Emma said, “This is it. 
This is how I’m going to get out of this mess!”  
Emma, like all the participants, was told to divide her 
money into several different accounts. “That’s just great,” she 
thought to herself. “I don’t have any money to divide up!” But 
since she wanted to try, Emma decided to divide up $1 a 
month into the accounts. Yes, that’s right, only $1 a month.  
Based on the allocation system we teach, using that one 
dollar, she put ten cents into her FFA (Financial Freedom 
Account). The first thing she thought to herself was “How the 
heck am I supposed to become financially free on ten cents a 
month?” So she committed to doubling that dollar every 
month. The second month she divided up $2, the 
 

third month $4, then $8, $16, $32, $64, and so on until the 
twelfth month was $2,048 that she was dividing up each 
month.  
Then, two years later, she began to collect some amazing 
fruits from her efforts. She was able to put $10,000 directly 
into her Financial Freedom Account! She had developed the 
habit of managing her money so well that, when a bonus check 
of $10,000 came her way, she didn’t need the money for 
anything else!  
Emma is now out of debt and on her way to becoming fi-
nancially free. All because she took action with what she’d 
learned, even if it was only with $1 a month.  
It doesn’t matter if you have a fortune right now or virtually 
nothing. What does matter is that you immediately begin to 
manage what you’ve got, and you’ll be in shock at how soon 
you get more.  
I had another student at the Millionaire Mind Intensive 
Seminar say, “How can I manage my money when I’m bor-
rowing money to live on as it is?” The answer is, borrow an 
extra dollar and manage that dollar. Even if you are borrowing or finding just a few dollars a month, you must manage that 
money, because more than a “physical” world principle is at 
play here: this is also a spiritual principle. Money miracles will 
occur once you demonstrate to the universe that you can 
handle your finances properly.  
In addition to opening a Financial Freedom bank account, 
create a Financial Freedom jar in your home and deposit 
money into it every day. It could be $10, $5, $1, a single penny, 
or all your loose change. The amount doesn’t matter; the habit 
does. The secret again is to place daily “attention” on your 
objective of becoming financially free. Like attracts like, 
money attracts more money. Let this simple jar  

 
become your “money magnet,” attracting more and more 
money and opportunities for financial freedom into your life.  
Now, I’m sure this isn’t the first time you’ve heard the ad-
vice to save 10 percent of your money for long-term investing, 
but it may be the first time you’ve heard that you must have an 
equal and opposite account specifically designed for you to 
“blow” money and play.  
One of the biggest secrets to managing money is balance. 
On one side, you want to save as much money as possible so 
you can invest it and make more money. On the other side, 
you need to put another 10 percent of your income into a 
“play” account. Why? Because we are holistic in nature. You 
cannot affect one part of your life without affecting the others. 
Some people save, save, save, and while their logical and 
responsible self is fulfilled, their “inner spirit” is not. Eventu-
ally this “fun-seeking” spirit side will say, “I’ve had enough. I 
want some attention too,” and sabotage their results.  
On the other hand, if you spend, spend, spend, not only will 
you never become rich, but the responsible part of you will 
eventually create the situation where you don’t even enjoy the things you spend your money on, and you’ll end up feeling 
guilty. The guilt will then cause you to unconsciously 
overspend as a way of expressing your emotions. Although 
you might feel better temporarily, soon it’s back to guilt and 
shame. It’s a vicious cycle, and the only way to prevent it is to 
learn how to manage your money in a way that works.  
Your play account is primarily used to nurture yourself— to 
do the things you wouldn’t normally do. It’s for the ex-
traspecial things like going to a restaurant and ordering a bottle 
of their finest wine or champagne. Or renting a boat 
 

for the day. Or staying in a high-class hotel for an extravagant 
night of fun and frolic.  
The play account rule is that it must be spent every month. 
That’s right! Each month you have to blow all the money in 
that account in a way that makes you feel rich. For example, 
imagine walking into a massage center, dumping all the money 
from your account on the counter, pointing to the massage 
therapists, and saying, “I want both of you on me. With the hot 
rocks and the frickin’ cucumbers. After that, bring me lunch!”  
Like I said, extravagant. The only way most of us will ever 
continue to follow our saving plan is by offsetting it with a 
playing plan that will reward us for our efforts. Your play ac-
count is also designed to strengthen your “receiving” muscle. 
It also makes managing money a heck of a lot more fun. In 
addition to the play account and the financial freedom ac-
count, I advise that you create four more accounts. The other 
accounts include:  
10 percent into your Long-Term Savings for Spending   
    Account  
10 percent into your Education Account  
50 percent into your Necessities Account  10 percent into your Give Account  
Again, poor people think it’s all about income; they believe 
you have to earn a fortune to get rich. Again, that’s male-cow 
manure! The fact is that if you manage your money following 
this program, you can become financially free on a relatively 
small income. If you mismanage your money, you can’t 
become financially free, even on a huge in
 

come. That is why so many high-income professionals— 
doctors, lawyers, athletes, and even accountants—are basically 
broke, because it’s not just about what comes in, it’s about 
what you do with what comes in.  
One of our attendees, John, told me that when he first 
heard about the money management system, he thought, 
“How boring! Why would anyone spend their precious time 
doing that?” Then later during the seminar he finally realized if 
he wanted to be financially free someday, especially sooner 
than later, he too would have to manage his money, just like 
the rich.  
John had to learn this new habit because it definitely wasn’t 
natural for him. He said it reminded him of when he was 
training for triathlons. He was really good at swimming and 
cycling; however, he hated the running. It hurt his feet, knees, 
and back. He was stiff after every training session. He was 
always out of breath and his lungs burned every time, even if 
he wasn’t going fast! He used to dread running. However, he 
knew that if he was to become a top triathlete, he had to learn 
to run and accept it as part of what it took to succeed. Whereas in the past John avoided running, he now decided to 
run every day. After a few months, he began enjoying running 
and actually looked forward to it each day.  
This is exactly what happened to John in the arena of 
money management. He started out hating every minute of it 
but grew to actually like it. Now he looks forward to getting 
his paycheck and dividing it into the different accounts! He 
also enjoys watching how his net worth has gone from zero to 
over $300,000 and is growing daily.  
It comes down to this: either you control money, or it will 
control you. To control money, you must manage it. 
 

 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Either you control money, or it will control you. 
 
  
I love hearing seminar graduates share how much more 
confident they feel around money, success, and themselves 
once they begin managing their money properly. The best part 
is that this confidence transfers into other parts of their lives 
and enhances their happiness, their relationships, and even 
their health.  
Money is a big part of your life, and when you learn how to 
get your finances under control, all areas of your life will soar.  
DECLARATION:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I am an excellent money manager.”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
   1.  Open your Financial Freedom bank account. Put 10  
        percent of all your income (after taxes) into this account. 
       This money is never to be spent, only invested to produce 
       passive income for your retirement.   
   2.  Create a Financial Freedom jar in your home and deposit 
       money into it every day. It could be $10, $5, $1, a single        penny, or all your loose change. Again, this will put daily 
       attention on your financial freedom, and where attention 
       goes, results show.  
 
 

 
   3.  Open a play account or have a play jar in your home  
        where you deposit 10 percent of all your income. Along  
        with your play account and your financial freedom   
        account, open four more accounts and deposit the 
       following percentages into each:  
10 percent into your Long-Term Savings for Spending   
 Account  
10 percent into your Education Account  
 Success Story from Christine Kloser  
From: Christine Kloser  
To: T. Harv Eker  
To put it simply, after attending T. Harv Eker’s Millionaire 
Mind Intensive, my relationship with money completely 
changed, and my business grew by 400 percent within one 
year.  
Most importantly, my husband and I finally “got” how 
important it was to save the first 10 percent of our income 
every month, no matter what. Now, I’m happy to say, we’ve 
saved more in the few years after attending Harv’s program 
than we had in the previous fifteen years!  
Plus, the techniques we learned for solving money issues 
in our relationship has kept us “money argument” free ever 
since.  
Harv’s money management system is easy to follow and 
works !  
To your success.  

50 percent into your Necessities Account  
10 percent into your Give Account  
 
4. Whatever money you have, begin managing it now. Do 
not wait another day. Even if you only have a dollar. 
Manage that dollar. Take ten cents and put it into your 
FFA jar, and another ten cents and put it into your play 
jar. This action alone will send a message to the 
universe that you are ready for more money. Of course 
if you can manage more, manage more.

=== CHAPTER 27: "Wealth File #15: Rich people have their money work hard for them. Poor people work hard for their money." ===
Wealth File #15  
Rich people have their money work hard for them. 
Poor people work hard for their money.  
If you’re like most people, you grew up being programmed 
that you “have to work hard for money.” Chances are good, 
however, that you didn’t grow up with the conditioning that it 
was just as important to make your money “work hard for 
you.”  
No question, working hard is important, but working hard 
alone will never make you rich. How do we know that? Take a 
look in the real world. There are millions—no, make that 
billions—of people who slave away, working their tails off all 
day and even all night long. Are they all rich? No! Are most of 
them rich? No! Are a lot of them rich? No! Most of them are 
broke or close to it. On the other hand, whom do you see 
lounging around the country clubs of the world? Who spends 
their afternoons playing golf, tennis, or sailing? Who spends 
their days shopping and their weeks vacationing? I’ll give you 
three guesses and the first two don’t count. 

Rich people, that’s who! So let’s get this straight: the idea that 
you have to work hard to get rich is bogus!  
The old Protestant work ethic states “a dollar’s work for a 
dollar’s pay.” There’s nothing wrong with that adage except 
that they forgot to tell us what to do with that “dollar’s pay.” 
Knowing what to do with that dollar is where you move from 
hard work to smart work.  
Rich people can spend their days playing and relaxing be-
cause they work smart. They understand and use leverage. 
They employ other people to work for them and their money 
to work for them.  
Yes, in my experience, you do have to work hard for your 
money. For rich people, however, this is a temporary situation. 
For poor people, it’s permanent. Rich people understand that 
“you” have to work hard until your “money” works hard 
enough to take your place. They understand that the more your 
money works, the less you will have to work.  
Remember, money is energy. Most people put work energy 
in and get money energy out. People who achieve financial 
freedom have learned how to substitute their investment of work energy with other forms of energy. These forms include 
other people’s work, business systems at work, or investment 
capital at work. Again, first you work hard for money, then 
you let money work hard for you.  
When it comes to the money game, most people don’t have 
a clue as to what it takes to win. What’s your goal? When do 
you win the game? Are you shooting for three square meals a 
day, $100,000 a year in income, becoming a millionaire, 
becoming a multimillionaire? At the Millionaire Mind Intensive 
Seminar, the goal of the money game we teach is to “never 
have to work again... unless you choose 
 

to,” and that if you work, you work “by choice, not by neces-
sity.”  
In other words, the goal is to become “financially free” as 
quickly as possible. My definition of financial freedom is 
simple: it is the ability to live the lifestyle you desire without having to 
work or rely on anyone else for money.  
Notice there is a good chance that your desired lifestyle is 
going to cost money. Therefore, to be “free,” you will need to 
earn money without working. We refer to income without 
work as passive income. To win the money game, the goal is 
to earn enough passive income to pay for your desired lifestyle. 
In short, you become financially free when your passive 
income exceeds your expenses.  
I have identified two primary sources of passive income. 
The first is “money working for you.” This includes invest-
ment earnings from financial instruments such as stocks, 
bonds, T-bills, money markets, mutual funds, as well as 
owning mortgages or other assets that appreciate in value and 
can be liquidated for cash.  
The second major source of passive income is “business 
working for you.” This entails generating ongoing income 
from businesses where you do not need to be personally 
involved for that business to operate and yield an income. 
Examples include rental real estate; royalties from books, 
music, or software; licensing your ideas; becoming a fran-
chisor; owning storage units; owning vending or other types of 
coin-operated machines; and network marketing, to name just 
a few. It also includes setting up any business under the sun or 
moon that is systematized to work without you. Again, it’s a 
matter of energy. The idea is that the business is working and 
producing value for people, instead of you. 
 

Network marketing, for example, is an amazing concept. 
First, it doesn’t usually require you to put up a lot of up-front 
capital. Second, once you’ve done the initial work, it allows 
you to enjoy ongoing residual income (another form of 
income without you working), year after year after year. Try 
creating that from a regular nine-to-five job!  
I can’t overemphasize the importance of creating passive 
income structures. It’s simple. Without passive income you can 
never be free. But, and it’s a big but, did you know that most 
people have a tough time creating passive income? There are 
three reasons. First, conditioning. Most of us were actually 
programmed not to earn passive income. When you were 
somewhere between thirteen and sixteen years old and you 
needed money, what did your parents tell you? Did they say, 
“Well, go out there and earn some passive income?” Doubtful! 
Most of us heard, “Go to work,” “Go get a job,” or something 
to that effect. We were taught to “work” for money, making 
passive income abnormal for most of us.  
Second, most of us were never taught how to earn passive 
income.  
In my school, Passive Income 101 was another subject that 
was never offered. This time I got to take woodworking and 
metalworking (notice both still entailed “working”) and make 
the perfect candleholder for my mom. Since we didn’t learn 
about creating passive income structures in school, we learned 
it elsewhere, right? Doubtful. The end result is that most of us 
don’t know much about it, and therefore don’t do much about 
it.  
Finally, since we were never exposed to or taught about 
passive income and investing, we have never given it much 
attention. We have largely based our career and business 
choices on generating working income. If you understood 

from an early age that a primary financial goal was to create 
passive income, wouldn’t you reconsider some of those career 
choices?  
I’m always recommending to folks choosing or changing 
their business or career to find a direction where generating 
streams of passive income is natural and relatively easy. This is 
especially important today because so many people work in 
service businesses where they have to be there personally to 
make money. There’s nothing wrong with being in a personal 
service business, other than that unless you get on your 
investment horse pretty soon and do exceptionally well, you’ll 
be trapped into working forever.  
By choosing business opportunities that immediately or 
eventually produce passive income, you’ll have the best of 
both worlds—working income now and passive income later. 
Refer back a few paragraphs to review some of the passive 
business income options we discussed.  
Unfortunately, almost everyone has a money blueprint that 
is set for earning working income and against earning passive 
income. This attitude will be radically changed after you attend the Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar, where using 
experiential techniques, we change your money blueprint so 
that earning a massive passive income is normal and natural 
for you.  
Rich people think long-term. They balance their spending 
on enjoyment today with investing for freedom tomorrow. 
Poor people think short-term. They run their lives based on 
immediate gratification. Poor people use the excuse “How can 
I think about tomorrow when I can barely survive today?” The 
problem is that, eventually, tomorrow will become today; if 
you haven’t taken care of today’s problem, you’ll be saying the 
same thing again tomorrow too.  

To increase your wealth, you either have to earn more or 
live on less. I don’t see anyone putting a gun to your head 
telling you the house you have to live in, the kind of car you 
have to drive, the clothes you have to wear, or the food you 
have to eat. You have the power to make choices. It’s a matter 
of priorities. Poor people choose now, rich people choose 
balance. I think about my in-laws.  
For twenty-five years my wife’s parents owned a variety 
store, a low-end version of a 7-Eleven and a lot smaller. Most 
of their income came from the sale of cigarettes, candy bars, 
ice cream bars, gum, and sodas. They didn’t even sell lottery 
tickets in those days. The average sale was less than a dollar. In 
short, they were in a “penny” business. Still, they saved most 
of those pennies. The didn’t eat out; they didn’t buy fancy 
clothes; they didn’t drive the latest car. They lived comfortably 
but modestly and eventually paid off their mortgage and even 
bought half of the plaza the store was located within. At the 
age of fifty-nine, by saving and investing “pen-nies,”my father-
in-law was able to retire.  
I hate to be the one to have to tell you this, but for the most 
part, buying things for immediate gratification is nothing more 
than a futile attempt to make up for our dissatisfaction in life. 
More often than not, “spending” money you don’t have comes 
from “expending” emotions you do have. This syndrome is 
commonly known as retail therapy. Overspending and the 
need for immediate gratification have little to do with the 
actual item you’re buying, and everything to do with lack of 
fulfillment in your life. Of course, if overspending isn’t coming 
from your immediate emotions, it arises from your money 
blueprint.  
According to Natalie, another of our students, her parents 
were the ultimate cheapskates! They used coupons for every

thing. Her mother had a file box full of coupons all sorted by 
category. Her father had a fifteen-year-old car that was rusting, 
and Natalie was embarrassed to be seen in it, especially when 
her mom picked her up from school. Anytime she got in the 
car, Natalie prayed that no one was looking. On vacation, her 
family never stayed in a motel or hotel; they didn’t even fly, 
but drove eleven days across the country and camped the 
whole way, every year!  
Everything was “too expensive.” The way they acted, Na-
talie thought her parents were broke. But her dad earned what 
she believed was a lot of money at the time, $75,000 a year. 
She was confused.  
Because she hated their stingy habits, she became the op-
posite. She wanted everything to be high-class and expensive. 
When she moved out on her own and started making her own 
money, she didn’t even realize it, but in a flash, she had spent 
all the money she had, and then some!  
Natalie had credit cards, membership cards, you name it. 
She racked up all of them to the point where she couldn’t even 
pay the minimums anymore! That’s when she took the Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar, and she says it saved her 
life.  
At the Millionaire Mind Intensive, during the section where 
we identify your “money personality,” Natalie’s whole world 
changed. She recognized why she had been spending all her 
money. It was a form of resentment toward her parents for 
being so cheap. It was also to prove to herself and the world 
that she wasn’t cheap. Since the course, with her blueprint 
changed, Natalie says she no longer has the urge to spend her 
money in “stupid” ways.  
Natalie related she was recently walking through a mall and 
noticed this gorgeous light brown suede and fur coat  

hanging in the window display of one of her favorite stores. 
Immediately her mind said, “That coat would look great on 
you, especially with your blond hair. You need that; you don’t 
have a really nice, dressy winter coat.” So she walked into the 
store, and as she was trying it on, she noticed the price tag, 
$400. She had never spent that much on a coat before. Her 
mind said, “So what, the coat looks gorgeous on you! Get it. 
You’ll make the money up later.”  
This is where she says she discovered how profound the 
Millionaire Mind Intensive is. Almost as soon as her mind 
suggested that she buy the coat, her new and more supportive 
mind “file” came up and said, “You’d be much better off 
putting that four hundred dollars toward your FFA account! 
What do you need this coat for? You already have a winter 
coat that’s okay for now.”  
Before she knew it, she was putting the coat on hold until 
the next day instead of buying it right there in the moment as 
usual. She never went back to get the coat.  
Natalie realized that her mental “material gratification” files 
had been replaced with “financial freedom” files. She wasn’t programmed to spend anymore. She now knows it’s fine to 
take the best of what her parents modeled for her and save 
money, and at the same time, to treat herself to nice things 
with her play account.  
Natalie then sent her parents to the course so they could be 
more balanced as well. She’s thrilled to report, they now stay in 
motels (not hotels yet), they bought a new car, and in learning 
how to make their money work for them, they’ve retired as 
millionaires.  
Natalie now understands that she doesn’t have to be as 
“cheap” as her parents were to become a millionaire. But she 
 

also knows that if she spends her money unconsciously as 
before, she’ll never be financially free. Natalie said, “It feels 
amazing to have my money and my mind under control.”  
Again, the idea is to have your money work as hard for you 
as you do for it, and that means you have to save and invest 
rather than make it your mission in life to spend it all. It’s 
almost funny: rich people have a lot of money and spend a 
little, while poor people have a little money and spend a lot.  
Long-term versus short-term: poor people work to earn 
money to live today; rich people work to earn money to pay 
for their investments, which will pay for their future.  
Rich people buy assets, things that will likely go up in value. 
Poor people buy expenses, things that will definitely go down 
in value. Rich people collect land. Poor people collect bills.  
I’ll tell you the same thing I tell my kids: “Buy real estate.” 
It’s best if you can purchase property that can produce positive 
cash flow, but as far as I’m concerned, any real estate is better 
than no real estate. Sure, real estate has its ups and downs, but 
in the end, be it five, ten, twenty, or thirty years from now, you 
can bet it will be worth a heck of a lot more than it is today, and it could be all you need to get rich.  
Buy what you can afford now. If you need more capital to 
get involved, you can partner with people you trust and know 
well. The only way to get in trouble with real estate is to 
overextend yourself or have to sell in a down market. If you 
heed my earlier advice and manage your money properly, the 
likelihood of this happening will be extremely slim and likely 
none. As the saying goes, “Don’t wait to buy real estate, buy 
real estate and wait.” 
 
 
 

Since I gave you a previous example involving my in-laws, 
it’s only fair I give you an example involving my own parents. 
My parents weren’t poor, but they barely made the middle 
class. My dad worked extremely hard and my mom wasn’t 
physically well, and so she stayed home with us kids. My dad 
was a carpenter and recognized that all the builders who 
employed him were developing land they had purchased years 
and years ago. He also recognized they were all fairly rich. My 
parents too saved their pennies and eventually had enough to 
buy a three-acre parcel of land about twenty miles outside the 
city in which they lived. It cost them $60,000. Ten years later, a 
developer decided he wanted to build a strip mall on that 
property. My parents sold for $600,000. Less their original 
investment, that’s an average earnings of $54,000 a year from 
their investment, while my dad earned only about $15,000 to a 
high of $20,000 a year from his job. Of course they are retired 
now and live quite comfortably, but I guarantee that without 
the purchase and sale of this property, they would have been 
living by the skin of their teeth. Thank goodness my father 
recognized the power of investment and especially the value of investing in real estate. Now you know why I collect land.  
While poor people see a dollar as a dollar to trade for 
something they want right now, rich people see every dollar as 
a “seed” that can be planted to earn a hundred more dollars, 
which can then be replanted to earn a thousand more dollars. 
Think about it. Every dollar you spend today may actually cost 
you a hundred dollars tomorrow. Personally, I consider each 
of my dollars to be investment “soldiers,” and their mission is 
“freedom.” Needless to say, I’m careful with my “freedom 
fighters” and don’t get rid of them quickly or easily. 
 
 

 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Rich people see every dollar as a “seed”  
that can be planted to earn a hundred  
more dollars, which can then be replanted  
to earn a thousand more dollars.  
 
 
The trick is to get educated. Learn about the investment 
world. Become familiar with a variety of different investment 
vehicles and financial instruments, such as real estate, 
mortgages, stocks, funds, bonds, currency exchange, the whole 
gamut. Then choose one primary area in which to become an 
expert. Begin investing in that area and then diversify into 
more, later.  
It comes down to this: poor people work hard and spend all 
their money, which results in their having to work hard 
forever. Rich people work hard, save, and then invest their 
money so they never have to work hard again.  
DECLARATION:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“My money works hard for me and makes me more 
and more money.”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
   1.  Get educated. Take investment seminars. Read at least   
       one investment book a month. Read magazines such as 
       Money, Forbes, Barron’s, and the Wall Street Journal. I’m not 
       suggesting you follow their advice, I’m sug- 
 

gesting you get familiar with what financial options  
are out there. Then choose an arena to become an ex pert in and begin investing in that area.  
 
   2.  Change your focus from “active” income to “passive”  
        income. List at least three specific strategies with which 
        you could create income without working, in either the 
        investment or the business field. Begin researching and 
        then take action on these strategies.  
 
   3.  Don’t wait to buy real estate. Buy real estate and wait.

=== CHAPTER 28: "Wealth File #16: Rich people act in spite of fear. Poor people let fear stop them." ===
Wealth File #16  
Rich people act in spite of fear.  
Poor people let fear stop them.  
 
Earlier in this book we discussed the Process of Manifestation. 
Let’s review the formula: thoughts lead to feelings, feelings 
lead to actions, actions lead to results.  
Millions of people “think” about getting rich, and thou-
sands and thousands of people do affirmations, visualizations, 
and meditations for getting rich. I meditate almost every day. 
Yet I’ve never sat there meditating or visualizing and had a bag 
of money drop on my head. I guess I’m just one of those 
unfortunate ones who actually has to do something to be a 
success.  
Affirmations, meditations, and visualizations are all won-
derful tools, but as far as I can tell, none of them on its own is 
going to bring you real money in the real world. In the real 
world, you have to take real “action” to succeed. Why is action 
so critical?  
Let’s go back to our Process of Manifestation. Look at 

thoughts and feelings. Are they part of the inner world or 
outer world? Inner world. Now look at results. Are they 
part of the inner or outer world? Outer world. That means 
action is the “bridge” between the inner world and the outer 
world.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Action is the “bridge” between the inner world  
and the outer world.   
 
So if action is so important, what prevents us from taking 
the actions we know we need to take?  
Fear!  
Fear, doubt, and worry are among the greatest obstacles, 
not only to success, but to happiness as well. Therefore, one of 
the biggest differences between rich people and poor people is 
that rich people are willing to act in spite of fear. Poor people 
let fear stop them.  
Susan Jeffers even wrote a fantastic book about this, enti-
tled Feel the Fear and Do It Anyway. The biggest mistake most 
people make is waiting for the feeling of fear to subside or 
disappear before they are willing to act. These people usually 
wait forever.  
One of our most popular programs is the Enlightened 
Warrior Training Camp. In that training, we teach that a true 
warrior can “tame the cobra of fear.” It doesn’t say kill the 
cobra. It doesn’t say get rid of the cobra, and it certainly 
doesn’t say run away from the cobra. It says “tame” the cobra.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
A true warrior can “tame the cobra of fear.”  
 

 
It’s imperative to realize that it is not necessary to try to get 
rid of fear in order to succeed. Rich and successful people 
have fear, rich and successful people have doubts, rich and 
successful people have worries. They just don’t let these 
feelings stop them. Unsuccessful people have fears, doubts, 
and worries, then let those feelings stop them.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
It is not necessary to try to get rid of fear  
in order to succeed.  
 
 
Because we are creatures of habit, we need to practice act-
ing in spite of fear, in spite of doubt, in spite of worry, in spite 
of uncertainty, in spite of inconvenience, in spite of 
discomfort, and even to practice acting when we’re not in the 
mood to act.  
I remember teaching an evening seminar in Seattle, and near 
the end, I was letting people know about the upcoming three-
day Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar being held in 
Vancouver. This one fella stands up and says, “Harv, I’ve had 
at least a dozen of my family and friends attend the course, 
and the results have been absolutely phenomenal. Every one 
of them is ten times happier than before, and they’re all on the 
road to financial success. They all said it was life changing, and 
if you were holding the course in Seattle, I’d definitely come 
too.”  
I thanked him for his testimonial and then asked if he was 
open to some coaching. He agreed and I said, “I have only 
three words for you.” He cheerfully replied, “What are they?” 
To which I tersely responded, “You’re frickin’ broke!”  
Then I asked him how he was doing financially. He 

sheepishly replied, “Not too good.” Of course I replied, “No 
kidding.” I then began ranting and raving at the front of the 
room: “If you are going to let a three-hour drive or a three-
hour flight or a three-day trek stop you from doing something 
you need and want to do, then what else will stop you? Here’s 
the easy answer: anything! Anything will stop you. Not because 
of the size of the challenge but because of the size of you!  
“It’s simple,” I continued. “Either you are a person who will 
be stopped, or you are a person who won’t be stopped. You 
choose. If you want to create wealth or any other kind of 
success, you have to be a warrior. You have to be willing to do 
whatever it takes. You have to ‘train’ yourself to not be stopped by 
anything.  
“Getting rich is not always convenient. Getting rich is not 
always easy. In fact, getting rich can be pretty damn hard. But 
so what? One of the key enlightened warrior principles states, 
‘If you are willing to do only what’s easy, life will be hard. But 
if you are willing to do what’s hard, life will be easy.’ Rich 
people don’t base their actions on what’s easy and convenient; 
that way of living is reserved for the poor and most of the middle class.”  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
If you are willing to do only what’s easy,  
life will be hard. But if you are willing to do  
what’s hard, life will be easy.  
 
 
The tirade was over. The crowd was silent.  
Later, the fella who’d started the entire discussion came up 
and thanked me profusely for “opening his eyes.” Of 
 
 

course he registered for the course (even though it was in 
Vancouver), but what was really funny was overhearing him 
on the phone as I was leaving, fervently giving the exact same 
speech I had just given him to one of his friends on the other 
end of the line. I guess it worked because the next day he 
called in with three more registrations. They were all from the 
East Coast... and they were all coming to Vancouver!  
Now that we’ve addressed convenience, what about dis-
comfort? Why is acting in spite of discomfort so important? 
Because “comfortable” is where you’re at now. If you want to 
move to a new level in your life, you must break through your 
comfort zone and practice doing things that are not 
comfortable.  
Let’s suppose you are currently leading a level 5 life and you 
want to move to a level 10 life. Level 5 and below are within 
your comfort zone, but level 6 and above are outside your box, 
in your “uncomfort” zone. Meaning, to get to a level 10 life 
from a level 5 life, you will have to travel through your 
uncomfort zone.  
Poor people and most of the middle class are not willing to 
be uncomfortable. Remember, being comfortable is their 
biggest priority in life. But let me tell you a secret that only rich 
and highly successful people know: being comfortable is highly 
overrated. Being comfortable may make you feel warm, fuzzy, 
and secure, but it doesn’t allow you to grow. To grow as a 
person you have to expand your comfort zone. The only time 
you can actually grow is when you are outside your comfort 
zone.  
Let me ask you a question. The first time you tried some-
thing new, was it comfortable or uncomfortable? Usually 
uncomfortable. But what happened afterward? The more  
 

you did it, the more comfortable it became, right? That’s how 
it goes. Everything is uncomfortable at the beginning, but if 
you stick with it and continue, you will eventually move 
through the uncomfort zone and succeed. Then you will have 
a new, expanded comfort zone, which means you will have 
become a “bigger” person.  
Again, the only time you are actually growing is when you 
are uncomfortable. From now on, whenever you feel un-comfortable, instead of retreating back into your old comfort 
zone, pat yourself on the back and say, “I must be growing,” 
and continue moving forward.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
The only time you are actually growing  
is when you are uncomfortable.  
 
 
If you want to be rich and successful, you’d better get 
comfortable with being uncomfortable. Consciously practice 
going into your uncomfort zone and doing what scares you. 
Here’s an equation I want you to remember for the rest of 
your life: CZ = WZ.  
It means your “comfort zone” equals your “wealth zone.”  
By expanding your comfort zone, you will expand the size 
of your income and wealth zone. The more comfortable you 
have to be, the fewer risks you will be willing to take, the fewer 
opportunities you will take advantage of, the fewer people you 
will meet, and the fewer new strategies you will try. Do you 
catch my drift? The more comfort becomes your priority, the 
more contracted you become with fear.  
On the contrary, when you are willing to s-t-r-e-t-c-h 
yourself, you expand your opportunity zone, and this allows 
 

you to attract and hold more income and wealth. Again, when 
you have a large “container” (comfort zone), the universe will 
rush to fill the space. Rich an d successful people have a big 
comfort zone, and they are constantly expanding it to be able 
to attain and hold more wealth.  
Nobody ever died of discomfort, yet living in the name of 
comfort has killed more ideas, more opportunities, more ac-
tions, and more growth than everything else combined. 
Comfort kills! If your goal in life is to be comfortable, I 
guarantee two things. First, you will never be rich. Second, you 
will never be happy. Happiness doesn’t come from living a 
lukewarm life, always wondering what could have been. 
Happiness comes as a result of being in our natural state of 
growth and living up to our fullest potential.  
Try this. The next time you are feeling uncomfortable, 
uncertain, or afraid, instead of shrinking and retreating back to 
safety, press forward. Notice and experience the feelings of 
discomfort, recognizing that they are only feelings—and that 
they do not have the power to stop you. If you doggedly 
continue in spite of discomfort, you will eventually reach your goal.  
Whether the feelings of discomfort ever subside doesn’t 
matter. In fact, when they do lessen, take it as a sign to in-
crease your objective, because the minute you get comfortable, 
you have stopped growing. Again, to grow yourself to your 
fullest potential, you must always be living at the edge of your 
box.  
And because we are creatures of habit, we must practice. I 
urge you to practice acting in spite of fear, practice acting in 
spite of inconvenience, practice acting in spite of discomfort, 
and practice acting even when you’re not in the mood. 
 

By doing so, you will quickly move to a higher level of life. 
Along the way, make sure you check your bank account, be-
cause, guaranteed, that will be growing quickly too.  
At this point in some of my evening seminars I ask the au-
dience, “How many of you are willing to practice acting in 
spite of fear and discomfort?” Usually everyone puts his or her 
hand up (probably because they’re scared to death I’m going 
to “pick” on them). Then I say, “Talk is cheap! Let’s see 
whether you mean it.” I then pull out a wooden arrow with a 
steel-pointed tip and explain that as a practice for this 
discipline, you’re going to break this arrow with your throat. I 
then demonstrate how the steel point goes into the soft part of 
your throat, while another person holds the other end of the 
arrow against their outstretched palm. The idea is to walk 
straight into the arrow and break it using only your throat 
before it pierces through your neck.  
At this point most people are in shock! Sometimes I pick 
one volunteer to do this exercise, sometimes I hand out arrows 
to everyone. I’ve done audiences where over a thousand 
people are breaking arrows!  
Can this feat be accomplished? Yes. Is it scary? You bet. Is 
it uncomfortable? Absolutely. But again, the idea is that fear 
and discomfort do not stop you. The idea is to practice, to 
train yourself to do whatever it takes, and to act in spite of 
anything that might be in your way.  
Do most people break the arrow? Yes, everyone who walks 
into it with 100 percent commitment breaks it. However, those 
who walk into it slowly, halfheartedly, or not at all, don’t.  
After the arrow exercise I ask people, “How many of you 
found the arrow easier to break physically than what your 
 
 

mind made it up to be?” All agree it was actually a lot easier 
than they thought it would be. Why is this so? Here comes one 
of the most important lessons you will ever learn.  
Your mind is the greatest soap-opera scriptwriter in history. 
It makes up incredible stories, usually based in dramas and 
disasters, of things that never happened and probably never 
will. Mark Twain said it best: “I’ve had thousands of problems 
in my life, most of which never actually happened.”  
One of the most important things you can ever understand 
is that you are not your mind. You are much bigger and greater 
than your mind alone. Your mind is a part of you just as your 
hand is a part of you.  
Here’s a thought-provoking question: What if you had a 
hand that was just like your mind? It was scattered all over the 
place, it was always beating you up, and it never shut up. What 
would you do with it? Most people answer something like 
“Cut it off !” But your hand is a powerful tool, so why would 
you cut it off ? The real answer of course is you’d want to 
control it, manage it, and train it to work for you instead of 
against you.  
Training and managing your own mind is the most important skill you 
could ever own, in terms of both happiness and success, and that’s 
exactly what we’ve been doing with this book and will 
continue to do with you should you attend one of our live 
programs.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
Training and managing your own mind is the most 
important skill you could ever own, in terms of both 
happiness and success.  
_____________________________________________ 
 
 

How do you train your mind? You start with observation. 
Notice how your mind consistently produces thoughts that are 
not supportive to your wealth and happiness. As you identify 
those thoughts, you can begin to consciously replace those 
nonempowering thoughts with empowering ones. Where do 
you find these empowering ways of thinking? Right here, in 
this book. Every one of the declarations in this book is an 
empowering and successful way of thinking.  
Adopt these ways of thinking, being, and attitudes as your 
own. You don’t have to wait for a formal invitation. Decide 
right now that your life would be better if you chose to think 
in the ways we’ve been describing in this book, instead of 
through the self-defeating mental habits of the past. Make a 
decision that from now on, your thoughts do not run you, you 
run your thoughts. From now on, your mind is not the captain 
of the ship, you are the captain of the ship, and your mind 
works for you.  
You can choose your thoughts.  
You have the natural ability to cancel any thought that is 
not supporting you, at any time. You can also install self-empowering thoughts at any time, simply by choosing to focus 
on them. You have the power to control your mind.  
As I mentioned earlier, at one of my seminars one of my 
closest friends and best-selling author Robert Allen said 
something quite profound: “No thought lives in your head 
rent-free.”  
What that means is that you will pay for negative thoughts. 
You will pay in money, in energy, in time, in health, and in 
your level of happiness. If you want to quickly move to a new 
level of life, begin dividing your thoughts into one of two 
categories—empowering or disem- 
 

powering. Observe the thoughts you have, and determine if 
they are supportive to your ha ppiness and success or not 
supportive. Then choose to entertain only empowering 
thoughts while refusing to focus on disempowering ones. 
When a nonsupportive thought bubbles up, say “Cancel” or 
“Thank you for sharing” and replace it with a more supportive 
way of thinking. I call this process power thinking, and mark 
my words, if you practice it, your life will never be the same 
again. That is a promise!  
So what is the difference between “power thinking” and 
“positive” thinking? The distinction is slight but profound. To 
me, people use positive thinking to pretend that everything is 
rosy, when they really believe that it’s not. With power 
thinking, we understand that everything is neutral, that nothing 
has meaning except for the meaning we give it, and that we are 
going to make up a story and give something its meaning.  
This is the difference between positive thinking and power 
thinking. With positive thinking, people believe that their 
thoughts are true. Power thinking recognizes that our thoughts 
are not true, but since we’re making up a story anyway, we might as well make up a story that supports us. We don’t do 
this because our new thoughts are “true” in an absolute sense, 
but because they are more useful to us and feel a heck of a lot 
better than nonsupportive ones.  
Before we leave this section, I must warn you—do not at-
tempt the arrow-break exercise at home. The exercise has to 
be set up in a specific way or you could hurt yourself as well as 
others around you. At our programs we use protective 
equipment. If you have an interest in these types of break-
through exercises, see the description of the Enlightened 
 

Warrior Training Camp on our Web site. This program will 
give you all you can handle and more!  
DECLARATIONS:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I act in spite of fear.”  
“I act in spite of doubt.”  
“I act in spite of worry.”  
“I act in spite of inconvenience.”  
“I act in spite of discomfort.”  
“I act when I’m not in the mood.”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
   1.  List your three greatest worries, concerns, or fears re 
       garding money and wealth. Challenge them. For each, 
       write down what you would do if the situation you fear        actually happened. Could you still survive? Could you 
       make a comeback? Chances are that the answers are yes.  
      Now quit worrying and start getting rich!  
 
   2.  Practice getting out of your comfort zone. Intentionally  
       make decisions that are uncomfortable for you. Speak to 
       people you normally wouldn’t speak to, ask for a raise in  
       your job or raise your prices in your business, wake up an 
       hour earlier each day, walk in the woods at night. Take the        Enlightened Warrior Training. It will train you to be 
       unstoppable!  
 
   3.  Employ “power thinking.” Observe yourself and your   
       thought patterns. Entertain only thoughts that sup- 
 
 

port your happiness and success. Challenge the little voice in 
your head whenever it tells you “I can’t” or “I don’t want to” 
or “I don’t feel like it.” Don’t allow this fear-based, comfort-
based voice to get the better of you. Make a pact with yourself 
that whenever the voice tries to stop you from doing 
something that would be supportive to your success, you will 
do it anyway, to show your mind that you are the boss, not it. 
Not only will you increase your confidence dramatically, but 
eventually this voice will get quieter and quieter as it 
recognizes it has little effect on you.  
 
 
 
 Success Story from Andrew Wilton  
Harv,  
My name is Andrew Wilton and I am eighteen years old. I 
have just completed my first y ear of university. I attended 
the Millionaire Mind Intensiv e two years ago and I have 
been using the techniques I learned there ever since.  
This past February for reading week, while my friends 
were working or visiting their families, using the money that 
I had saved through your methods, I was able to spend ten 
days on the southern coast of S pain. What an experience!  
I wouldn’t have had the financial freedom to go wherever 
I wanted and do whatever I wanted if I hadn’t implemented 
the strategies I learned at the MMI.  
Thank you, Harv.

=== CHAPTER 29: "Wealth File #17: Rich people constantly learn and grow. Poor people think they already know." ===
Wealth File #17 
Rich people constantly learn and grow. 
Poor people think they already know. 
 
At the beginning of my live seminars, I introduce people to 
what I call “the three most dangerous words in the English 
language.” Those words are “I know that.” So how do you 
know if you know something? Simple. If you live it, you know 
it. Otherwise, you heard about it, you read about it, or you talk 
about it, but you don’t know it. Put bluntly, if you’re not really 
rich and really happy, there’s a good chance you still have 
some things to learn about money, success, and life.  
As I explained at the beginning of this book, during my 
“broke” days, I was fortunate to get some advice from a mul-
timillionaire friend who had some compassion for my plight. 
Remember what he said to me: “Harv, if you’re not as suc-
cessful as you’d like to be, there’s something you don’t know.” 
Fortunately, I took his suggestion to heart and went from 
being a “know-it-all” to a “learn-it-all.” From that moment on, 
everything changed.  
Poor people are often trying to prove that they’re right. 
They put on a mask as if they’ve got it all figured out, and it’s 
just some stroke of bad luck or a temporary glitch in the 
universe that has them broke or struggling.  
One of my more famous lines is “You can be right or you 
can be rich, but you can’t be both.” Being “right” means hav-
ing to hold on to your old ways of thinking and being. Un-
fortunately, these are the ways that got you exactly where you 
are now. This philosophy also pertains to happiness, in that 
“you can be right or you can be happy.”  
 

 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
You can be right or you can be rich,  
but you can’t be both.  
 
 
There’s a saying that author and speaker Jim Rohn uses that 
makes perfect sense here: “If you keep doing what you’ve 
always done, you’ll keep getting what you’ve always got.” You 
already know “your” way, what you need is to know some new 
ways. That’s why I wrote this book. My goal is to give you 
some new mental files to add to the ones you already have. 
New files mean new ways of thinking, new actions, and 
therefore new results.  
That’s why it’s imperative you continue to learn and grow.  
Physicists agree that nothing in this world is static. Every-
thing alive is constantly changing. Take any plant. If a plant 
isn’t growing, it is dying. It’s the same with people as well as all 
other living organisms: if you are not growing, you are dying.  
One of my favorite sayings is by author and philosopher 
Eric Hoffer, who said, “The learners shall inherit the earth 
while the learned will be beautifully equipped to live in a world 
that no longer exists.” Another way of saying that is, if you’re 
not continuously learning, you will be left behind.  
Poor people claim they can’t afford to get educated due to 
lack of time or money. On the other hand, rich people relate 
to Benjamin Franklin’s quote: “If you think education is 
expensive, try ignorance.” I’m sure you’ve heard this before, 
“knowledge is power,” and power is the ability to act.  
Whenever I offer the Millionaire Mind Intensive program, I 
find it interesting that it’s usually the people who are 
 
 

the most broke who say, “I don’t need the course,” “I don’t 
have the time,” or “I don’t have the money.” Meanwhile, the 
millionaires and multimillionaires all register and say, “If I can 
learn just one new thing or make one improvement, it’s worth 
it.” By the way, if you don’t have the time to do the things you 
want to do or need to do, you’re most probably a modern 
slave. And if you don’t have the money to learn how to be 
successful, you probably need it more than anyone. I’m sorry, 
but saying “I don’t have the money” just doesn’t cut it. When 
will you have the money? What is going to be different a year 
or two years or five years from now? Here’s the easy answer: 
nothing! And you’ll be saying the exact same words again at 
that time.  
The only way I know for you to have the money you want is 
to learn how to play the money game inside and out. You need 
to learn the skills and strategies to accelerate your income, to 
manage money, and to invest it effectively. The definition of 
insanity is doing the same thing over and over and expecting 
different results. Look, if what you’ve been doing were 
working, you’d already be rich and happy. Anything else your mind conjures up as a response is nothing more than an 
excuse or justification.  
I hate to be so in your face about it, but the way I see it, 
that’s my job. I believe a good coach will always ask more of 
you than you will ask of yourself. Otherwise, why the heck do 
you need one? As a coach, my goal is to train you, inspire you, 
encourage you, coax you, and have you observe, in full living 
color, what is holding you back. In short, to do whatever it 
takes to move you to the next level in your life. If I have to, I’ll 
rip you apart and then piece you back together in a way that 
works. I’ll do whatever it takes to make you ten times happier 
and a hundred times as rich. If you’re looking 

for Pollyanna, I’m not your guy. If you want to move quickly 
and permanently, let’s continue.  
Success is a learnable skill. You can learn to succeed at 
anything. If you want to be a great golfer, you can learn how to 
do it. If you want to be a great piano player, you can learn how 
to do it. If you want to be truly happy, you can learn how to 
do it. If you want to be rich, you can learn how to do it. It 
doesn’t matter where you are right now. It doesn’t matter 
where you are starting from. What matters is that you are 
willing to learn.  
One of my better-known quotes is “Every master was once 
a disaster.” Here’s an example. A while ago, I had an Olympic 
skier in my seminar. When I made that statement, he stood up 
and asked to share. He was adamant, and for some reason I 
thought he was going to vehemently disagree. To the contrary, 
he told everyone the story of how when he was a kid, he was 
the worst skier of all his buddies. How they sometimes 
wouldn’t call him to go skiing with them because he was so 
slow. To fit in, he went to the mountain early each weekend 
and took lessons. Pretty soon he not only kept up with his buddies, he surpassed them. He then got involved in the racing 
club and learned from a top-ranked coach. His exact words 
were “I might be a master skier now, but I definitely started 
out as a disaster. Harv’s absolutely right. You can learn to 
succeed at anything. I learned how to succeed at skiing, and 
my next goal is to learn how to succeed with money!”  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
“Every master was once a disaster.”  
—T. Harv Eker 
 
  

No one comes out of the womb a financial genius. Every 
rich person learned how to succeed at the money game, and so 
can you. Remember, your motto is, if they can do it, I can do 
it!  
Becoming rich isn’t as much about getting rich financially as 
about whom you have to become, in character and mind, to 
get rich. I want to share a secret with you that few people 
know: the fastest way to get rich and stay rich is to work on 
developing you! The idea is to grow yourself into a “successful” 
person. Again, your outer world is merely a reflection of your 
inner world. You are the root; your results are the fruits.  
There’s a saying I like: “You take yourself with you wher-
ever you go.” If you grow yourself to become a successful 
person, in strength of character and mind, you will naturally be 
successful in anything and everything you do. You will gain the 
power of absolute choice. You will gain the inner power and 
ability to choose any job, business, or investment arena and 
know you’ll be a success. This is the essence of this book. 
When you are a level 5 person, you get level 5 results. But if 
you can grow into a level 10 person, you will get level 10 results.  
Heed this warning, however. If you don’t do the inner work 
on yourself, and somehow you make a lot of money, it would 
most likely be a stroke of luck and there’s a good chance you’d 
lose it. But if you become a successful “person” inside and out, 
you’ll not only make it, you’ll keep it, grow it, and most 
important, you’ll be truly happy.  
Rich people understand the order to success is BE, DO, 
HAVE.  
Poor and middle-class people believe the order to success is 
HAVE, DO, BE.  
 

Poor and most middle-class people believe “If I have a lot of 
money, then I could do what I want and I’d be a success.”  
Rich people understand, “If I become a successful person, I 
will be able to do what I need to do to have what I want, in-
cluding a lot of money.”  
Here’s something else only rich people know: the goal of 
creating wealth is not primarily to have a lot of money, the 
goal of creating wealth is to help you grow yourself into the 
best person you can possibly be. In fact, that is the goal of all 
goals, to grow yourself as a person. World-renowned singer 
and actress Madonna was asked why she kept changing her 
persona, her music, and her style every year. She responded 
that music was her way to express her “self ” and that rein-
venting herself each year forces her to grow into the kind of 
person she wants to be.  
In short, success is not a “what,” it’s a “who.” The good 
news is that “who” you are is totally trainable and learnable. I 
should know. By no means am I perfect or even close to it, but 
when I look at who I am today as opposed to who I was 
twenty years ago, I can see a direct correlation between “me and my wealth” (or lack of it) then and “me and my wealth” 
now. I learned my way to success and so can you. That’s why 
I’m in the training business. I know from personal experience 
that virtually any person can be trained to succeed. I was 
trained to succeed, and now I’ve been able to train tens of 
thousands of others to succeed. Training works!  
I’ve found that another key difference between rich people 
and poor and middle-class people is that rich people are experts 
in their field. Middle-class people are mediocre in their field, 
and poor people are poor in their field. How good are you at 
what you do? How good are you at your job? How good are 
you at your business? Do you want a totally 

unbiased way of knowing? Look at your paycheck. That will 
tell you everything. It’s simple: to get paid the best, you must be the 
best.  
 
 
WEALTH PRINCIPLE:  
To get paid the best, you must be the best.  
 
 
We recognize this principle in the professional sports world 
every day. Generally, the best players in every sport earn the 
most. They also make the most money on endorsements. This 
same principle also holds true in both the business and 
financial worlds. Whether you choose to be a business owner, 
a professional, a network marketing distributor, whether you’re 
in commissioned sales or a salaried job, whether you’re an 
investor in real estate, stocks, or anything else, all things being 
equal: the better you are at it, the more you’ll earn. This is just 
another reason why being a continuous learner and enhancing 
your skill in whatever arena you are in is imperative.  
On the topic of learning, it’s worth noting that rich people 
not only continue to learn, they make sure they learn from 
those who have already been where they themselves want to 
go. One of the things that made the biggest difference for me 
personally was whom I learned from. I always made it a point 
to learn from true masters in their respective fields—not those 
who claimed to be experts, but those who had real-world re-
sults to back up their talk.  
Rich people take advice from people who are richer than 
they are. Poor people take advice from their friends, who are 
just as broke as they are.  
I recently had a meeting with an investment banker who 
 

wanted to do business with me. He was suggesting I place 
several hundred thousand dollars with him to get started. He 
then asked me to forward him my financial statements so he 
could make his recommendations.  
I looked him in the eye and said, “Excuse me, but don’t you 
have this backward? If you want me to hire you to handle my 
money, wouldn’t it be more appropriate for you to forward me 
your financial statements? And if you’re not really rich, don’t 
bother!” The man was in shock. I could tell that no one had 
ever questioned his own net worth as a stipulation for 
investing with him.  
It’s absurd. If you were going to climb Mount Everest, 
would you hire a guide who’ s never been to the summit be-
fore, or would it be smarter to find someone who’s made it to 
the top several times and knows exactly how to do it?  
So, yes, I am absolutely suggesting you put serious attention 
and energy into continuously learning and, at the same time, be 
cautious of whom you are learning and taking advice from. If 
you learn from those who are broke, even if they’re 
consultants, coaches, or planners, there’s only one thing they can teach you—how to be broke!  
By the way, I highly recommend you consider hiring a 
personal success coach. A good coach will keep you on track 
in doing what you’ve said you want to do. Some coaches are 
“life” coaches, meaning they handle the gamut of everything, 
while other coaches have specialties that might include per-
sonal or professional performance, finances, business, rela-
tionships, health, and even spirituality. Again, find out your 
prospective coach’s background to ensure the coach has 
demonstrated success in the arenas of importance to you.  
Just as there are successful paths to climbing Mount Ever-
est, there are proven routes and strategies for creating high 

income, fast financial freedom, and wealth. You have to be 
willing to learn them and use them.  
Again, as part of our Millionaire Mind Money Management 
method, I strongly suggest that you put 10 percent of your 
income into an Education Fund. Use this money specifically 
for courses, books, tapes, CDs, or any other way you choose 
to educate yourself, whether through the formal education 
system, private training companies, or personalized, one-on-
one coaching. Whatever method you choose, this fund ensures 
you will always have the wherewithal to learn and grow instead 
of repeating the poor person’s refrain of “I already know.” 
The more you learn, the more you earn . . . and you can take 
that to the bank!  
DECLARATION:  Place your hand on your heart and say...  
“I am committed to constant ly learning and growing.”  
Touch your head and say...  
“I have a millionaire mind!”  
MILLIONAIRE MIND ACTIONS  
   1.  Commit to your growth. Each month read at least one 
        book, listen to one educational tape or CD, or take a         seminar on money, business, or personal development. 
        Your knowledge, your confidence, and your success will 
        soar!   
   2.  Consider hiring a personal coach to keep you on track.  
 
   3.  Attend the Millionaire Mind Intensive. This amazing         event has transformed the lives of thousands and 
       thousands of people and will transform your life too!

=== CHAPTER 30: "So What the Heck Do I Do Now?" ===
“So What the Heck Do I Do Now?”  
 
So what now? what do you do? where do you start?  
I’ve said it before, and I’ll say it again and again and again: 
“Talk is cheap.” I hope you enjoyed reading this book, but 
more important, I hope you use its principles to dramatically 
enhance your life. In my experience, however, reading alone 
will not make the difference you are looking for. Reading is a 
start, but if you want to succeed in the real world, it’s going to 
be your actions that count.  
In Part I of this book, I introduced the concept of your 
money blueprint. It’s simple: your financial blueprint will 
determine your financial destiny. Make certain you do each of 
the exercises I suggested in the arenas of verbal programming, 
modeling, and specific incidents, in order to begin changing 
your blueprint to one that supports financial success. I also 
encourage you to do the declarations I suggested each and 
every day.  
In Part II of this book, you learned seventeen specific ways 
that rich people think differently from poor and middle-class 
people. I recommend you commit each of these 
 

“wealth files” to memory by repeating their declarations daily. 
This will root these principles into your mind. Eventually you 
will find yourself looking at life and especially money very 
differently. From there you will make new choices and 
decisions and create new results. To speed up this process, 
make sure you do the action exercises given at the end of each 
of the wealth files.  
These action exercises are imperative. For change to be 
permanent, it must occur on a cellular basis—your brain’s 
wiring must be remade. This means you have to put the ma-
terial into practice. Not just read about it, not just talk about it, 
and not just think it, but actually do it.  
Beware of the little voice in your head saying something like 
“Exercises, schmexercises, I don’t need or have time for 
exercises.” Notice who is doing the talking here? The condi-
tioned mind, that’s who! Remember, its job is to keep you 
right where you are, in your comfort zone. Don’t listen to it. 
Do the action exercises, do your declarations, and watch your 
life skyrocket!  
I also suggest you reread this book from beginning to end at 
least once a month for the next year. “What?” your little voice 
might be screaming. “I’ve already read the book, why do I 
need to read it over and over again?” Good question, and the 
answer is simple: repetition is the mother of learning. Again, 
the more you study this book, the faster the concepts will 
become natural and automatic for you.  
Be sure to visit www.millionairemindbook.com  and click 
on “FREE BOOK BONUSES” to receive several valuable 
gifts that include:  
 • A printable list of declarations suitable for framing  
 • The Millionaire Mind “thought of the week”  
 

 
 • The Millionaire Mind “action reminder”  
 • The Millionaire Mind “net worth tracking sheet”  
 • A printout of your “Commitment to Wealth”  
As I stated earlier, I learned my way to success, so now it’s 
my turn to assist others. My mission is to “educate and inspire 
people to live in their ‘higher self ’ based in courage, purpose, 
and joy versus fear, need, and obligation.”  
I am truly blessed to have seminars, workshops, and camps 
that transform people’s lives quickly and permanently. I’m 
thrilled to have been able to help over 250,000 people become 
richer and happier. From my heart to yours, I invite you to 
attend the three-day Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar. This 
event will take you to an entirely new level of success. The 
course is where we actually change your money blueprint right 
on the spot.  
In one incredible weekend you will break through whatever 
is holding you back from reaching your full financial potential. 
You will walk out of the program with a brand-new outlook 
on life, on money, on your relationships, and on yourself. 
Many attendees count the Millionaire Mind Intensive as one of 
the most important experiences of their life. It’s fun, it’s 
exciting, and it’s packed with profound knowledge and 
essential financial skills. You will meet hundreds of like-
minded people from all over the world, many of whom could 
become business associates and lifelong friends. This course is 
so crucial for you to attend that, for a limited time, the 
publishers of this book and I have decided to provide a 
scholarship to you and a family member to attend the course 
free as our guests. That’s right, both of you come free ! 
 
 

See the following pages for more details about this offer to 
you.  
Well, that’s it for now. Thank you for spending your pre-
cious time reading this book. I wish you tremendous success 
and true happiness, and I look forward to meeting you in 
person soon.  
For your freedom,  
T. Harv Eker

=== CHAPTER 31: "Special Bonus Offer" ===
SPECIAL BONUS OFFER  
T. Harv Eker’s Three-Day 
Millionaire Mind Intensive 
Seminar Free!  
As a thank-you for purchasing Secrets of the Millionaire Mind, T. 
Harv Eker is offering a scholarship for you and a family 
member to attend the three-day Millionaire Mind Intensive 
Seminar as his complimentary guests. That is a total value of 
$2,590—for free!  
These guest seats are available to purchasers of T. Harv 
Eker’s Secrets of the Millionaire Mind published by Harper-
Business. The course must be co mpleted by July 1, 2006, and 
this offer is made on a space-available basis. All seating is first 
come, first serve. To assure your spot, please register 
immediately at www.millionairemindbook.com .  
At the Millionaire Mind Intensive weekend program, you 
will expand upon the insights provided in this book by 
learning:  
• How to permanently change your money blueprint for 
natural and automatic success.  
 

• A step-by-step process for winning the money game, so  
  that you never have to work again...unless you choose to.  
• Rarely revealed high-income and wealth-creation strategies.  
• How to quadruple your speed to financial freedom.  
• The world’s easiest and most effective money-   management method.  
• The habits of truly wealthy people.  
• The underlying cause of almost all financial problems.  
• Twelve ways to earn passive income so you can make 
  money while you sleep.  • How to release your hidden emotional blocks to wealth.  
• How to recognize your “money personality” so you can 
  build on your strengths and overcome your weaknesses.  
 
By the end of the course, you will have the inner capacity to 
create wealth and, more important, to keep your wealth and 
grow it. Best of all, the same inner strategies that work to 
create success with money work to enhance your inner peace 
and happiness as well.  
Whether you are currently a millionaire, middle-class, or 
broke, if you’re not 100 percent satisfied with your income, 
your net worth, or your level of happiness, and you know you 
have more potential than your results are showing, then regis-
ter for the Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar today. This 
course will change your life. Register now at www.million 
airemindbook.com . 
 
 
  
 
 

The Millionaire Mind Seminar is life-changing. I urge every one of my 
students to attend this powerful course. It is incredible.”  
—Robert G. Allen, New York Times number one best-selling author, 
Nothing Down Real Estate and Multiple Streams of Income, coauthor, The One 
Minute Millionaire  
“Harv Eker is one of the most extraordinary trainers in the world today! 
Harv’s experiential techniques are transformational, and he creates 
amazing results every time he speaks!”  
—Mark Victor Hansen, cocreator, Chicken Soup for the Soul ® , more than 
70 million sold; coauthor, The One Minute Millionaire  
“T. Harv Eker is an electrifying speaker!  
He has the ability to transfix an audience, motivate  
and enlighten them, and give them information in a way  
that they absorb it fully. I’ve seen and heard a lot of speakers; 
none are as dynamic as T. Harv Eker!”  
—Jay Conrad Levinson, author of the Guerrilla Marketing book series, 
more than 14 million sold

=== CHAPTER 32: "Share the Wealth" ===
SHARE THE WEALTH  
The mark of true wealth is determined by how much one can give away.  
—T. Harv Eker  
This book teaches you to observe your ways of thinking and to 
challenge your limiting, nonsupportive thoughts, habits, and 
actions with regard to money. The reason we start with money 
is that money is one of the biggest areas of pain in most 
people’s lives. But there’s a bigger picture to consider. You see, 
once you start recognizing your nonsupportive ways around 
finances, this awareness will transfer into every other part of 
your life.  
The goal of this book has been to assist you in raising your 
consciousness. Again, consciousness is observing your 
thoughts and actions, so that you can operate from true choice 
in the present, rather than acting on the basis of programming 
from the past. It is about the power to respond from your 
higher self rather than to react from your fear-based, “lower” 
self. In this way you can be the best you can be and fulfill your 
destiny.  
But you know what? The essence of this transformation is 
not just about you. It is about the entire world. Our world is 
nothing more than a reflection of the people who make it up. 
As each individual raises his or her consciousness, the 
 

world raises its consciousness—moving from fear to courage, 
from hatred to love, and from scarcity to prosperity for all.  
It is therefore up to each of us to enlighten ourselves so that 
we may add more light to the world.  
If you want the world to be a certain way, then start with 
you being that way. If you want the world to be a better place, 
start with you being better. That is why I believe it’s your duty 
to grow yourself to your fullest potential, to create abundance 
and success in your life; for in doing so, you will be able to 
help others and add to the world in a positive way.  
I therefore ask you to share this message of consciousness 
and empowerment with others. Get the message of this book 
out to as many people as possible. Commit to telling at least 
one hundred of your friends, family, and associates about it or 
consider getting it for them as a life-changing gift. Not only 
will they be introduced to powerful financial concepts, they 
will learn to observe the way they think, raise their 
consciousness, and in turn raise the consciousness of the 
planet. It would also be incredible for them to join you at the 
Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar. It is truly a blessing to have your friends and family share this extraordinary 
experience with you. My dream is that one book, one course, 
one person at a time, we can change the world for the better. I 
ask for your support in making this dream a reality.  
Thank you.

=== CHAPTER 33: "Recommended Resources" ===
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES 
Peak Potentials Programs  
Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar—3 Days  
The world-famous Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar will 
transform your financial life forever. You will learn how to win 
the money game so that you never have to work again, as well 
as to reset your “money blueprint” so that financial success is 
natural and automatic for you.  
Millionaire Mind Evening and Teleclasses  
The principles of the millionaire mind are taught in evening 
seminars in several cities across North America as well as by 
teleclass. For details and schedule go to www.millionaire 
mindbook.com or call 1-888-623-7424.  
Enlightened Warrior Training Camp—4 1⁄2 Days  
The definition of an enlightened warrior is “one who conquers 
oneself.” In this high-intensity program you will learn how to 
access your true power at will and succeed in spite of anything. 
By the end of this camp nothing will ever stop you again!  
Wizard Training—4 1⁄2 Days  
Learn to manifest what you want with elegance and grace. At 
Wizard Training you will learn to live as the “eye of the 
storm,” calm, centered, and peaceful in spite of anything. 
 
 
 

 
Mind of Steel, Heart of Gold—6 Days  
This program is the next level of both the Warrior and the 
Wizard. Here you will learn to dance easily and effortlessly 
between these two powerful energies. This camp is open only 
to graduates of both Enlightened Warrior and Wizard 
Training.  
Life Directions—3 Days  
The objective of this program is for you to have money with 
meaning. In Life Directions you will discover your true mis-
sion as well as create a vehicle that expresses this mission in a 
way that is highly successful in the real world. It’s an absolute 
must for anyone wanting clarity and focus.  
Train the Trainer Certification—4 1⁄2 Days  
Earn $20,000 a weekend teaching what you love. That’s exactly 
what you’ll learn to do at Train the Trainer. Learn everything 
you need to be successful in the training business, including 
choosing the right topic, designing an incredible program, 
using accelerated-learning technologies, and marketing for 
success. By the end of this course you will be a “hot” trainer 
and know exactly how to become a rich one too.  
Train the Trainer II—5 Days  
This program is the next level of Train the Trainer and focuses 
on using your full authenticity within the amazing Trainer 
tools that are taught. The program is open only to Train the 
Trainer Certification graduates.  
 
 
 

 
Millionaire School—4 Days  
Making your money work hard for you is one of the key ele-
ments of wealth. At Millionaire School you will learn the A–
Z’s of the investment world in a way that is simple and easy to 
understand. You’ll also be introduced to investment 
opportunities that are usually only in the domains of the rich.  
Guerrilla Business School—5 Days  
At Guerrilla Business School you will learn how to create 
wealth quickly in any business you choose. You will learn how 
to create million-dollar ideas, street-smart financing, maverick 
marketing methods, real-world negotiation strategies, and 
much, much more.  
Wealth and Wisdom—3 Days  
Our annual extravaganza gathers many of the top authors and 
trainers in the world, who come together all in one place to 
teach how to create more money, love, and happiness in your 
life.  
The World’s Greatest Marketing Seminar—5 Days  
Marketing is by far the most important skill you can own when 
it comes to high-speed success in business. The World’s 
Greatest Marketing Seminar is exactly what it says, the most 
hands-on, experiential, effective, and intensive marketing 
program on the planet. In five days you will become a 
marketing genius. Period!  
 
 
 

SuccessTracs Coaching—Ongoing  
The best athletes in the world all have one thing in common: 
great coaching. SuccessTracs is a one-on-one coaching system 
designed to make certain you succeed in all areas of your life. 
The objective is simple: for you to at least double your income, 
double your time off, and double your speed to financial 
freedom. Your results will astound even you!  
For full details on each of these life-changing programs, go to 
www.millionairemindbook.com or call 1-888-623-7424.  
Home Learning Programs  
Many of the programs described above are available on CDs 
so you can learn while you drive or in the comfort of your own 
home.  
For full details go to www.millionairemindbook.com or call 
1-888-623-7424.  
Speaking Engagements  
T. Harv Eker has been called “the most electrifying speaker on the planet.” His message conveys the perfect blend of street-
smart success strategies with enlightened wisdom, humor, and 
fun. Audiences are sky-high during his trainings, yet his lessons 
last a lifetime.  
To have T. Harv Eker or one of our Millionaire Mind 
Master Trainers appear live at your next event, e-mail 
speaker@peakpotentials.com or call 1-888-623-7424.  
 
 

INDEX 
______________ 
 
   
abundance, 62  
accelerated learning techniques,  15  
Acres of Diamonds (Conwell),   89–90  
actions, 16, 18, 19, 20, 45, 47, 49, 52,       53, 80, 84, 166, 189–92    in exercises, 61–62, 65, 72, 78, 85, 94,       101, 105–6, 110–11, 122–23, 129,      137, 144, 153, 165–66, 177–78,       187, 190  admiration, 88, 93–94  
affirmations, 16, 166  
agreements, 132  Allen, Robert, 89–90, 175  ambivalence, 66–68, 71  anger, 30–31  arrow-break exercise, 173–74, 176  attention, 60, 143, 149  attention-seeking behavior, 60  
automatic responses, 19, 50–51  
awareness, 24, 25, 34, 39, 45, 51  
 
Bach, Richard, 75  Baines, Rhonda and Bob, 48  bank accounts, 148–52, 187  bankruptcy, 148  “Be, Do, Have,” 183–84  beliefs, 10, 45, 104–5, 124, 134      empowering, 47, 88      limiting, 21–22, 23, 46–47, 56–57, 66, 
       88, 135, 137  
   see also thoughts  
benefits, 128
 blame, 55, 59, 61  
“blame game,” 55  
borrowing, 26, 149  breakups, 38  business ownership, 124, 126–29  
 
Chamitoff, Deborah, 37  change, 45, 53     declarations for, 15–17     elements of, 24    reconditioning and, 24–47     steps for, 25, 34, 39  character, 10, 107, 183  
choices, 45, 50, 110  
   see also decisions  
coaching, 181–82, 186  comfort zone, 42, 170–72, 190 comfort zone = wealth zone (CZ =    WZ), 171–72 commission, 124, 127  commitment, 65–72, 169, 173  
   ambivalence vs., 66–68, 71  
   rationalizing vs., 66     role of universe in, 67–68, 71  complaining, 58–60, 61  conditioned mind, 19, 112, 190  conditioning, 45, 46, 102, 126, 134,       135, 136, 145, 155, 158, 162       influences on, 18–40  
   modeling and, 20, 25–34, 95, 100,  
     189
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

 
conditioning ( cont.)  
parental, 18, 21–23, 25–28, 29, 30, 
33–34, 35, 97, 103, 111–12  
punishment and, 111–12  and reconditioning, 20, 24–40  specific incidents and, 20,  
34–40, 102, 189  verbal programming and,  
20–25, 189  
confidence, 79  consciousness, 45, 46  consultancy, 128  contracting, 128  convenience, 169  Conwell, Russell H., 89–90, 91  cost of living, 140 
 courage, 191  
“crap” magnet, 58–59  criticism, 100 culture, 19  CZ = WZ (comfort zone = wealth 
zone), 171–72 
 
decisions, 23, 45, 49–51, 71, 79,  
160, 169, 175, 190  and commitment, 69  see also choices  
declarations, 15–17, 175, 189, 190  
in exercises, 17, 25, 34, 39, 47, 61, 
65, 72, 77–78, 85, 94, 100, 105, 110, 121, 129, 137, 144, 153, 165, 177, 187  
demand, 73  dharma, 75  
disassociation, 24, 25, 34, 39  discomfort, 170–71, 173  disempowering thoughts,  
175–76  
see also limiting beliefs 
distributorships, 127–28  
doing habits, 53  doubts, 167  
downers, 96–98  duality, 9  duty to others, 73–78, 105, 118–19     see also philanthropy  
 
Education Account, 151  
Education Fund, 187 effects, see results  
ego, 60, 74, 75, 100, 108  either/or thinking, 131–37  
emotional world, 14  
emotions, 22, 150  see also feelings  
empowering beliefs, 47–88  empowering thoughts, 87–88,       175–76  see also declarations energy, 10, 15, 81, 
     96, 133, 143  
   negative, 58, 98, 107  
   poisonous, 98     positive, 156–57  Enlightened Warrior Training, 81,       110, 167, 169, 176–77  “entering the corridor,” 82–83  entrepreneurs, 26, 75, 139  envy, 86–94, 95  
   admiration vs., 86, 93–94  
experts, 91, 165, 184–85  extravagance, 151  
 
fears, 9, 31, 32, 45, 46, 74, 75, 78, 124,       135, 191     action in spite of, 166–78  feelings, 18, 19, 20, 47, 49, 52, 166, 167     see also emotions; specific feelings  
Feel the Fear and Do It Anyway  
     (Jeffers), 167  Felicien, Perdita, 99  
FFA (Financial Freedom Account),   
    148–50, 162
 
 
  

 
financial destiny, 17–18  
financial freedom, 11, 30, 145, 150–53,       157, 162–63, 164  Financial Freedom Account  (FFA),      148–50, 162  Financial Freedom jar, 149–50  financial funnel, 139  financial garden, 23  
financial planner, 143–44  
financial potential, 11, 41, 191  financial success:     cause and effect in, 12–15     full potential for, 11, 41  financial thermostat, 11, 43–44  financial warriors, 110  focus, 80–81, 109, 143  
four factors of net worth, 138–42  
four quadrants of existence, 13–14  Franklin, Benjamin, 180  freedom, 36, 110, 133     see also financial freedom  
“freedom fighters,” 164  fruits, 12–13, 31  Fuller, Buckminster, 75  
 
generosity, 93, 119, 136  Give Account, 151  
goals, 16 
   expansive, 73–78, 80–81     high vs. low, 64–65     of middle class, 63–64     obstacles and, 81     of poor, 62–63, 64  God, 55, 76, 113     see also higher power  
gratitude, 120, 121  
Great Depression, 28, 29  
greed, 20, 22, 91, 93, 119  guilt, 150 habits:  
   money, 145, 147, 149, 152     personal, 9, 32, 45, 53, 119, 168, 172,      175    see also conditioning; specific habits  
Hansen, Mark Victor, 89–90  happiness, 12, 31, 46, 51, 121, 133–34,      141, 153  
“Have, Do, Be,” 183–84  
high-and-mighty syndrome, 103  higher power, 67, 80     see also God; universe  
higher self, 31, 108, 191  Hoffer, Eric, 180  Huna wisdom, 93  
 
immediate gratification, 140, 159, 160  inaction, 72, 84 income, 43, 139  
income ceiling, 125  
initiative, 78–85     opportunities vs. obstacles in, 78–82     see also taking action  
inner laws of money, 9–10  inner world, 9–10, 12–15, 95, 108, 120,       167  insecurities, 32, 46  
intention, power of, 29–30, 63, 68, 82  
investments, 41–42, 43, 46, 139, 140,       148, 155–66 invisible world, see inner world  
involvement, 15  
 
Jeffers, Susan, 167  Jonathan Livingston Seagull (Bach), 75  joy, 191  judgment, 100
 
 
  
 
 

 
justification, 56–57, 59, 61, 79, 119, 181  
 
kindness, 136  kiss-of-death syndrome, 42  
Kiyosaki, Robert, 104  Kloser, Christine, 154  
 
Law of Attraction, 58, 67  Law of Income, 72  law of intention, 54  leadership, 104  leverage, 36, 126, 128  life coaches, 186  limiting beliefs, 21–22, 23, 46–47,  
     56–57, 66, 88, 137  
   see also disempowering thoughts  
Long-Term Savings for Spending      Account, 151  long-term thinking, 159, 163  lottery, 54  lottery winners, 11  love, 57, 60–61, 121, 136  
luck, 80, 183  
   taking action vs., 54, 80  marketplace value, 73  material gratification, 162  meditations, 166  mental control, see mental  
management   mental management, 174–76  mental processes, 49–51  
   see also mind-sets; thoughts  
mental training, 174–76  mental world, 14  Midas touch, 42  middle-class money mentality, 51–52  millionaire mind, 11, 109
  Millionaire Mind “action reminder,”  
     191  Millionaire Mind Intensive Seminar, 19,      24, 34, 38, 41, 45, 66, 68, 87, 88–89,      102, 114, 117, 119, 140, 141, 146,      147, 148, 149, 156, 159, 161, 162,      168, 174, 180, 191  Millionaire Mind Money Management  
     method, 148–52, 187  
Millionaire Mind “net worth tracking      sheet,” 191  Millionaire Mind “thought of the      week,” 24, 190  Millionaire Next Door, The (Stanley),      145  mind bank, 29  
mind-sets:  
   of rich vs. poor and middle class,       51–52, 54, 62, 65, 73, 78, 86, 95,      101, 106, 111, 123, 131, 137, 145,      155, 166, 179     willingness to change, 52–53     see also mental processes;  
   thoughts  
mind’s money files, see wealth files  
missions, see duty to others  
modeling, 20, 25–34, 95–96, 100, 189     steps for change in, 34  money:     ambivalence about, 66–68, 71     gender and attitudes toward, 35–37     importance of, 56–57, 133     misconceptions about, 20, 22, 41,  
     118, 123–24, 131, 132–33, 155–56  
   negative connotations of, 20, 21, 31,       35, 66, 86–88, 89–90, 91
 
 
 
  
 

 
as source of conflict in relationships,  
     36–40  money blueprint, 9–48, 100, 109, 140,       159, 160, 161, 189, 191     business success and, 42–43     formation of, 18–40     goals of, 40–48     identification of, 17–18  
   importance of, 10–17  
   in relationships, 36–40     reprogramming of, 20–40  money game, 62–65, 156, 181     high vs. low goals in, 62–65  money magnet, 120, 150  money management, 145–55  money management method,  
     148–52, 187  
money mentality, 49–53     in decision making, 49–51     rich vs. poor and middle class,       51–52  “money personality,” 161  money supply, 135–36  mortgage, 141, 157  
Murray, W. H., 71  
 
Necessities Account, 151  need, 191  
negative energy, 96–98, 107, 116  negativity, 87–88  negotiations, 132  network marketing, 74, 127–28, 158  net worth, 43, 137–44, 152     determining, 138     four factors of, 138–42     tracking of, 142–43, 191  
   vs. working income, 138  
net worth factors, 138–42   net worth objective, 143  
Nita, Sean, 130 nonempowering thoughts, see  
     disempowering thoughts  not-doing habits, 53  nurturing, 119, 150–51  
 
obstacles, 78–82, 107–8, 110  One Minute Millionaire, The       (Hansen and Allen), 89–90  opportunities, 78–82, 84, 171  
opportunity zone, 171  
optimism, 78–79  outer laws of money, 9  outer world, 9, 12–15, 95, 108, 120, 167  overspending, 160–61  
 
parental influences, 18, 21–23, 25–28,       29, 30, 33–34, 35, 97, 103, 111–12,       126, 132–33  Parkinson’s Law, 142  partners, 38–93, 163  
passive income, 139, 157–59  
   through “business working for you,”      157–58     through “money working for you,”      157     vs. working income, 158–59  passive-income streams, 148  peace, 31, 96  Peak Potentials Training, 53, 101, 131  
people pleasers, 60  
percentage, 126, 127  personal characteristics, 9–10, 32–33,       41–42     of the wealthy, 91     see also individual characteristics
 
 
 
   
 

 
personal growth, 45, 96–98, 106–8,  
     170–71     continuing, 179–87     nonsupportive influences on, 96–98,       169–73     in problem solving, 106–8     in retaining wealth, 109  personal histories, 34–40  
personal service businesses, 125–26  
personal success coaches, 186  perspective, 131–37     of “either/or” vs. “both,” 131–37     of money vs. happiness, 131, 133–34     of self-worth, 113–15 pessimism, 78–      79  philanthropy, 41, 92–93  
   see also duty to others  
physical world, 14  planes of existence, see four  
     quadrants of existence 
 “play” account, 120, 150–51, 162  
pleasure, 36  poor money mentality, 51–52  positive energy, 96–98  
positive thinking, 176  
power of intention, 29–30, 63, 68, 82  power thinking, 176 practice, 172–73  “printout,” 14  problem-orientation, 109–10  problem solvers, 75  problem solving, 106–11     through personal growth, 106–8  
Process of Manifestation, 18, 19–20, 49, 
     166–67  “program,” 14  programming, see conditioning  
promotion, 101–6     of products, services and ideas,       103–5
 Promotion (Cont),     resentment of, 102–3     of self, 103, 104  Protestant work ethic, 156  punishment, 111–12  purpose, 191  
 
quality, 73  quantity, 73  
 
rainy day saving, 29–30  rationalizing, see justification  
“Ready, fire, aim!,” 81, 84  
real estate, 163–64  
rebellion, 30, 33  receiving, 151     difficulty with, 111–23     and giving, 115–16  reconditioning, 20, 24–40, 51     see also conditioning  
rejection, 102–3  relationships, 36–40, 153  
remuneration, 123–30  
   results-based, 123, 126, 128     salary-based, 123, 126, 128–29     time-based, 123, 124, 125–26  resentment, 30, 86–88, 93  residual income, 158  responsibility, 54–62, 69, 79, 80     vs. victimhood, 54–61  
results, 12–15, 18, 19, 20, 47, 49, 143,  
     166, 190     causes and, 12–15  retail therapy, 160  retirement, 148  Return to Love, A (Williamson), 76  
Rich Dad, Poor Dad (Kiyosaki), 104  
rich money mentality, 51–53  
risks, 70, 71, 78, 79, 124, 171  
 
 
 

 
Rohn, Jim, 180  
roots, 12–13, 31  
Rosemary, Jim, 77  
 
sacrifice, 70, 71  saving, 21, 29–30, 41, 43, 81, 139–40  
security, 32, 62, 123–24, 126  “seeds,” 164  self-made millionaires, 11  self-worth, 31–33, 111–23     and difficulty with receiving, 111–23     low, 111–12     and net worth, 112  
   recreating of, 114–15  
   self as determiner of, 113–14, 127  selling, see promotion service 
businesses, 159  shame, 150  short-term thinking, 159, 163  simplification, 139, 140–41, 160  social associations, 91–94, 95–101  solution-orientation, 109  
specific incidents, 20, 34–40, 102, 189  
   steps for change in, 39  spending, 41, 43, 81, 140  spirituality, 91, 97, 136, 149, 150     see also God; higher power;  
   inner world; universe  spiritual world, 14  sports, 98–99, 185  
stalling, 79, 84  
Stanley, Thomas, 145  steady paycheck, 123, 126  stress, 31, 59  subconscious mind, 16, 18, 22–23,       68–69, 112  survival, 49, 62 taking action, 189–92  
   see also actions; initiative  
talents, 75  
“taming the cobra of fear,” 167  tax benefits, 128  taxes, 127  tax write-offs, 127  television, 87, 98  thinking big, 73, 75–77  thinking small, 73, 74, 76  
thoughts, 18, 19, 20, 46, 47, 49, 52, 88, 
     166, 167     empowering vs. disempowering,       175–76     negative vs. empowering, 87–88     see also beliefs; mental processes;    
     mind-sets  tools, 14, 44–45, 109 toxic situations, 98  
Trump, Donald, 11, 51  
trust, 89–90  
 
uncomfort zone, 170–71  understanding, 24, 25, 34, 39  universe, 71, 82, 91, 116–17, 120, 121,      147, 149, 172, 179  up-and-down income pattern, 26–28,      40  
 
value, 73, 75, 97, 135–36     extolling one’s own, 101–5  verbal programming, 20–25, 189     steps for change in, 25  
victimhood, 54–61, 86, 108, 118, 126  
   blame and, 55     complaining and, 58–60     justification and, 56–57
 
  
 
  
 

 
visible world, see outer world 
visualizations, 166  wanting, three levels of, 69  wealth files, 19, 38, 49–187, 190  wealth zone, 171–72  Wilde, Stuart, 10  Williamson, Marianne, 76  Wilton, Andrew, 178  Winfrey, Oprah, 87  
Wizard Training, 96  working income, 138, 139, 159  working smart, 156  World War II, 29  worries, 9, 10, 167  “yo-yo” model, see up-and-down  
     income pattern  
 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
_____________________________ 
 
 
Writing a book appears to be an individual project, but the reality 
is that if you want it  to be read by thousands or hopefully millions 
of people, it takes an entire team. I’d first like to thank my wife, 
Rochelle, my daughter, Madison, and my son, Jesse. Thank you 
for allowing me the space to do what I came here to do. I’d also 
like to thank my parents, Sam and Sara, as well as my sister, Mary, 
and brother-in-law, Harvey, for your unending love and support. 
Next, a huge thank you to Gail Balsillie, Michelle Burr, Shelley 
Wenus, Robert and Roxanne Riopel, Donna Fox, A. Cage, Jeff 
Fagin, Corey Kouwenberg, Kris Ebbeson, and the entire team at 
Peak Potentials Training for all your hard work and dedication to 
making a positive contribution to people’s lives as well as making 
Peak Potentials one of the fastest growing personal development 
companies in the world.  
Thank you to my brilliant book agent, Bonnie Solow, for your 
ongoing assistance, encouragement, and for leading me through 
the ins and outs of the book business. Another big thank-you 
goes to the team at HarperBusiness: publisher Steve Hanselman, 
who had the vision for this project and put so much time and 
energy into it; my wonderful editor, Herb Schaffner; marketing 
director Keith Pfeffer; and publicity director Larry Hughes. A 
special thanks goes to my colleagues Jack Canfield, Robert G. 
Allen, and Mark Victor Hans en for your friendship and 
continued support from the beginning.  
Finally, I am deeply grateful to all of the Peak Potentials 
seminar attendees, support staff, and joint venture partners. 
Without you, there would be no life-changing seminars.  
 

About the Author  
Using the principles he teaches, T. HARV EKER Went from 
zero to millionaire in only two and a half years. Eker is 
president of Peak Potentials Training, one of the fastest 
growing success training companies in North America. With 
his unique brand of “street smarts with heart,” Eker’s 
humorous, “cut-to the-chase” style keeps his audience spellbound. People come from all over the world to attend his 
sold-out seminars, where crowds often exceed 2,000 people 
for a weekend program. So far, Eker’s teachings have touched the lives of more than a quarter million people. Now, for the 
first time, he shares his proven secrets of success in this 
revolutionary book. Read it and grow rich!  
Don’t miss the next book by your favorite author. Sign up 
now for AuthorTracker by visiting www.AuthorTracker.com.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 

Praise for T. Harv Eker and  
Secrets of the Millionaire Mind  
“T. Harv Eker gives us a blueprint and the tools to build our 
house of wealth, from the inside out, so it will stand the test of 
time and circumstance.”  
—Dr. Denis Waitley, author, Seeds of Greatness  
“T. Harv Eker is a master at making the road to riches simple. 
Finally, his powerful principles are available in this amazing 
book.”  
—Marci Shimoff, coauthor, Chicken Soup for the Woman’s Soul  
“Study this book as if your life depended on it...finan-cially it 
may!”  
—Anthony Robbins, the world’s #1 peak performance coach  
“Secrets of the Millionaire Mind is the bible for creating wealth in a 
practical way. T. Harv Eker dispels the myths and makes 
millionaire secrets accessible to every person. Devour this 
book!”  
—Jill Lublin, best-selling author,  
Networking Magic and Guerrilla Publicity  
 
“Harv Eker is one of the most extraordinary trainers in the 
world today! Harv’s experiential techniques are transforma-
tional, and he creates amazing results every time he speaks!”  
—Mark Victor Hansen, cocreator,  
Chicken Soup for the Soul ® , more than 70 million sold;  
coauthor, The One Minute Millionaire 
 
 

Credits 
Designed by RLF Design 
Jacket design by Mucca Design 
 
                          

Copyright  
The offer on page 193 is open to all purchasers of Secrets of the 
Millionaire Mind by T. Harv Eker. Original proof of purchase is 
required. The offer is limited to the Millionaire Mind Intensive 
weekend seminar only, and your registration in the seminar is 
subject to availability of space and/or changes to program 
schedule. The course must be completed by July 1, 2006. The 
value of this free admission for you and a companion is 
$2,590, as of February 2005. Corporate or organizational 
purchasers may not use one book to invite more than two people. While participants will be responsible for their travel 
and other costs, admission to the program is complimentary. 
Participants in the seminars are under no additional financial 
obligation whatsoever to Peak Potentials Training or T. Harv 
Eker. Peak Potentials Training reserves the right to refuse admission to anyone it believes may disrupt the seminar, and 
to remove from the premises anyone it believes is disrupting 
the seminar.  
This book is not intended to provide personalized legal, 
accounting, financial, or investment advice. Readers are 
encouraged to seek the counsel of competent professionals 
with regard to such matters as interpretation of the law, proper accounting procedures, financial planning, and 
investment strategies. The Author and Publisher specifically 
disclaim any liability, loss, or risk which is incurred as a consequence, directly or indirectly, of the use and application 
of any of the contents of this work. 
 
SECRETS OF THE MILLIONAIRE MIND. Copyright © 
2005 by Harv Eker. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the 
required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-

transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-
screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, 
down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or 
introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or 
mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the 
express written permission of PerfectBound™.  
PerfectBound™ and the PerfectBound™ logo are 
trademarks of HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.  
Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader February 2005 ISBN 0-06-
083194-4  
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication 
Data Eker, T. Harv  
Secrets of the millionaire mind: mastering the inner 
game of wealth/T. Harv Eker.  
p. cm. Includes index.

