facilities. These functions, even if they're considered "facilities" in the
broadest sense, are very different, as are the respective skill sets. Similarly,
at another time, we talked about combining folks who work on client
agreements with those who do counterparty agreements under one manager.
That would have been a mistake because the skills required to reach
agreements with clients are very different from the ones required to reach
agreements with counterparties. It was wrong to conflate both departments
under the general heading of "agreements," because each kind called for
specific knowledge and skills.
175c) The ratio of senior managers to junior managers and to the number
of people who work two levels below should be limited, to preserve quality
communication and mutual understanding. Generally, the ratio should not
be more than 1:10, and preferably closer to 1:5. Of course, the appropriate
ratio will vary depending on how many people your direct reports have
reporting to them, the complexity of the jobs they're doing, and the
manager's ability to handle several people or projects at once.
175d) The number of layers from top to bottom and the ratio of managers
to their direct reports will limit the size of an effective organization.
175e) The larger the organization, the more important are 1) information
technology expertise in management and 2) cross-department
communication (more on these later).
175f) Do not build the organization to fit the people. Jobs are created
based on the work that needs to be done, not what people want to do or
what people are available. You can always search outside Bridgewater to
find the people who "click" best for a particular role.
176) Have the clearest possible delineation of responsibilities and
reporting lines. It's required both within and between departments. Make
sure reporting lines and designated responsibilities are clear. To avoid
confusion, people should not report to two different departments. Dual
reporting (reporting across department lines) causes confusion, complicates
prioritization, diminishes focus on clear goals, and muddies the lines of
supervision and accountability, especially when a person reports to two
people in two different departments. When situations require dual reporting,
managers need to be informed. Asking someone from another department to
do a task without consulting with his or her manager is strictly prohibited
(unless the request will take less than an hour or so). However, appointing
co-heads of a department or a sub-department can work well if the
managers are in synch and combine complementary and essential strengths
to this area; dual reporting in that case can work fine if properly coordinated
by the co-heads.
176a) Create an organizational chart to look like a pyramid, with straight
lines down that don't cross. A series of descending pyramids make up the
whole pyramid, but the number of layers should be limited to minimize
hierarchy.
177) Constantly think about how to produce leverage. For example, to
make training as easy to leverage as possible, document the most common
questions and answers through audio, video, or written guidelines and then
assign someone to regularly organize them into a manual. Technology can
do most tasks, so think creatively about how to design tools that will
provide leverage for you and the people who work for you.
177a) You should be able to delegate the details away. If you can't, you
either have problems with managing or training or you have the wrong
people doing the job. The real sign of a master manager is that he doesn't
have to "do" practically anything. Of course, a great manager has to hire
and oversee the people who do things; but a "supreme master" manager can
even hire a person or two to do this and has achieved such leverage that
things are effortlessly running superbly. Of course, there is a continuum
related to this. The main message I'm trying to convey is that managers
should strive to hire, train, and oversee in a way in which others can
superbly handle as much as possible on their own. Managers should view
the need to get involved in the nitty-gritty themselves as a bad sign.
177b) It is far better to find a few smart people and give them the best
technology than to have a greater number of ordinary and less well-
equipped people. First of all, great people and great technology are almost
always a great value because their effectiveness in enhancing the
organization's productivity can be enormous. Second, it is desirable to have
smart people have the widest possible span of understanding and control
because fragmented understanding and control create inefficiencies and
undermine organizational cohesion. Usually it is the person's capacity that
limits the scope of his understanding and control. So the mix of really smart
people operating with really great technology in a streamlined organization
is optimal for organizational efficiency.
177c) Use "leveragers." Leveragers are capable of doing a lot to get your
concepts implemented. Conceptualizing and managing are most important
and take only about 10% of the time needed for implementing; so if you
have good leveragers, you can accomplish a lot more with relative ease.
178) Understand the clover-leaf design. Find two or three responsible
parties who have overlapping believabilities and responsibilities and who
are willing to challenge and check each other. If you do this, and those
people are willing to fight for what they believe is best by being open-
minded and assertive at the same time, and if they escalate their
disagreements and failures to you, this process will have a high probability
of sorting issues that they can probably handle well from issues that you
should examine and resolve with them.
179) Don't do work for people in another department or grab people
from another department to do work for you unless you speak to the boss.
180) Watch out for "department slip." This happens when a support
department, such as HR or Facilities, mistakes its responsibilities to provide
support with a responsibility to determine how the thing they are supporting
should be done. An example of this sort of mistake is if those in the
Recruiting department think they should determine whom we should hire or
if people in HR think they should determine what our employment policies
should be. Another example would be if the Facilities group determined
what facilities we should have. While support departments should know the
goals of the people they're supporting and provide feedback regarding
possible choices, they are not the ones to determine the vision.
181) Assign responsibilities based on workflow design and people's
abilities, not job titles. What people do should primarily be a function of
the job they have, and it should be pretty obvious who should do what (if
they're suited for the job). For example, just because someone is
responsible for "human resources," "recruiting," "legal," "programming,"
etc., doesn't necessarily mean they are the appropriate person to do
everything associated with those functions. For example, though "Human
Resources" people help with hiring, firing, and providing benefits, it would
be a mistake to give them the responsibility of determining who gets hired
and fired and what benefits are provided to employees. When assigning
responsibilities, think about both the workflow design and a person's
abilities, not the job title.
182) Watch out for consultant addiction. Beware of the chronic use of
consultants to do work that should be done by employees.
183) Tool: Maintain a procedures manual. This is the document in
which you describe how all of the pieces of your machine work. There
needs to be enough specificity so that operators of the different pieces of
the machine can refer to the manual to help them do their job. The manual
should be a living document that includes output from the issues log so that
mistakes already identified and diagnosed aren't repeated. It prevents
forgetting previous learning and facilitates communication.
184) Tool: Use checklists. When people are assigned tasks, it is generally
desirable to have these captured on checklists so they can check off each
item as it is done. If not, there is a risk that people will gradually not do the
agreed tasks or there will be lack of clarity. Crossing items off a checklist
will serve as a task reminder and confirmation of what has been done.
184a) Don't confuse checklists with personal responsibility. People should
be expected to do their job well, not just what is on their checklists.
184b) Remember that "systematic" doesn't necessarily mean
computerized. It might mean having people do specified tasks and indicate
that they have done them with checklists.
184c) Use "double-do" rather than "double-check" to make sure mission-
critical tasks are done correctly. When people double-check someone
else's work, there is a much lower rate of catching errors than when two
parties independently do the work and the results are compared. Double-
doing is having two different people doing the same task on the same job so
that two independent answers are derived. By comparing them you will not
only assure better answers but you will see the differences in people's
performances and make much more rapid improvement. I use double-dos in
critical areas such as finance, where large amounts of money are involved.
185) Watch out for "job slip." Job slip is when a job changes without
being explicitly thought through and agreed to, generally because of
changing circumstances or a temporary necessity. Job slip will generally
cause bad job design. It often leads to the wrong people handling the wrong
responsibilities and confusion over who is supposed to do what.
186) Think clearly how things should go, and when they aren't going
that way, acknowledge it and investigate. First decide which issue to
address first: finding the reason the machine isn't working well or executing
the tasks required to get past the problem (in which case you need to come
back to the reasons later). Either way, don't pass the problem by without
discussing the reasons. Otherwise, you will end up with job slip.
187) Have good controls so that you are not exposed to the dishonesty
of others and trust is never an issue. A higher percentage of the population
than you might imagine will cheat if given an opportunity, and most people
who are given the choice of being "fair" with you and taking more for
themselves will choose taking more for themselves. Even a tiny amount of
cheating is intolerable, so your happiness and success will depend on your
controls. Security controls should be viewed as a necessary tool of our
profession, not as a personal affront to an individual's integrity. Just as a
bank teller doesn't view a check on the money in his drawer as an
indication that the bank thinks he is dishonest, everyone here should
understand the need for our security controls. Explain this to your people so
they see it in the proper context. Even the best controls will never be
foolproof, and trustworthiness is a quality that should be appreciated.
187a) People doing auditing should report to people outside the
department being audited, and auditing procedures should not be made
known to those being audited.
187b) Remember: There is no sense in having laws unless you have
policemen (auditors).
188) DO WHAT YOU SET OUT TO DO
So...
189) Push through! You can make great things happen, but you must
MAKE great things happen. Times will come when the choice will be to
plod along normally or to push through to achieve the goal. The choice
should be obvious.[71]
TO MAKE DECISIONS EFFECTIVELY...
190) RECOGNIZE THE POWER OF KNOWING HOW TO DEAL WITH NOT KNOWING
So...
191) Recognize that your goal is to come up with the best answer, that
the probability of your having it is small, and that even if you have it,
you can't be confident that you do have it unless you have other believable
people test you.
192) Understand that the ability to deal with not knowing is far more
powerful than knowing. That is because there's way more that we don't
know than what we could possibly ever know.
192a) Embrace the power of asking: "What don't I know, and what
should I do about it?" Generally you should find believable people and ask
their advice, remembering that you are looking to understand their
reasoning rather than get their conclusions.
192b) Finding the path to success is at least as dependent on coming up
with right questions as coming up with answers. Successful people are
great at asking the important questions and then finding the answers. When
faced with a problem, they first ask themselves if they know all the
important questions about it; they are objective in assessing the probability
that they have the answers; and they are good at open-mindedly seeking
believable people to ask.
193) Remember that your goal is to find the best answer, not to give the
best one you have. The answer doesn't have to be in your head; you can
look outside of you. In life the goal is for you to do the right thing,
considering the probability that you might be wrong. So it is invaluable to
know what you don't know so that you can figure out a way to find out
and/or to get help from others.
194) While everyone has the right to have questions and theories, only
believable people have the right to have opinions. If you can't successfully
ski down a difficult slope, you shouldn't tell others how to do it, though you
can ask questions about it and even express your views about possible ways
if you make clear that you are unsure.
195) Constantly worry about what you are missing. Even if you
acknowledge you are a "dumb shit" and are following the principles and are
designing around your weaknesses, understand that you still might be
missing things. You will get better and be safer this way.
195a) Successful people ask for the criticism of others and consider its
merit.
195b) Triangulate your view. Never make any important decisions without
asking at least three believable people. Don't ask them for their conclusions
or just do what they tell you to do. Understand, visualize, and assess their
reasoning to see if it makes sense to you. Ask them to probe your own
reasoning. That's critical to your learning as well as to your successful
handling of your responsibilities.
196) MAKE ALL DECISIONS LOGICALLY, AS EXPECTED VALUE CALCULATIONS
So...
197) Considering both the probabilities and the payoffs of the
consequences, make sure that the probability of the unacceptable (i.e., the
risk of ruin) is nil.
197a) The cost of a bad decision is equal to or greater than the reward of
a good decision, so knowing what you don't know is at least as valuable
as knowing.
197b) Recognize opportunities where there isn't much to lose and a lot to
gain, even if the probability of the gain happening is low. It is a reality that
there are always multiple possibilities and nothing is certain. All decisions
are therefore risk/reward bets. Know how to pursue fabulous risk/reward
ratios that have a huge upside and very little downside, albeit a small
probability of happening. My life has been filled with these.
197c) Understand how valuable it is to raise the probability that your
decision will be right by accurately assessing the probability of your being
right. I often observe people giving opinions as soon as they have them,
which seems at about the point that they think there's more than a 50%
chance of them being right. Often they don't pay any attention to the value
of raising the probability of being right (e.g., from 51% to 85%) by
reflecting harder on whether the answer is right and doing the investigations
and double-checking with others to make sure that the answer is right.
Remember that, in an expected value sense, raising the probability of
being right (e.g., from 51% to 85%) can be worth more than just going from
probably wrong (e.g., 45%) to probably being right (e.g., 51%) because we
are all playing probabilities. Think about the effects of altering the
probabilities of achieving must-dos: if you have a 51% probability of
handling a "must-do" correctly, it means that only a bit more than half of
your must-dos will be done appropriately, whereas an 85% probability of
handling a decision well means that only 15% of the must-dos will be
handled badly.
197d) Don't bet too much on anything. Make 15 or more good,
uncorrelated bets.
198) REMEMBER THE 80/20 RULE, AND KNOW WHAT THE KEY 20% IS
So...
199) Distinguish the important things from the unimportant things and
deal with the important things first.
199a) Don't be a perfectionist, because perfectionists often spend too much
time on little differences at the margins at the expense of other big,
important things. Be an effective imperfectionist. Solutions that broadly
work well (e.g., how people should contact each other in the event of crises)
are generally better than highly specialized solutions (e.g., how each person
should contact each other in the event of every conceivable crisis),
especially in the early stages of a plan. There generally isn't much gained
by lots of detail relative to a good broad solution. Complicated procedures
are tough to remember, and it takes a lot of time to make such detailed plans
(so they might not even be ready when needed).
199b) Since 80% of the juice can be gotten with the first 20% of the
squeezing, there are relatively few (typically less than five) important
things to consider in making a decision. For each of them, the marginal
gains of studying them past a certain point are limited.
199c) Watch out for "detail anxiety," i.e., worrying inappropriately about
unimportant, small things.
199d) Don't mistake small things for unimportant things, because some
small things can be very important (e.g., hugging a loved one).
200) Think about the appropriate time to make a decision in light of the
marginal gains made by acquiring additional information versus the
marginal costs of postponing the decision. There are some decisions that are
best made after acquiring more information, and some that are best made
sooner rather than later. The later a decision is made, the more informed it
can be; however, making it later can also have adverse consequences
(e.g., postponing progress). Understanding the trade-off between the
marginal gains of acquiring the extra information against the marginal costs
of postponing a decision is an important factor in the timing and
preparation of decision-making.
201) Make sure all the "must do's" are above the bar before you do
anything else. First, distinguish between your "must do's" and your "like to
do's". Don't overlook any "must do's," and don't mistakenly slip the "like
to do's" onto the list. Then, get all the "must do's" above the bar. Then get
all the "must do's" excellent. If you have time, turn to the "like to do's" and
try to get them above the bar. Only if you have time (though you certainly
will not if you are thinking broadly), turn toward making things perfect.
Chances are, you won't have to deal with the unimportant things, which is
better than not having time to deal with the important things. I often hear
people say, "Wouldn't it be good to do this or that," referring to nice-to-do's
rather than must-do's that have to be above the bar. Chances are, they are
being distracted from far more important things that need to be done well.
202) Remember that the best choices are the ones with more pros than
cons, not those that don't have any cons. Watch out for people who tend
to argue against something because they can find something wrong with
it without properly weighing all the pros against the cons. Such people
tend to be poor decision-makers.
203) Watch out for unproductively identifying possibilities without
assigning them probabilities, because it screws up prioritization. You can
recognize this with phrases like "It's possible that..." then going on to say
something that's improbable and/or unimportant, rather than something
like, "I think there's a good chance that..." followed by something that's
important or probable. Almost anything is possible. All possibilities must
be looked at in terms of their likelihoods and prioritized.
204) Understand the concept and use the phrase "by and large." Too
often I hear discussions fail to progress when a statement is made and the
person to whom it is made replies, "Not always," leading to a discussion of
the exceptions rather than the rule. For example, a statement like "The
people in the XYZ Department are working too many hours" might lead to
a response like "Not all of them are; Sally and Bill are working normal
hours," which could lead to a discussion of whether Sally and Bill are
working too long, which derails the discussion. Because nothing is 100%
true, conversations can get off track if they turn to whether exceptions exist,
which is especially foolish if both parties agree that the statement is by and
large true. To avoid this problem, the person making such statements might
use the term "by and large," like "By and large, the people in the XYZ
Department are working too many hours." People hearing that should
consider whether it is a "by and large" statement and treat it accordingly.
204a) When you ask someone whether something is true and they tell you
that "It's not totally true," it's probably true enough.
205) SYNTHESIZE
So...
206) Understand and connect the dots. To do this well, you have to
synthesize what is going on. Usually it takes diagnosing a few (e.g., five or
so) dots of the same type to get at the true root cause so that you can see
how the machine should be modified to produce better outcomes. For
example, one type of outcome involves someone, let's call him Harry,
handling a type of responsibility (entering an order). You will need at least a
few experiences to learn about Harry doing this. It will pay for you to
understand Harry and his handling of orders and have him understand you
by looking objectively at the outcomes and by getting in synch, especially
about the bad outcomes. The quality of your understanding of your machine
and its constituent parts will depend on how well you diagnose and process
the important outcomes. If you don't do this continuously and you don't
synthesize well, you will fail. This isn't easy.
See how the dots connect through time. This requires collecting, analyzing,
and sorting lots of different types, and it ain't easy for most folks. Imagine a
day in which eight outcomes occur. Some are good, some bad. Let's
represent this day as follows, with each type of event represented by a
letter and the quality of the outcome represented by its height.
In order to see the day this way, you must categorize outcomes by type and
quality, which will require synthesizing a "by and large" assessment of
each. If you didn't examine the bad outcomes as they occurred, you
couldn't understand what they are symptomatic of. Keep in mind our
example is a relatively simple one: only eight occurrences over one day.
Now let's look at what a month looks like.
Confusing, eh? Some people are much better at this than others.
In order to understand how your machine is working to achieve your goals,
you have to perceive change over time, charting improvement vs.
deterioration. The chart below plots just the type X dots, which you can see
improving. As mentioned in the section on diagnosis, you must categorize,
understand, and observe the evolution of the different parts of your machine
through time, and synthesize this understanding into a picture of how your
machine is working and how it should be improved. People who do this
well are rare and essential. As with most abilities, synthesizing well is
partially innate and partially learned through practice.
207) Understand what an acceptable rate of improvement is, and that it
is the level and not the rate of change that matters most. I often hear
people say, "It's getting better," as though that is good enough when "it" is
both below that bar and improving at an inadequate rate. That isn't good
enough. For example, if someone who has been getting 30s and 40s on tests
raised his grade to the 50s, you could say he's improving but the level is
still woefully inadequate. Everything important you manage has to be on a
trajectory to be "above the bar" and headed for "excellent" at an acceptable
pace. For example, in the chart below, the trajectory of A might be
acceptable, but B's trajectory is not. A gets us above the bar in an
acceptable amount of time.
208) If your best solution isn't good enough, think harder or escalate
that you can't produce a solution that is good enough. A common mistake
is accepting your own best solution when it isn't good enough.
209) Avoid the temptation to compromise on that which is
uncompromisable. You must have and achieve high standards. This is
particularly difficult when two uncompromisable things are at odds. At such
times, there is a tendency to let one of them go. However, at such times you
have to allocate more time to figure out how to best handle this, be more
creative, and ask for more input. But don't compromise on one of the things
that shouldn't be compromised. For example, one of the uncompromisable
things I regularly get pressure from people to compromise on is letting great
people avoid exploring their mistakes and weaknesses because they find it
painful. For reasons articulated throughout these principles, I believe we
can't compromise on this because that process of exploration is healthy for
Bridgewater, healthy for them, and key to our culture. I also believe that to
allow opt-outs would legitimatize two sets of rules and put our radically
honest way of being in jeopardy. But I want great people.[52]
210) Don't try to please everyone. Not everyone is going to be happy
about every decision you make, especially the decisions that say they can't
do something.
[1] Since I learned these principles by encountering reality and reflecting on
my encounters, and I am still doing these things, I expect there are more
principles to come. So I am still creating this document by throwing various
thoughts down when they occur to me, trying to put them in some sensible
order and trying to smooth over the bumps. Organizing these principles into
a sensible order is a challenge since they relate to each other more like a
matrix than as a sequence. To help guide you, I've tried to organize them
around large themes like building a great culture, managing people well,
and creative problem-solving. I will continue these things, so this is an
evolving document.
[2] While this particular document will always express just what I believe,
others will certainly have their own principles, and possibly even their own
principles documents, and future managers of Bridgewater will work in
their own ways to determine what principles Bridgewater will operate by.
At most, this will remain as one reference of principles for people to
consider when they are deciding what's important and how to behave.
[3] I wish everyone wrote down their principles. I wish I could read and
compare the principles of all the people I'm interested in— Steve Jobs,
Albert Einstein, people running for political office, people I share my
life with, etc. I'd love to know what they value most and what principles
they use to get what they want. Imagine how great that would be—e.g. imagine
how much valuable fundamental thinking could be harnessed. I hope that
my doing this will encourage others to do the same.
[4] Rote memory is memory for things that don't have an intrinsic logic for
being what they are, like a random series of numbers, words in a foreign
language and people's names (all of which I have trouble with). On the
other hand, I have a great memory for things that make sense in a context.
For example, I can tell you what happened in every year in the economy
and markets since the mid-1960s and how many things work.
[5] The way I learn is to immerse myself in something, which prompts
questions, which I answer, prompting more questions, until I reach a
conclusion.
[6] This included my retail stockbroker, the people I was caddying for, even
my local barber, who was equally engrossed in the stock market. (It wasn't
as precocious as it sounds. At the time, instead of talking about the
Yankees, everyone was talking about stocks. That was the world I grew up
in.)
[7] Sometimes when I know that I don't know which way the coin is going
to flip, I try to position myself so that it won't have an impact on me either
way. In other words, I don't make an inadvertent bet. I try to limit my bets
to the limited number of things I am confident in.
[8] By the way, I still meditate and I still find it helpful.
[9] It is unethical because a basic principle of justice is that everyone has
the right to face his accuser. And it is unproductive because it does not lead
to the exploration of "Is it true?" which can lead to understanding and
improvement.
[10] I do not mean that you should say everything you think, just that what
you do say matches your thoughts
[11] The word "integrity" is from the Latin root "integer," which means
"one" i.e., that you are the same inside and out. Most people would be
insulted if you told them that they don't have integrity—but how many
people do you know who tell people what they really think?
[12] I believe that our society's "mistakephobia" is crippling, a problem that
begins in most elementary schools, where we learn to learn what we are
taught rather than to form our own goals and to figure out how to achieve
them. We are fed with facts and tested and those who make the fewest
mistakes are considered to be the smart ones, so we learn that it is
embarrassing to not know and to make mistakes. Our education system
spends virtually no time on how to learn from mistakes, yet this is critical to
real learning. As a result, school typically doesn't prepare young people for
real life—unless their lives are spent following instructions and pleasing
others. In my opinion, that's why so many students who succeed in school
fail in life.
[13] After all, isn't the point of learning to help you get what you want? So
don't you have to start with what you want and figure out what you have to
learn in order to get it?
[14] In fact I believe that most people who are quick to come up with
answers simply haven't thought about all the ways that they can be wrong.
[15] I don't mean that the more pain the better. I believe that too much pain
can break someone and that the absence of pain typically prevents growth
so that one should accept the amount of pain that is consistent with
achieving one's objectives.
[16] I have been very lucky because I have had the opportunity to see what
it's like to have little or no money and what it's like to have a lot of it. I'm
lucky because people make such a big deal of it, and if I didn't experience
both, I wouldn't be able to know how important it really is for me. I can't
comment on what having a lot of money means to others, but I do know
that for me, having a lot more money isn't a lot better than having enough
to cover the basics. That's because, for me, the best things in life—
meaningful work, meaningful relationships, interesting experiences, good
food, sleep, music, ideas, sex, and other basic needs and pleasures— are
not, past a certain point, materially improved upon by having a lot of
money. For me, money has always been very important to the point that I
could have these basics covered and never very important beyond that.
That doesn't mean that I don't think that having more is good—it's just that
I don't think it's a big deal. So, while I spend money on some very expensive
things that cost multiples relative to the more fundamental things, these
expensive things have never brought me much enjoyment relative to the
much cheaper, more fundamental things. They were just like cherries on
the cake. For my tastes, if I had to choose, I'd rather be a backpacker who is
exploring the world with little money than a big income earner who is in a
job I don't enjoy. (Though being in a job that provides me with what I want
is best of all, for me). Also, from having come from having next-to-nothing
to having a lot, I have developed a strong belief that, all things being equal,
offering equal opportunity is fundamental to being good, while handing out
money to capable people that weakens their need to get stronger and
contribute to society is bad.
[17] I recognize that sometimes a discovery is made by accident, but the
discovery is of some basic underlying principle that creates understanding
of a cause-effect relationship that leads to a desired result.
[18] In fact, it appears to me that everything other than evolution eventually
disintegrates and that we all are, and everything else is, vehicles for
evolution.
[19] Of course, we are often satisfied with the same things – relationships,
careers, etc.— but when that is the case, it is typically because we are
getting new enjoyments from the new dimensions of these things.
[20] The marginal benefits of moving from a shortage to an abundance of
anything decline.
[21] When pursuing self-interest is in conflict with evolution, it is typically
punished.
[22] Of course, there are many people who give society what it wants but are
paid poorly. This is explained by the law of supply and demand.
[23] I do know some successful people who are obsessed with making
money despite making money having little or no marginal benefit for them.
[24] Darwin is reported to have said, "It is not the strongest of the species
that survives, nor the most intelligent that survives. It is the one that is the
most adaptable to change."
[25] Your ability to see the changing landscape and adapt is more a function
of your perceptive and reasoning abilities than your ability to learn and
process quickly.
[26] Of course it is true that people are born with differences in their various
innate abilities. However, judgment is primarily learned.
[27] As Freud put it, "Love and work are the cornerstones of our humanness."
[28] The work doesn't necessarily have to be a job, though I believe it's
generally better if it is a job. It can be any kind of long-term challenge that
leads to personal improvement. As you might have guessed, I believe the
need to have meaningful work is connected to man's innate desire to
improve. And relationships are the natural connections to others that make
us relevant to society.
[29] There are literally two different parts of each person's brain that
influence these reactions: the pre-frontal cortex and the amygdala. They
work as though they were two different brains that fight for control of
decision-making. The pre-frontal cortex is the logical part of the brain that
evaluates choices logically and the amygdala is the "animal instinct" part of
the brain that triggers emotional reactions like the instinct to fight or flee.
When faced with an obstacle or threat, an emotional reaction (e.g. pain) can
be triggered that can lead to a fight or flight reaction that "hijacks" decision
making away from the pre-frontal cortex, where the rational choices are
being made. This can result in our making decisions that produce
consequences that we do not want. This typically causes really big
problems.
[30] Your very unique power of reflectiveness—i.e., your ability to look at
yourself, the world around you, and the relationship between you and the
world—means that you can think deeply and weigh subtle things to come
up with learning and wise choices. Asking other believable people about the
root causes of your pain in order to enhance your reflections is also
typically very helpful—especially others who have opposing views and
who share your interest in finding the truth rather than being proven right.
[31] If you can reflect deeply about your problems, they almost always
shrink or disappear, because you almost always find a better way of dealing
with them than if you don't face them head on. The more difficult the
problem, the more important it is that you think hard about it and deal
with it. After seeing how effectively facing reality—especially your
problems, mistakes and weaknesses— works, I believe you will become
comfortable with it and won't want to operate any other way.
[32] An example of this is what discussed earlier: wanting to save the
wildebeest from the hyenas. When you don't want to face what's really
happening, you can't make sound decisions.
[33] For example, if you are dumb or ugly, you are unlikely to acknowledge
it, even though doing so would help you better deal with that reality.
Recognizing such "harsh realities" is both very painful and very productive.
[34] I am not saying that we all have the same potential, just that to get the
most of your potential—whatever that is—you must learn and earn.
[35] As I mentioned in the first chapter, you don't have to know everything
to get what you want. You just have to be honest with yourself about what
you don't know and know who to ask for help.
[36] Sometimes it can be difficult to anticipate the 2nd or 3rd order
consequences of a decision, such as one that involves using complex
technology like X-Rays or DDT, where either things are not what they seem
to be or there are too many unknown variables to make a sound decision.
For more on the probabilities of personal decision-making, please refer to
the "To Make Decisions Effectively" section at the end of Part 3.
[37] Blaming others is NOT the same thing as holding others accountable,
which we will discuss in my Management Principles.
[38] Luck—both good and bad—is a reality. But it is not a reason for an
excuse. In life, we have a large number of choices, and luck can play a
dominant role in the outcomes of our choices. But if you have a large
enough sample size—if you have large number of decisions (if you are
playing a lot of poker hands, for example)—over time, luck will cancel out
and skill will have a dominant role in determining outcomes. A superior
decision-maker will produce superior outcomes. That does not mean there
won't be certain bad- (or good-) luck events that are life changing: a friend
of mine dove into a swimming pool and became a quadriplegic. But he
approached his situation well and became as happy as anybody else,
because there are many paths to happiness. What happens to a lot of people
is that they don't take personal responsibility for their outcomes, and as a
result fail to make the best possible decisions.
[39] As I mentioned earlier, I believe that nature is symbiotic—and that we
must give to it for it to give back.
[40] The you I am referring to here is the strategic you – the one who is
deciding on what you want and how best to get it, previously referred to as
you (1).
[41] Some societies define evil to be the desires that can take you away from
your goals, which I think is a good way of seeing the difference between
goals and desires. That doesn't mean I think that there isn't room for a little
"bad", but I do think that desires that fundamentally divert you from your
goals should be avoided at all cost.
[42] This might sound inconsistent with the previous point that you can't
have everything. It's not. I am saying that, at this stage of goal-setting, don't
set your goals based on what you think you can achieve. In the process of
doing the other four steps (especially designing) you will thoroughly think
through what is possible. Then you will circle back and enter the goal-
setting mode again. As I mentioned, this five-step process is iterative, but
it must be pursued one step at a time in order to do each step excellently.
[43] The more creative I am, the less hard I have to work.
[44] Though I've said it before, it's worth saying again: I understand that
recognizing harsh realities can be extremely painful. But I've learned that if
you can stare hard at your problems, they almost always shrink or
disappear, because you almost always find a better way of dealing with
them than if you don't face them head on. The more difficult the problem,
the more important it is that you stare at it and deal with it. After seeing
how effectively facing reality – especially your problems, mistakes and
weaknesses – works, you will become comfortable with it and won't want
to operate any other way. I also believe that one of the best ways of getting
at truth is reflecting with others who have opposing views and who share
your interest in finding the truth rather than being proven right.
[45] This is typically because they let their emotions control their behavior
and/or they haven't learned how to deal with their problems e.g., the
amygdala is "hijacking" decision-making away from the pre-frontal cortex.
[46] There are also other antidotes that we will delve into in the next book.
[47] Not caring to solve problems often occurs when the expected reward is
less than the expected cost. For example, when someone is working toward
someone else's goals without being appropriately supervised, rewarded or
punished.
[48] The organization Outward Bound has a concept that is helpful in
thinking about the optimal pace of personal evolution. They speak of a
comfort zone, a stretch zone and a panic zone. It's best to spend most of
your time in the stretch zone.
[49] Thomas Edison said about failure: "I have not failed. I've just found
10,000 ways that don't work." "I am discouraged, because every wrong
attempt discarded is another step forward." "Results! Why, man, I have
gotten a lot of results. I know several thousand things that won't work."
"When I have fully decided that a result is worth getting I go ahead of it and
make trial after trial until it comes." "Many of life's failures are men who
did not realize how close they were to success when they gave up."
[50] A good book about this is Einstein's Mistakes by Hans Ohanian.
[51] If you recognize short-term failure as a step toward long-term success,
which it really is if you learn from it, you won't be afraid of it or made
uncomfortable by it and you will approach all of your experiences as
learning experiences, even the most difficult ones.
[52] Ego often stands in the way of acknowledging your weaknesses (which
is the essential first step in overcoming them), like being afraid to ask a
question because people might think you're stupid because you don't know
something. Yet acknowledging those weaknesses (e.g., "I know I'm a dumb
shit, but I'd just like to know...") helps you move beyond ego toward
learning and improving.
[53] Most people have a tough time disagreeing about the most trivial
things, like whether they like the same restaurant, yet are happy to
confidently express their opinions, however badly they are formed, if they
get them out first. As a result, there is an overabundance of confident bad
opinions around and very few thoughtful conclusions arising from learning
from each other. It is common for conversations to be exchanges of
sentences that begin "I think..." followed by their conclusions, and both
parties believing that they had a good conversation and feeling good about
each other, even though nothing was accomplished. If most people did the
opposite—i.e., if they sought out and open-mindedly explored their
disagreements—it would produce a radical increase in learning, and the
world would be a much better place.
[54] In fact, I once toyed with the possibility of developing a voting system
based on a believability matrix. Though that might not be possible for
practical reasons, it suggests the merit-based decision-making we aspire
toward with our current process. The challenging and probing we encourage
are not meant to second-guess every decision but to help us assess the
quality of our work over time.
[55] The thing that I like least (or dislike most) about my job is fighting to
maintain standards, but it must be done. I know that the only way for me to
succeed and to be happy is to have good people do it for me, which means
that I have to hire, train, and sort out people. It is futile to give
responsibilities to people who do not have the qualities required to succeed.
It frustrates, and inevitably angers, all parties, which is subversive to the
environment. So, hiring, training, and sorting out people so that
responsibilities are placed in the hands of people who can be trusted to do
an excellent job is the only viable path, and is extremely satisfying.
[56] I have particularly valued psychologist Bob Eichinger.
[57] I am convinced that we are just scratching the surface of understanding
differences in how people think and how to test for it, so there is great
potential for others to follow this path. Unfortunately, most of the world's
experts I have met are more theoretical than practical.
[58] A good book on this is A Whole New Mind by Daniel H. Pink, and a good
article on the science of this is "A Wandering Mind Heads Straight
Toward Insight" by Robert Lee Hotz from The Wall Street Journal.
[59] "Bright" people have high IQs, are highly analytical thinkers, and can
solve complex mental problems.
[60] "Smart" people have common sense, are good at synthesizing, and can
imagine what is possible.
[61] Even the "mistakes" that nature makes have a purpose; they are
essential for the evolutionary process.
[62] The importance of a skill will vary according to the job. The more
knowledge-dependent and independent in nature the job is (e.g., a
programmer or lawyer whose job isn't to think about the direction of the
company), the more relevant the required skills are.
[63] Consider how few important decisions you make as a student from first
grade through college. Other than deciding which college to attend in the
senior year of high school and which major to pursue in the sophomore year
of college, most people normally just do what they are told to do.
[64] You learn principles by experiencing the rewards and punishments of
your actions interacting with reality. The clearer the relationship is between
cause and effect, the better it is for learning and evolving. So clearly
designated responsibilities enhance the feedback and learning process. For
example, if you are in the woods and have to survive on your own, the
connection between your actions and their results is clearer and is all that
matters. Blame doesn't enter into it as it gets you nothing. All that you
focus on are the interactions between your actions and their results.
[65] If you answered C and A, you understand the concept. If you didn't,
think again.
[66] Child psychologists, dog trainers, and other behavior modification
specialists will tell you that constant, no-exception feedback is fundamental
to good training.
[67] I believe that school overrates the importance of intellectualized
learning. People who were terrific in school and very good at this type of
learning tend to overvalue it, or at least fail to distinguish it from the
experiential/internalized kind of learning. This lack of differentiation can
become a great peril later in life. Many people who have had great
academic success need to be mindful of this challenge, especially if their
success has been in the "sciences," such as math and engineering. I also
believe this is why hands-on experience is particularly valuable for these
types of people.
[68] Which would be because the manager—the responsible party for
making it clear who is responsible for what—is failing to do that well.
[69] That doesn't mean that all people have to solve and prevent all repeating
problems or they shouldn't be in their jobs. That might not be possible
because smaller, repeating problems might be consciously accepted until
they become high enough priorities to be fixed. However, it does mean that
repeating problems should be recognized and, if not able to be resolved,
they must be elevated.
[70] Good conceptual thinkers naturally see things in this outline-like form
and know how to navigate. They know whether they are having an above-
the-line conversation and appropriately delving, and they know how to
navigate between both levels. Poor conceptual thinkers tend to get confused
because they see things as one big pile of information from which they pick
data points almost at random.
[71] As Lee Ann Womack's country and western song says, when you have
a choice between sitting it out or dancing, I hope you'll dance.
[72] Everyone is wrestling with some things, but most people don't talk
about them—some people don't like to probe you about your weaknesses
because they think it's unkind or awkward. And it's often difficult for us to
see and accept our own weaknesses. So when you are really in synch with
others about what you're wrestling with, that is a great step forward,
because this feedback is probably true.
Table of Contents
Part 1: The Importance of Principles
Part 2: My Most Fundamental Life Principles
Part 3: My Management Principles
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]
[30]
[31]
[32]
[33]
[34]
[35]
[36]
[37]
[38]
[39]
[40]
[41]
[42]
[43]
[44]
[45]
[46]
[47]
[48]
[49]
[50]