
--- Page 1 ---

--- Page 2 ---

--- Page 3 ---

--- Page 4 ---
Contents
Title	Page
Contents
Dedication
Copyright
Prologue
Introduction:	
Thinking	Outside	the	Brain
Part	I:	Thinking	with	Our	Bodies
Thinking	with	Sensations
Thinking	with	Movement
Thinking	with	Gesture
Part	II:	Thinking	with	Our	Surroundings
Thinking	with	Natural	Spaces
Thinking	with	Built	Spaces
Thinking	with	the	Space	of	Ideas
Part	III:	Thinking	with	Our	Relationships
Thinking	with	Experts
Thinking	with	Peers
Thinking	with	Groups
Conclusion
Acknowledgments
Notes
Index
About	the	Author
--- Page 5 ---
For	Sally,	Billy,	and	Frankie
--- Page 6 ---
Copyright	©	2021	by	Anne	Paul
All	rights	reserved
For	information	about	permission	to	reproduce	selections	from	this	book,	write	to
trade.permissions@hmhco.com
	or	to	Permissions,	Houghton	Mifflin	Harcourt	Publishing	Company,	3	Park
Avenue,	19th	Floor,	New	York,	New	York	10016.
hmhbooks.com
Library	of	Congress	Cataloging-in-Publication	Data
Names:	Paul,	Annie	Murphy,	author.
Title:	The	extended	mind	:	the	power	of	thinking	outside	the	brain	/	Annie	Murphy	Paul.
Description:	Boston	:	Houghton	Mifflin	Harcourt,	2021.	|	Includes	bibliographical	references	and	index.
Identifiers:	
LCCN
	2020039127	(print)	|	
LCCN
	2020039128	(ebook)	|	
ISBN
	9780544947665	(hardcover)	|
ISBN
	9780544947580	(ebook)	|	
ISBN
	9780358611516	|	
ISBN
	9780358611585
Subjects:	
LCSH
:	Mind	and	body.	|	Thought	and	thinking.	|	Cognition.
Classification:	
LCC
	
BF
161	.
P
38	2021	(print)	|	
LCC	BF
161	(ebook)	|	
DDC
	128—dc23
LC	record	available	at	
https://lccn.loc.gov/2020039127
LC	ebook	record	available	at	
https://lccn.loc.gov/2020039128
Cover	design	by	Mark	Robinson
Author	photograph	©	Stephanie	Anestis	Photography
Cover	Image:	ISpiyaphong	/	iStock	/	Getty	Images
v1.0521
--- Page 7 ---
Prologue
W
HEN	YOU’RE	WRITING
	a	book	about	how	to	think	well,	your	sources—the
cognitive	scientists,	psychologists,	biologists,	neuroscientists,	and	philosophers
who	all	have	something	to	contribute	on	the	subject—will	often	seem	to	be
speaking,	via	their	work,	directly	to	you:	
Yes,	you	there,	writing	a	book!
	They
cajole	and	insist,	they	argue	and	debate,	they	issue	warnings	and	pass	judgment;
as	you	lay	out	their	recommendations	for	the	reader,	they	inquire	pointedly:	
Are
you	taking	your	own	advice?
I	entered	into	one	such	intimate	exchange	when	I	read,	with	a	jolt	of
recognition,	a	passage	written	more	than	130	years	ago;	it	was	as	if	the	author
were	reaching	through	the	pages	that	lay	open	on	my	desk.	Making	the	meeting
more	intense,	the	writer	in	question	was	a	distinctly	intimidating	character:	the
German	philosopher	Friedrich	Nietzsche,	he	of	the	severe	gaze	and	vaguely
sinister	mustache.
“How	quickly	we	guess
	how	someone	has	come	by	his	ideas,”	Nietzsche	slyly
observed,	“whether	it	was	while	sitting	in	front	of	his	inkwell,	with	a	pinched
belly,	his	head	bowed	low	over	the	paper—in	which	case	we	are	quickly	finished
with	his	book,	too!	Cramped	intestines	betray	themselves—you	can	bet	on	that
—no	less	than	closet	air,	closet	ceilings,	closet	narrowness.”
The	room	in	which	I	was	writing	suddenly	seemed	rather	airless	and	small.
I	encountered	his	words	as	I	was	working	on	a	chapter	about	how	bodily
movement	affects	the	way	we	think.	The	quote	from	Nietzsche	
appears	in	a	book
titled	
A	Philosophy	of	Walking,
	by	the	contemporary	French	philosopher
Frédéric	Gros;	Gros	has	his	own	thoughts	to	add.	Don’t	think	of	a	book	as
issuing	only	from	an	author’s	head,	he	advises.	“Think	of	the	scribe’s	body
:	his
hands,	his	feet,	his	shoulders	and	legs.	Think	of	the	book	as	an	expression	of
physiology.	In	all	too	many	books	the	reader	can	sense	the	seated	body,	doubled
up,	stooped,	shriveled	in	on	itself.”
My	seated	body	shifted	guiltily	in	its	chair,	which	it	had	occupied	all	morning.
Far	more	conducive	to	the	act	of	creation,	Gros	continues,	is	“the	walking
body”
—which,	he	says,	is	“unfolded	and	tensed	like	a	bow:	opened	to	wide
--- Page 8 ---
spaces	like	a	flower	to	the	sun.”	Nietzsche,	he	reminds	us,	wrote	that	we	should
“sit	as	little	as	possible;
	do	not	believe	any	idea	that	was	not	born	in	the	open	air
and	of	free	movement.”
The	philosophers	were	ganging	up	on	me;	I	closed	my	laptop	and	went	for	a
walk.
I	was	acting	not	only	on	their	say-so,	of	course;	by	this	point	in	my	research	I
had	read	dozens	of	empirical	studies	showing	that	a	bout	of	physical	activity
sharpens	our	attention,	improves	our	memory,	and	enhances	our	creativity.	And
in	fact,	I	found	that	the	forward	movement	of	my	legs,	the	flow	of	images	past
my	eyes,	the	slight	elevation	of	my	heart	rate	did	work	some	kind	of	change	on
my	mind.	Upon	sitting	back	down	at	my	desk,	I	wasted	no	time	resolving	a
knotty	conceptual	problem	that	had	tormented	me	all	morning.	(I	can	only	hope
that	the	prose	I	produced	also	“retains	and	expresses
	the	energy,	the	springiness
of	the	body,”	in	Gros’s	formulation.)	Could	my	brain	have	solved	the	problem
on	its	own,	or	did	it	require	the	assist	provided	by	my	ambulatory	limbs?
Our	culture	insists	that	the	brain	is	the	sole	locus	of	thinking,	a	cordoned-off
space	where	cognition	happens,	much	as	the	workings	of	my	laptop	are	sealed
inside	its	aluminum	case.	This	book	argues	otherwise:	it	holds	that	the	mind	is
something	more	like	the	nest-building	bird	I	spotted	on	my	walk,	plucking	a	bit
of	string	here,	a	twig	there,	constructing	a	whole	out	of	available	parts.	For
humans	these	parts	include,	most	notably,	the	feelings	and	movements	of	our
bodies;	the	physical	spaces	in	which	we	learn	and	work;	and	the	other	minds
with	which	we	interact—our	classmates,	colleagues,	teachers,	supervisors,
friends.	Sometimes	all	three	elements	come	together	in	especially	felicitous
fashion,	as	they	did	
for	the	brilliant	intellectual	team	of	Amos	Tversky	and
Daniel	Kahneman.	The	two	psychologists	carried	out	much	of	their
groundbreaking	work	on	heuristics	and	biases—the	human	mind’s	habitual
shortcuts	and	distortions—by	talking	and	walking	together,	through	the	bustling
streets	of	Jerusalem	or	along	the	rolling	hills	of	the	California	coast.	“I	did	the
best	thinking
	of	my	life	on	leisurely	walks	with	Amos,”	Kahneman	has	said.
Many	tomes	have	been	written	on	human	cognition,	many	theories	proposed
and	studies	conducted	(Tversky	and	Kahneman’s	among	them).	These	efforts
have	produced	countless	illuminating	insights,	but	they	are	limited	by	their
assumption	that	thinking	happens	only	inside	the	brain.	Much	less	attention	has
been	paid	to	the	ways	people	use	the	world	to	think:	the	gestures	of	the	hands,
the	space	of	a	sketchbook,	the	act	of	listening	to	someone	tell	a	story,	or	the	task
of	teaching	someone	else.	These	“extra-neural”	inputs	change	the	way	we	think;
it	could	even	be	said	that	they	constitute	a	part	of	the	thinking	process	itself.	But
where	is	the	chronicle	of	
this
	mode	of	cognition?	Our	scientific	journals	mostly
--- Page 9 ---
proceed	from	the	premise	that	the	mental	organ	is	a	disembodied,	placeless,
asocial	entity,	a	“brain	in	a	vat”;
	our	history	books	spin	tales	that	attribute	world-
changing	breakthroughs	to	individual	men,	thinking	great	thoughts	on	their	own.
Yet	a	parallel	narrative	has	existed	in	front	of	us	all	along—a	kind	of	secret
history	of	thinking	outside	the	brain.	Scientists,	artists,	authors;	leaders,
inventors,	entrepreneurs:	they’ve	all	used	the	world	as	raw	material	for	their
trains	of	thought.	This	book	aims	to	exhume	that	hidden	saga,	reclaiming	its
rightful	place	in	any	full	accounting	of	how	the	human	race	has	achieved	its
remarkable	feats	of	intellect	and	creativity.
We’ll	learn	about	how	geneticist	Barbara	McClintock	made	her	Nobel	Prize–
winning	discoveries	by	imaginatively	“embodying”	the	plant	chromosomes	she
studied,	and	about	how	pioneering	psychotherapist	and	social	critic	Susie
Orbach	senses	what	her	patients	are	feeling	by	tuning	in	to	the	internal
sensations	of	her	own	body	(a	capacity	known	as	
interoception
).	We’ll
contemplate	how	biologist	James	Watson	determined	the	double-helix	structure
of	DNA	by	physically	manipulating	cardboard	cutouts	he’d	made	himself,	and
how	author	Robert	Caro	plots	the	lives	of	his	biographical	subjects	on	an
intricately	detailed	wall-sized	map.	We’ll	explore	how	virologist	Jonas	Salk	was
inspired	to	complete	his	work	on	a	polio	vaccine	while	wandering	a	thirteenth-
century	Italian	monastery,	
and	how	the	artist	Jackson	Pollock	set	off	a	revolution
in	painting	by	trading	his	apartment	in	frenetic	downtown	Manhattan	for	a
farmhouse	on	the	verdant	south	fork	of	Long	Island.	We’ll	find	out	how	Pixar
director	Brad	Bird	creates	modern	movie	classics	like	
Ratatouille
	and	
The
Incredibles
	by	arguing—vehemently—with	his	longtime	producer,	and	how
physicist	Carl	Wieman,	another	Nobel	Prize	winner,	figured	out	that	inducing
his	students	to	talk	with	one	another	was	the	key	to	getting	them	to	think	like
scientists.
Such	stories	push	back	against	the	prevailing	assumption	that	the	brain	can,	or
should,	do	it	all	on	its	own;	they	are	vivid	testimony	to	the	countervailing	notion
that	we	think	best	when	we	think	with	our	bodies,	our	spaces,	and	our
relationships.	But	as	with	Friedrich	Nietzsche’s	commendation	of	the	virtues	of
walking,	the	evidence	supporting	the	efficacy	of	thinking	outside	the	brain	is	far
from	merely	anecdotal.	Research	emerging	from	three	related	areas	of
investigation	has	convincingly	demonstrated	the	centrality	of	extra-neural
resources	to	our	thinking	processes.
First,	there	is	the	study	of	
embodied	cognition,
	which	explores	the	role	of	the
body	in	our	thinking:	for	example,	how	making	hand	gestures	increases	the
fluency	of	our	speech	and	deepens	our	understanding	of	abstract	concepts.
Second,	there	is	the	study	of	
situated	cognition,
	which	examines	the	influence	of
--- Page 10 ---
place	on	our	thinking:	for	instance,	how	environmental	cues	that	convey	a	sense
of	belonging,	or	a	sense	of	personal	control,	enhance	our	performance	in	that
space.	And	third,	there	is	the	study	of	
distributed	cognition,
	which	probes	the
effects	of	thinking	with	others—such	as	how	people	working	in	groups	can
coordinate	their	individual	areas	of	expertise	(a	process	called	“transactive
memory”),	and	how	groups	can	work	together	to	produce	results	that	exceed
their	members’	individual	contributions	(a	phenomenon	known	as	“collective
intelligence”).
As	a	journalist	who	has	covered	research	in	psychology	and	cognitive	science
for	more	than	twenty	years,	I	read	the	findings	generated	by	these	fields	with
growing	excitement.	Together	they	seemed	to	indicate	that	it’s	the	stuff	
outside
our	heads	that	makes	us	smart—a	proposition	with	enormous	implications	for
what	we	do	in	education,	in	the	workplace,	and	in	our	everyday	lives.	The	only
problem:	there	was	no	“together,”	no	
overarching	framework	that	organized
these	multitudinous	results	into	a	coherent	whole.	Researchers	working	within
these	three	disciplines	published	in	different	journals	and	presented	at	different
conferences,	rarely	drawing	connections	among	their	areas	of	specialization.
Was	there	some	unifying	idea	that	could	pull	together	these	deeply	intriguing
findings?
Once	again	a	philosopher	came	to	my	rescue:	this	time	it	was	Andy	Clark,
professor	of	cognitive	philosophy	at	the	University	of	Sussex	in	England.	In
1995	Clark	had	co-written	a	paper	titled	“The	Extended	Mind,”	which	opened
with	a	deceptively	simple	question:	“Where	does	the	mind	stop
	and	the	rest	of
the	world	begin?”	Clark	and	his	coauthor,	philosopher	David	Chalmers,	noted
that	we	have	traditionally	assumed	that	the	mind	is	contained	within	the	head—
but,	they	argued,	“there	is	nothing	sacred	about	skull	and	skin.”	Elements	of	the
world	outside	may	effectively	act	as	mental	“extensions,”	allowing	us	to	think	in
ways	our	brains	could	not	manage	on	their	own.
Clark	and	Chalmers	initially	focused	their	analysis	on	the	way	
technology
	can
extend	the	mind—a	proposal	that	quickly	made	the	leap	from	risibly
preposterous	to	self-evidently	obvious,	once	their	readers	acquired	smartphones
and	began	offloading	large	chunks	of	their	memories	onto	their	new	devices.
(Fellow	philosopher	Ned	Block	likes	to	say
	that	Clark	and	Chalmers’s	thesis	was
false	when	it	was	written	in	1998	but	subsequently	became	true—perhaps	in
2007,	when	Apple	introduced	the	first	iPhone.)
Yet	as	early	as	that	original	paper,	Clark	hinted	that	other	kinds	of	extensions
were	possible.	“What	about	socially	extended	cognition?”
	he	and	Chalmers
asked.	“Could	my	mental	states	be	partly	constituted	by	the	states	of	other
thinkers?	We	see	no	reason	why	not.”	In	the	years	that	followed,	Clark
--- Page 11 ---
continued	to	enlarge	his	conception	of	the	kinds	of	entities	that	could	serve	as
extensions	of	the	mind.	He	observed	that	our	physical	movements	and	gestures
play	“an	important	role
	in	an	extended	neural-bodily	cognitive	economy”;	he
noted	that	humans	are	inclined	to	create	“designer	environments”
—carefully
appointed	spaces	“that	alter	and	simplify	the	computational	tasks	which	our
brains	must	perform	in	order	to	solve	complex	problems.”	Over	the	course	of
many	more	published	papers	and	books,	Clark	mounted	a	broad	and	persuasive
argument	against	what	he	called	the	“brainbound”	perspective
—the	view	that
thinking	happens	only	inside	the	brain—and	in	favor	of	what	he	called	the
“extended”	perspective,	in	which	the	rich	resources	of	our	world	can	and	do
enter	into	our	trains	of	thought.
Consider	me	a	convert.	The	notion	of	the	extended	mind	seized	my
imagination	and	has	not	yet	released	its	grip.	During	my	many	years	of
reporting,	I	had	never	before	encountered	an	idea	that	changed	so	much	about
how	I	think,	how	I	work,	how	I	parent,	how	I	navigate	everyday	life.	It	became
apparent	to	me	that	Andy	Clark’s	bold	proposal	was	not	(or	not	only!)	the
esoteric	thought	experiment	of	an	ivory	tower	philosopher;	it	was	a	plainly
practical	invitation	to	think	differently	and	better.	As	I	began	to	catalog	the
dozens	of	techniques	for	thinking	outside	the	brain	that	researchers	have	tested
and	verified,	I	eagerly	incorporated	them	into	my	own	repertoire.
These	include	methods	for	sharpening	our	interoceptive	sense,	so	as	to	use
these	internal	signals	to	guide	our	decisions	and	manage	our	mental	processes;
they	encompass	guidelines	for	the	use	of	specific	types	of	gesture,	or	particular
modes	of	physical	activity,	to	enhance	our	memory	and	attention.	This	research
offers	instructions	on	using	time	in	nature	to	restore	our	focus	and	increase	our
creativity,	as	well	as	directions	for	designing	our	learning	and	working	spaces
for	greater	productivity	and	performance.	The	studies	we’ll	cover	describe
structured	forms	of	social	interaction	that	allow	other	people’s	cognition	to
augment	our	own;	they	also	supply	guidance	on	how	to	offload,	externalize,	and
dynamically	interact	with	our	thoughts—a	much	more	effective	approach	than
doing	it	all	“in	our	heads.”
In	time	I	came	to	recognize	that	I	was	acquiring	a	second	education—one	that
is	increasingly	essential	but	almost	always	overlooked	in	our	focus	on	educating
the	brain.	Over	many	years	of	elementary	school,	high	school,	and	even	college
and	graduate	school,	we’re	never	explicitly	taught	to	think	outside	the	brain;
we’re	not	shown	how	to	employ	our	bodies	and	spaces	and	relationships	in	the
service	of	intelligent	thought.	Yet	this	instruction	is	available	if	we	know	where
to	look;	our	teachers	are	the	artists	and	scientists	and	authors	who	have	figured
out	these	methods	for	themselves,	and	the	researchers	who	are,	at	last,	making
these	methods	the	object	of	study.
--- Page 12 ---
these	methods	the	object	of	study.
For	my	own	part,	I’m	convinced	that	I	could	not	have	written	this	book
without	the	help	of	the	practices	detailed	within	it.	That’s	not	to	say	
that	I	didn’t
sometimes	fall	back	into	our	culture’s	default	position.	Before	Friedrich
Nietzsche’s	fortuitous	intervention	that	morning,	I	was	in	full	brainbound	mode,
my	“head	bowed	low”	over	my	keyboard,	working	my	poor	brain	ever	harder
instead	of	looking	for	opportunities	to	extend	it.	I’m	grateful	for	the	nudge	my
research	supplied;	it’s	that	gentle	push	in	a	more	productive	direction	that	this
book	seeks	to	offer	its	own	readers.
Frédéric	Gros,	the	French	philosopher	who	brought	Nietzsche’s	words	to	my
attention,	maintains	that	thinkers	ought	to	get	moving	in	a	“quest	for	a	different
light.”
	As	he	observes,	“Libraries	are	always	too	dark,”	and	books	written
among	the	stacks	manifest	this	dull	dimness—while	“other	books	reflect
piercing	mountain	light,	or	the	sea	sparkling	in	sunshine.”	It’s	my	hope	that	this
book	will	cast	a	different	light,	bring	a	bracing	gust	of	fresh	air	to	the	thinking
we	do	as	students	and	workers,	as	parents	and	citizens,	as	leaders	and	creators.
Our	society	is	facing	unprecedented	challenges,	and	we’ll	need	to	think	well	in
order	to	solve	them.	The	brainbound	paradigm	now	so	dominant	is	clearly
inadequate	to	the	task;	everywhere	we	look	we	see	problems	with	attention	and
memory,	with	motivation	and	persistence,	with	logical	reasoning	and	abstract
thinking.	Truly	original	ideas	and	innovations	seem	scarce;	engagement	levels	at
schools	and	in	companies	are	low;	teams	and	groups	struggle	to	work	together	in
an	effective	and	satisfying	way.
I’ve	come	to	believe	that	such	difficulties	result	in	large	part	from	a
fundamental	misunderstanding	of	how—and	
where
—thinking	happens.	As	long
as	we	settle	for	thinking	inside	the	brain,	we’ll	remain	bound	by	the	limits	of	that
organ.	But	when	we	reach	outside	it	with	intention	and	skill,	our	thinking	can	be
transformed.	It	can	become	as	dynamic	as	our	bodies,	as	airy	as	our	spaces,	as
rich	as	our	relationships—as	capacious	as	the	whole	wide	world.
--- Page 13 ---
Introduction:
Thinking	Outside	the	Brain
U
	
SE	YOUR	HEAD.
How	many	times	have	you	heard	that	phrase?	Perhaps	you’ve	even	urged	it	on
someone	else—a	son	or	daughter,	a	student,	an	employee.	Maybe	you’ve
muttered	it	under	your	breath	while	struggling	with	an	especially	tricky	problem,
or	when	counseling	yourself	to	remain	rational:	
Use	your	head!
The	command	is	a	common	one,	issued	in	schools,	in	the	workplace,	amid	the
trials	of	everyday	life.	Its	refrain	finds	an	echo	in	culture	both	high	and	low,
from	Auguste	Rodin’s	
The	Thinker,
	chin	resting	thoughtfully	on	fist,	to	the
bulbous	cartoon	depiction	of	the	brain	that	festoons	all	manner	of	products	and
websites—educational	toys,	nutritional	supplements,	cognitive	fitness	exercises.
When	we	say	it,	we	mean:	call	on	the	more	than	ample	powers	of	your	brain,
draw	on	the	magnificent	lump	of	tissue	inside	your	skull.	We	place	a	lot	of	faith
in	that	lump;	whatever	the	problem,	we	believe,	the	brain	can	solve	it.
But	what	if	our	faith	is	misplaced?	What	if	the	directive	to	“use	your	head,”
ubiquitous	though	it	may	be,	is	misguided?	A	burgeoning	body	of	research
suggests	that	we’ve	got	it	exactly	backwards.	As	it	is,	we	use	our	brains	entirely
too	much—to	the	detriment	of	our	ability	to	think	intelligently.	What	we	need	to
do	is	think	
outside
	the	brain.
Thinking	outside	the	brain	means	skillfully	engaging	entities	external	to	our
heads—the	feelings	and	movements	of	our	bodies,	the	physical	spaces	in	which
we	learn	and	work,	and	the	minds	of	the	other	people	around	us—drawing	them
into	our	own	mental	processes.	By	reaching	
beyond	the	brain	to	recruit	these
“extra-neural”	resources,	we	are	able	to	focus	more	intently,	comprehend	more
deeply,	and	create	more	imaginatively—to	entertain	ideas	that	would	be	literally
unthinkable	by	the	brain	alone.	It’s	true	that	we’re	more	accustomed	to	thinking
about
	our	bodies,	our	spaces,	and	our	relationships.	But	we	can	also	think	
with
and	
through
	them—by	using	the	movements	of	our	hands	to	understand	and
express	abstract	concepts,	for	example,	or	by	arranging	our	workspace	in	ways
that	promote	idea	generation,	or	by	engaging	in	social	practices	like	teaching	and
--- Page 14 ---
storytelling	that	lead	to	deeper	understanding	and	more	accurate	memory.	Rather
than	exhorting	ourselves	and	others	to	use	our	heads,	we	should	be	applying
extra-neural	resources	to	the	project	of	thinking	
outside
	the	skull’s	narrow
circumference.
But	wait,	you	may	be	asking:	What’s	the	need?	Isn’t	the	brain,	on	its	own,	up
to	the	job?	Actually,	no.	We’ve	been	led	to	believe	that	the	human	brain	is	an
all-purpose,	all-powerful	thinking	machine.	We’re	deluged	with	reports	of
discoveries	about	the	brain’s	astounding	abilities,	its	lightning	quickness	and	its
protean	plasticity;	we’re	told	that	the	brain	is	a	fathomless	wonder,	“the	most
complex	structure
	in	the	universe.”	But	when	we	clear	away	the	hype,	we
confront	the	fact	that	the	brain’s	capacities	are	actually	quite	constrained	and
specific.	The	less	heralded	scientific	story	of	the	past	several	decades	has	been
researchers’	growing	awareness	of	the	brain’s	
limits.
	The	human	brain	is	limited
in	its	ability	to	pay	attention,	limited	in	its	capacity	to	remember,	limited	in	its
facility	with	abstract	concepts,	and	limited	in	its	power	to	persist	at	a	challenging
task.
Importantly,	these	limits	apply	to	
everyone’s
	brain.	It’s	not	a	matter	of
individual	differences	in	intelligence;	it’s	a	matter	of	the	character	of	the	organ
we	all	possess,	its	biological	nature	and	its	evolutionary	history.	The	brain	
does
do	a	few	things	exquisitely	well—things	like	sensing	and	moving	the	body,
navigating	through	space,	and	connecting	with	other	humans.	These	activities	it
can	manage	fluently,	almost	effortlessly.	But	accurately	recalling	complex
information?	Engaging	in	rigorous	logical	reasoning?	Grasping	abstract	or
counterintuitive	ideas?	Not	so	much.
Here	we	arrive	at	a	dilemma—one	that	we	all	share:	The	modern	world	is
extraordinarily	complex,	bursting	with	information,	built	around	non-intuitive
ideas,	centered	on	concepts	and	symbols.	Succeeding	in	this	world	requires
focused	attention,	prodigious	memory,	capa
cious	bandwidth,	sustained
motivation,	logical	rigor,	and	proficiency	with	abstractions.	The	gap	between
what	our	biological	brains	are	capable	of,	and	what	modern	life	demands,	is
large	and	getting	larger	each	day.	With	every	experimental	discovery,	the	divide
between	the	scientific	account	of	the	world	and	our	intuitive	“folk”
understanding	grows	more	pronounced.	With	every	terabyte	of	data	swelling
humanity’s	store	of	knowledge,	our	native	faculties	are	further	outstripped.	With
every	twist	of	complexity	added	to	the	world’s	problems,	the	naked	brain
becomes	more	unequal	to	the	task	of	solving	them.
Our	response	to	the	cognitive	challenges	posed	by	contemporary	life	has	been
to	double	down	on	what	the	philosopher	Andy	Clark	calls	“brainbound”	thinking
—those	very	capacities	that	are,	on	their	own,	so	woefully	inadequate.	We	urge
--- Page 15 ---
ourselves	and	others	to	grit	it	out,	bear	down,	“just	do	it”—to	
think	harder.
	But,
as	we	often	find	to	our	frustration,	the	brain	is	made	of	stubborn	and	unyielding
stuff,	its	vaunted	plasticity	notwithstanding.	Confronted	by	its	limits,	we	may
conclude	that	we	ourselves	(or	our	children	or	our	students	or	our	employees)
are	simply	not	smart	enough,	or	not	“gritty”	enough.	In	fact,	it’s	the	way	we
handle	our	mental	shortcomings—which	are,	remember,	endemic	to	our	species
—that	is	the	problem.	Our	approach	constitutes	an	instance	of	(as	the	poet
William	Butler	Yeats	put	it	in	another	context)	“the	will	trying	to	do	the	work
	of
the	imagination.”	The	smart	move	is	not	to	lean	ever	harder	on	the	brain	but	to
learn	to	reach	beyond	it.
In	
The	Middle	Class	Gentleman,
	a	comedy	written	by	the	seventeenth-century
French	playwright	Molière,	the	would-be	aristocrat	Monsieur	Jourdain	is
delighted	by	a	realization	that	fol
lows	upon	his	learning	the	difference	between
prose	and	verse.	“By	my	faith!
	For	more	than	forty	years	I	have	been	speaking
prose	without	knowing	anything	about	it!”	he	exclaims.	Likewise,	we	may	be
impressed	to	learn	that	we	have	long	been	drawing	extra-neural	resources	into
our	thinking	processes—that	we	
already
	think	outside	the	brain.
That’s	the	good	news.	The	bad	news	is	that	we	often	do	it	haphazardly,
without	much	intention	or	skill.	It’s	no	wonder	this	is	the	case.	Our	efforts	at
education	and	training,	as	well	as	management	and	leadership,	are	aimed	almost
exclusively	at	promoting	brainbound	thinking.	Beginning	in	elementary	school,
we	are	taught	to	sit	still,	work	quietly,	think	hard—a	model	for	mental	activity
that	will	prevail	during	all	the	years	that	follow,	through	high	school	and	college
and	into	the	workplace.	The	skills	we	develop	and	the	techniques	we	are	taught
are	those	that	involve	using	our	heads:	committing	information	to	memory,
engaging	in	internal	reasoning	and	deliberation,	endeavoring	to	self-discipline
and	self-motivate.
Meanwhile,	there	is	no	corresponding	cultivation	of	our	ability	to	think
outside	the	brain—no	instruction,	for	instance,	in	how	to	tune	in	to	the	body’s
internal	signals,	sensations	that	can	profitably	guide	our	choices	and	decisions.
We’re	not	trained	to	use	bodily	movements	and	gestures	to	understand	highly
conceptual	subjects	like	science	and	mathematics,	or	to	come	up	with	novel	and
original	ideas.	Schools	don’t	teach	students	how	to	restore	their	depleted
attention	with	exposure	to	nature	and	the	outdoors,	or	how	to	arrange	their	study
spaces	so	that	they	extend	intelligent	thought.	Teachers	and	managers	don’t
demonstrate	how	abstract	ideas	can	be	turned	into	physical	objects	that	can	be
manipulated	and	transformed	in	order	to	achieve	insights	and	solve	problems.
Employees	aren’t	shown	how	the	social	practices	of	imitation	and	vicarious
learning	can	shortcut	the	process	of	acquiring	expertise.	Classroom	groups	and
workplace	teams	aren’t	coached	in	scientifically	validated	methods	of	increasing
--- Page 16 ---
workplace	teams	aren’t	coached	in	scientifically	validated	methods	of	increasing
the	collective	intelligence	of	their	members.	Our	ability	to	think	outside	the	brain
has	been	left	almost	entirely	uneducated	and	undeveloped.
This	oversight	is	the	regrettable	result	of	what	has	been	called	our
“neurocentric	bias”
—that	is,	our	idealization	and	even	fetishization	of	the	brain
—and	our	corresponding	blind	spot	for	all	the	ways	cognition	extends	beyond
the	skull.	(As	the	comedian	Emo	Philips	has	remarked:	“I	used	to	think
	that	the
brain	was	the	most	wonderful	organ	in	my	body.	Then	I	realized	who	was	telling
me	this.”)	Seen	from	another	perspective,	however,	this	near-universal	neglect
represents	an	auspicious	opportunity—a	world	of	unrealized	potential.	Until
recently,	science	shared	the	larger	culture’s	neglect	of	thinking	outside	the	brain.
But	this	is	no	longer	the	case.	Psychologists,	cognitive	scientists,	and
neuroscientists	are	now	able	to	provide	a	clear	picture	of	how	extra-neural	inputs
shape	the	way	we	think.	Even	more	promising,	they	offer	practical	guidelines	for
enhancing	our	thinking	through	the	use	of	these	outside-the-brain	resources.
Such	developments	are	unfolding	against	the	backdrop	of	a	broader	shift	in	how
we	view	the	mind—and,	by	extension,	how	we	understand	ourselves.
But	first—to	gain	a	sense	of	where	we’ve	been	and	where	we’re	headed,	it’s
worth	taking	several	steps	back	in	time,	to	the	moment	when	our	current	ideas
about	the	brain	were	born.
	
O
N	FEBRUARY
	14,	1946,	a	breathless	bustle	filled	the	halls	of	the	Moore	School
of	Electrical	Engineering	in	Philadelphia.	On	this	day,	the	school’s	secret	jewel
was	going	to	be	revealed	to	the	world:	the	ENIAC.	Inside	a	locked	room	at
Moore	hummed	the	Electronic	Numerical	Integrator	and	Computer,
	the	first
machine	of	its	kind	capable	of	performing	calculations	at	lightning	speed.
Weighing	thirty	tons,	the	massive	ENIAC	used	around	eighteen	thousand
vacuum	tubes,	employed	about	six	thousand	switches,	and	encompassed
upwards	of	half	a	million	soldered	joints;	it	had	taken	more	than	200,000	man-
hours	to	build.
The	bus-sized	contraption	was	the	brainchild	of	John	Mauchly	and	J.	Presper
Eckert	Jr.,	two	young	scientists	at	the	University	of	Pennsylvania,	Moore’s
parent	institution.	With	funding	from	the	US	Army,	the	ENIAC	had	been
developed	for	the	purpose	of	computing	artillery	trajectories	for	American
gunners	fighting	the	war	in	Europe.	Compiling	trajectory	tables—necessary	for
the	effective	use	of	new	weapons	being	introduced	by	the	military—was	a
laborious	process,	requiring	the	service	of	teams	of	human	“computers”	working
in	shifts	around	the	clock.	A	machine	that	could	do	their	job	with	speed	and
accuracy	would	give	the	army	an	invaluable	edge.
Now,	six	months	after	V-Day,	the	demands	of	wartime	were	giving	way	to	the
--- Page 17 ---
Now,	six	months	after	V-Day,	the	demands	of	wartime	were	giving	way	to	the
needs	of	an	expanding	economy,	and	Mauchly	and	Eckert	had	called	a	press
conference	to	introduce	their	invention	to	the	world.	The	two	men	had	prepared
for	the	event	with	deliberate	care,	and	no	small	amount	of	stagecraft.	As	the
ENIAC	chugged	away	at	a	given	task,	some	three	hundred	neon	lights	built	into
the	machine’s	accumulators	flickered	and	flashed.	Presper	Eckert,	known	to	all
as	“Pres,”	judged	the	effect	of	these	small	bulbs	insufficiently	impressive.	On	the
morning	of	the	press	conference,	he	ran	out	and	purchased	an	armful	of	Ping-
Pong	balls,	each	of	which	he	cut	in	half	and	marked	with	a	number.	The	plastic
domes,	glued	over	the	neon	bulbs,	now	cast	a	dramatic	glow—especially	once
the	room’s	overhead	lights	were	dimmed.
At	the	appointed	hour,	the	door	to	the	room	that	held	the	ENIAC	was	opened,
and	a	gaggle	of	officials,	academics,	and	journalists	filed	in.	
Standing	in	front	of
the	hulking	machine,	lab	member	Arthur	Burks	welcomed	the	group	and	sought
to	impart	to	them	a	sense	of	the	moment’s	magnitude.	The	ENIAC	was
engineered	to	carry	out	mathematical	operations,	he	explained,	and	these
operations,	“if	made	to	take	place
	rapidly	enough,	might	in	time	solve	almost
any	problem.”	Burks	announced	that	he	would	begin	the	day’s	demonstration	by
asking	the	ENIAC	to	multiply	97,367	by	itself	five	thousand	times.	The	reporters
in	the	room	bent	over	their	notepads.	“Watch	closely,	you	may	miss	it,”	he
warned,	and	pushed	a	button;	before	the	newsmen	had	time	to	look	up,	the	task
was	complete,	executed	on	a	punch	card	delivered	to	Burks’s	hand.
Next	Burks	fed	the	machine	a	problem	like	those	for	which	it	had	been
designed:	the	ENIAC	would	now	calculate	the	trajectory	of	a	shell	taking	thirty
seconds	to	travel	from	the	gun	to	its	target.	Such	a	task	would	take	a	team	of
human	experts	three	days	to	compute;	the	ENIAC	completed	the	job	in	twenty
seconds,	faster	than	the	shell	itself	could	fly.	Jean	Bartik,	one	of	a	group	of
pioneering	female	engineers	who	helped	program	the	ENIAC,	was	on	hand	for
the	demonstration.	She	recalled,	“It	was	unheard	of
	that	a	machine	could	reach
such	speeds	of	calculation,	and	everyone	in	the	room,	even	the	great
mathematicians,	were	in	complete	wonder	and	awe	at	what	they	had	just	seen.”
The	next	day,	admiring	accounts	of	the	ENIAC	appeared	in	newspapers	all
over	the	world.	“
PHILADELPHIA
—One	of	the	war’s	top	secrets,
	an	amazing
machine	which	applies	electronic	speeds	for	the	first	time	to	mathematical	tasks
hitherto	too	difficult	and	cumbersome	for	solution,	was	announced	here	tonight
by	the	War	Department,”	the	
New	York	Times
	reported	on	its	front	page.	The
Times
	reporter,	T.	R.	Kennedy	Jr.,	sounded	dazzled	by	what	he’d	seen.	“So
clever	is	the	device,”	he	wrote,	“that	its	creators	have	given	up	trying	to	find
problems	so	long	that	they	cannot	be	solved.”
--- Page 18 ---
The	introduction	of	the	ENIAC	was	not	just	a	milestone	in	the	history	of
technology.	It	was	a	turning	point	in	the	story	of	
how	we	understand	ourselves.
In	its	early	days,	Mauchly	and	Eckert’s	invention	was	frequently	compared	to	a
human	brain.
	Newspaper	and	magazine	articles	described	the	ENIAC	as	a	“giant
electronic	brain,”
	a	“robot	brain,”
	an	“automatic	brain,”	and	a	“brain	machine.”
But	before	long,	the	analogy	got	turned	around.	It	became	a	commonplace	that
the	
brain
	is	like	a	
computer.
	Indeed,	the	“cognitive	revolution”	that	would	sweep
through	American	
universities	in	the	1950s	and	1960s	was	premised	on	the
belief	that	the	brain	could	be	understood	as	a	flesh-and-blood	computing
machine.	The	first	generation	of	cognitive	scientists	“took	seriously	the	idea
	that
the	mind	is	a	kind	of	computer,”	notes	Brown	University	professor	Steven
Sloman.	“Thinking	was	assumed	to	be	a	kind	of	computer	program	that	runs	in
people’s	brains.”
Since	those	early	days	at	the	dawn	of	the	digital	age,	the	brain-computer
analogy	has	become	only	more	pervasive	and	more	powerful,	engaged	not	just
by	researchers	and	academics	but	by	the	rest	of	us,	the	public	at	large.	The
metaphor	provides	us	with	a	model,	sometimes	conscious	but	often	implicit,	of
how	thinking	works.	The	brain,	according	to	this	analogy,	is	a	self-contained
information-processing	machine,	sealed	inside	the	skull	as	the	ENIAC	was
sequestered	in	its	locked	room.	From	this	inference	emerges	a	second:	the
human	brain	has	attributes,	akin	to	gigabytes	of	RAM	and	megahertz	of
processing	speed,	that	can	be	easily	measured	and	compared.	Following	on	these
is	the	third	and	perhaps	most	significant	supposition	of	all:	that	some	brains,	like
some	computers,	are	just	
better;
	they	possess	the	biological	equivalent	of	more
memory	storage,	greater	processing	power,	higher-resolution	screens.
To	this	day,	the	computer	metaphor	dominates	the	way	we	think	and	talk
about	mental	activity—but	it’s	not	the	only	one	that	shapes	our	notion	of	the
brain.	A	half-century	after	the	ENIAC	was	unveiled,	another	analogy	rose	to
prominence.
	
“N
EW	RESEARCH	SHOWS
	That	the	Brain	Can	Be	Developed	Like	a	Muscle,”	read
the	headline	of	the	news	article,	set	in	bold	type.	The	year	was	2002,	and	Lisa
Blackwell,	a	graduate	student	at	Columbia	University	working	with	psychology
professor	Carol	Dweck,	was	handing	out	copies	of	the	article	to	a	classroom	full
of	seventh-graders	at	a	public	school	in	New	York	City.	Dweck	and	Blackwell
were	testing	a	new	theory,	investigating	the	possibility	that	the	way	we
conceptualize	the	brain	can	affect	how	well	we	think.	The	study’s	protocol
required	Blackwell	to	guide	the	students	through	eight	informational	sessions;	in
--- Page 19 ---
this,	the	third	session	in	the	sequence,	students	were	to	take	turns	reading	the	text
of	the	article	aloud.
“Many	people	believe	that	a	person	is	born	either	smart,	average,	or	dumb—
and	stays	that	way,”	one	student	began.	“But	new	research	shows	
that	the	brain
is	more	like	a	muscle—it	changes	and	gets	stronger	when	you	use	it.”	Another
student	picked	up	the	thread:	“Everyone	knows	that	when	you	lift	weights,	your
muscles	get	bigger	and	you	get	stronger.	A	person	who	can’t	lift	20	pounds
when	they	start	exercising	can	get	strong	enough	to	lift	100	pounds	after
working	out	for	a	long	time.	That’s	because	the	muscles	become	larger	and
stronger	with	exercise.	And	when	you	stop	exercising,	the	muscles	shrink	and
you	get	weaker.	That’s	why	people	say,	‘Use	it	or	lose	it!’
 
”	A	giggle	rippled
through	the	room.	“But,”	a	third	pupil	read	on,	“most	people	don’t	know	that
when	they	practice	and	learn	new	things,	parts	of	their	brain	change	and	get
larger,	a	lot	like	muscles	do	when	they	exercise.”
Dweck’s	idea,	which	she	initially	called	“the	incremental	theory
	of
intelligence,”	would	eventually	become	known	to	the	world	as	the	“growth
mindset”
:	the	belief	that	concerted	mental	effort	could	make	people	smarter,	just
as	vigorous	physical	effort	could	make	people	stronger.	As	she	and	her
colleagues	wrote	in	an	account	of	their	early	research	in	schools,	“The	key
message
	was	that	learning	changes	the	brain	by	forming	new	connections,	and
that	students	are	in	charge	of	this	process.”	From	these	beginnings,	growth
mindset	became	a	popular	phenomenon—spawning	a	book,	
Mindset,
	that	has
sold	millions	of	copies,	and	inspiring	an	untold	number	of	speeches,
presentations,	and	workshops,	delivered	to	corporate	and	organizational
audiences	as	well	as	to	students	and	teachers.
At	the	center	of	it	all	is	a	metaphor:	the	brain	as	muscle.	The	mind,	in	this
analogy,	is	akin	to	a	biceps	or	a	quadriceps—a	physical	entity	that	varies	in
strength	among	individuals.	The	comparison	has	been	incorporated	into	another
hugely	popular	concept	originating	in	academic	psychology:	“grit.”	Angela
Duckworth,	the	University	of	Pennsylvania	psychologist	who	defines	grit	as
“perseverance	and	passion
	for	long-term	goals,”	echoes	Dweck	in	her	own	book.
“Like	a	muscle
	that	gets	stronger	with	use,	the	brain	changes	itself	when	you
struggle	to	master	a	new	challenge,”	she	wrote	in	the	best-selling	
Grit,
	published
in	2016.	The	emphasis	in	
Grit
	on	mustering	more	of	one’s	own	internal
resources	makes	the	brain-as-muscle	analogy	a	perfect	fit.	The	comparison	is
made	even	more	explicitly	by	purveyors	of	so-called	“cognitive	fitness”
exercises,	which	have	drawn	millions	of	hopeful	users	under	names	like
“CogniFit”	and	“Brain	Gym.”	(So	pervasive	is	the	metaphor	that	some	scientists
concerned	about	the	
spread	of	“neuromyths”
—common	misconceptions	about
--- Page 20 ---
the	brain—have	begun	to	point	out	that	the	brain	is	not	
actually
	a	muscle	but
rather	an	organ	made	up	of	specialized	cells	known	as	neurons.)
These	two	metaphors—brain	as	computer	and	brain	as	muscle—share	some
key	assumptions.	To	wit:	the	mind	is	a	discrete	thing	that	is	sealed	in	the	skull;
this	discrete	thing	determines	how	well	people	are	able	to	think;	this	thing	has
stable	properties	that	can	easily	be	measured,	compared,	and	ranked.	Such
assumptions	feel	comfortably	familiar;	indeed,	they	weren’t	particularly	novel
even	at	the	moment	they	were	first	proposed.	For	centuries,	brains	had	been
likened	to	machines
—to	whichever	appliance	of	the	time	appeared	most
advanced:	a	hydraulic	pump,	a	mechanical	clock,	a	steam	engine,	a	telegraph
machine.
In	a	lecture	delivered	in	1984,	philosopher	John	Searle	noted:	“Because	we	do
not	understand
	the	brain	very	well,	we	are	constantly	tempted	to	use	the	latest
technology	as	a	model	for	trying	to	understand	it.	In	my	childhood	we	were
always	assured	that	the	brain	was	a	telephone	switchboard.”	Teachers,	parents,
and	other	adults	all	proffered	the	metaphor	of	brain	as	switchboard,	recounted
Searle,	for	“what	else	could	it	be?”
Brains	had	also	long	been	likened	to	muscles	that	could	be	strengthened	with
exercise—a	theme	promulgated,	for	example,	by	physicians	and	health	experts
in	the	nineteenth	and	early	twentieth	centuries.	In	his	
First	Book	in	Physiology
and	Hygiene,
	published	in	1888,	doctor	John	Harvey	Kellogg	made	an	argument
that	sounds	very	much	like	Carol	Dweck’s.	“What	do	we	do
	when	we	want	to
strengthen	our	muscles?	We	make	them	work	hard	every	day,	do	we	not?”
Kellogg	inquired	of	his	intended	youthful	readership.	“The	exercise	makes	them
grow	large	and	strong.	It	is	just	the	same	with	our	brains.	If	we	study	hard	and
learn	our	lessons	well,	then	our	brains	grow	strong	and	study	becomes	easy.”
Entrenched	historical	foundations	support	these	metaphors;	they	rest	upon
deep	cultural	underpinnings	as	well.	The	computer	and	muscle	analogies	fit
neatly	with	our	society’s	emphasis	on	individualism—its	insistence	that	we
operate	as	autonomous,	self-contained	beings,	in	possession	of	capacities	and
competencies	that	are	ours	alone.	These	comparisons	also	readily	conform	to	our
culture’s	penchant	for	thinking	in	terms	of	good,	better,	best.	Scientist	and
author	Stephen	Jay	Gould	once	included	in	his	list	of	“the	oldest	issues
	and
errors	of	our	philosophical	traditions”	our	persistent	inclination	“to	order	items
by	ranking	them	in	
a	linear	series	of	increasing	worth.”	Computers	may	be	slow
or	fast,	muscles	may	be	weak	or	strong—and	so	it	goes,	we	assume,	with	our
own	and	others’	minds.
There	even	appear	to	be	hard-wired	
psychological
	factors	underlying	our
embrace	of	these	ideas	about	the	brain.	The	belief	that	some	core	quantity	of
--- Page 21 ---
intelligence	resides	within	each	of	our	heads	fits	with	a	pattern	of	thought,
apparently	universal	in	humans,	that	psychologists	call	“essentialism”—that	is,
the	conviction	that	each	entity	we	encounter	possesses	an	inner	essence	that
makes	it	what	it	is.	“Essentialism	shows	up
	in	every	society	that	has	been
studied,”	notes	Yale	University	psychology	professor	Paul	Bloom.	“It	appears	to
be	a	basic	component	of	how	we	think	about	the	world.”	We	think	in	terms	of
enduring	essences—rather	than	shifting	responses	to	external	influences—
because	we	find	such	essences	easier	to	process	mentally,	as	well	as	more
satisfying	emotionally.	From	the	essentialist	perspective,	people	simply	“are”
intelligent	or	they	are	not.
Together,	the	historical,	cultural,	and	psychological	bases	of	our	assumptions
about	the	mind—that	its	properties	are	individual,	inherent,	and	readily	ranked
according	to	quality—give	them	a	powerful	punch.	Such	assumptions	have
profoundly	shaped	the	views	we	hold	on	the	nature	of	mental	activity,	on	the
conduct	of	education	and	work,	and	on	the	value	we	place	on	ourselves	and
others.	It’s	therefore	startling	to	contemplate	that	the	whole	lot	of	it	could	be
misconceived.	To	grasp	the	nature	of	this	error,	we	need	to	consider	another
metaphor.
	
O
N	THE	MORNING
	of	April	18,	2019,	computer	screens	went	dark	across	a	swath
of	Seoul,	South	Korea’s	largest	city.	Lights	flickered	out	in	schools	and	offices
across	the	234-square-mile	metropolis,	home	to	some	10	million	people.
Stoplights	at	street	intersections	blinked	off,	and	electric-powered	trains	slowed
to	a	halt.	The	cause	of	the	blackout	was	as	small	in	scale	as	its	effects	were
widespread:	a	power	outage
	caused	by	magpies,	the	black-and-white-feathered
birds	who	build	their	nests	on	utility	poles	and	transmission	towers.	Magpies—
members	of	the	corvid	family,	which	also	includes	crows,	jays,	and	ravens—are
well	known	for	making	their	nests	out	of	whatever	is	available	in	the
environment.	The	birds	have	been	observed	using	an	astonishing	array	of
materials:	not	
only	twigs,	string,	and	moss,	but	also	dental	floss,	fishing	line,	and
plastic	Easter	grass;	chopsticks,	spoons,	and	drinking	straws;	shoelaces,	eyeglass
frames,	and	croquet	wickets.	During	the	American	Dust	Bowl	of	the	1930s,
which	eliminated	vegetation	from	huge	swaths	of	the	West,	magpies’	corvid
cousins	made	nests	out	of	barbed	wire.
The	densely	packed	urban	neighborhoods	of	modern-day	Seoul	feature	few
trees	or	bushes,	so	magpies	use	what	they	can	find:	metal	clothes	hangers,	TV
antennas,	and	lengths	of	steel	wire.	These	materials	conduct	electricity—and	so,
when	the	birds	build	their	nests	on	the	city’s	tall	electrical	transmission	towers,
the	flow	of	electricity	is	regularly	disrupted.	According	to	KEPCO,	the	Korea
Electric	Power	Corporation,	magpies	are	responsible	for	hundreds	of	power
--- Page 22 ---
Electric	Power	Corporation,	magpies	are	responsible	for	hundreds	of	power
outages	annually	in	areas	all	across	the	country.	Each	year,	KEPCO	employees
work	to	remove	upwards	of	ten	thousand	nests,	but	just	as	quickly	the	magpies
build	them	up	again.
Magpies	may	pose	a	headache	for	power	companies,	but	their	activity	supplies
a	felicitous	analogy	for	the	way	the	mind	works.	Our	brains,	it	might	be	said,	are
like	magpies,	fashioning	their	finished	products	from	the	materials	around	them,
weaving	the	bits	and	pieces	they	find	into	their	trains	of	thought.	Set	beside	the
brain-as-computer	and	brain-as-muscle	metaphors,	it’s	apparent	that	the	brain	as
magpie	is	a	very	different	kind	of	analogy,	with	very	different	implications	for
how	mental	processes	operate.	For	one	thing:	thought	happens	not	only	inside
the	skull	but	out	in	the	world,	too;	it’s	an	act	of	continuous	assembly	and
reassembly	that	draws	on	resources	external	to	the	brain.	For	another:	the	kinds
of	materials	available	to	“think	with”	affect	the	nature	and	quality	of	the	thought
that	can	be	produced.	And	last:	the	capacity	to	think	well—that	is,	to	be
intelligent—is	not	a	fixed	property	of	the	individual	but	rather	a	shifting	state
that	is	dependent	on	access	to	extra-neural	resources	and	the	knowledge	of	how
to	use	them.
This	is,	admittedly,	a	radically	new	way	of	thinking	about	thinking.	It	may	not
feel	easy	or	natural	to	adopt.	But	a	growing	mass	of	evidence	generated	within
several	scientific	disciplines	suggests	that	it’s	a	much	more	accurate	rendering	of
how	human	cognition	actually	works.	Moreover,	it’s	a	gratifyingly	generative
conceptualization,	because	it	offers	so	many	practical	opportunities	for
improving	how	well	we	think.	It	has	arrived	just	in	time.	Recasting	our	model	of
how	the	mind	functions	
has	lately	become	an	urgent	necessity,	as	we	find
ourselves	increasingly	squeezed	by	two	opposing	forces:	we	need	ever	more	to
think	outside	the	brain,	even	as	we	have	become	ever	more	stubbornly
committed	to	the	brainbound	approach.
First,	as	to	that	growing	need	to	think	outside	the	brain:	as	many	of	us	can
readily	recognize—in	the	accelerated	pace	of	our	days	and	the	escalating
complexity	of	our	duties	at	school	and	work—the	demands	on	our	thinking	are
ratcheting	up.	There’s	
more
	information	we	must	deal	with.	The	information	we
have	to	process	is	coming	at	us	
faster.
	And	the	
kind
	of	information	we	must	deal
with	is	increasingly	specialized	and	abstract.	This	difference	in	kind	is	especially
significant.	The	knowledge	and	skills	that	we	are	biologically	prepared	to	learn
have	been	outstripped	by	the	need	to	acquire	a	set	of	competencies	that	come	far
less	naturally	and	are	acquired	with	far	more	difficulty.	David	Geary,	a	professor
of	psychology	at	the	University	of	Missouri,	makes	a	useful	distinction	between
“biologically	primary”
	and	“biologically	secondary”	abilities.	Human	beings,	he
--- Page 23 ---
points	out,	are	born	ready	to	learn	certain	things:	how	to	speak	the	language	of
the	local	community,	how	to	find	their	way	around	a	familiar	landscape,	how	to
negotiate	the	challenges	of	small-group	living.	We	are	not	born	to	learn	the
intricacies	of	calculus	or	the	counterintuitive	rules	of	physics;	we	did	not	evolve
to	understand	the	workings	of	the	financial	markets	or	the	complexities	of	global
climate	change.	And	yet	we	dwell	in	a	world	where	such	biologically	secondary
capacities	hold	the	key	to	advancement,	even	survival.	The	demands	of	the
modern	environment	have	now	met,	and	exceeded,	the	limits	of	the	biological
brain.
For	a	time,	it’s	true,	humanity	was	able	to	keep	up	with	its	own	ever-
advancing	culture,	resourcefully	finding	ways	to	use	the	biological	brain	better.
As	their	everyday	environments	grew	more	intellectually	demanding,	people
responded	by	upping	their	cognitive	game.	Continual	engagement	with	the
mental	rigors	of	modern	life—along	with	improving	nutrition,	rising	living
conditions,	and	reduced	exposure	to	infectious	disease	and	other	pathogens—
produced	a	century-long	climb
	in	average	IQ	score,	as	measured	by	intelligence
tests	taken	by	people	all	over	the	globe.	But	this	upward	trajectory	is	now
leveling	off.	In	recent	years,	IQ	scores	have	stopped	rising,
	or	have	even	begun
to	drop,	in	countries	like	Fin
land,	Norway,	Denmark,	Germany,	France,	and
Britain.	Some	researchers	suggest	that	we	have	now	pushed	our	mental
equipment	as	far	as	it	can	go.	It	may	be	that	“our	brains	are	already	working
	at
near-optimal	capacity,”	note	Nicholas	Fitz	and	Peter	Reiner,	writing	in	the
journal	
Nature.
	Efforts	to	wrest	more	intelligence	from	this	organ,	they	add,
“bump	up	against	the	hard	limits	of	neurobiology.”
As	if	to	protest	this	unwelcome	truth,	attempts	to	subvert	such	limits	have
received	growing	attention	in	recent	years.	Commercial	brain-training	regimens
like	Cogmed,	Lumosity,	and	BrainHQ	have	attracted	many	who	desire	to
improve	their	memory	and	increase	their	focus;	Lumosity	alone	claims
	100
million	registered	users	in	195	countries.	At	the	same	time,	so-called
neuroenhancement—innovations	like	“smart	pills”	and	electrical	brain
stimulation	that	claim	to	make	their	users	more	intelligent—have	drawn
breathless	media	coverage,	as	well	as	extensive	investment	from	pharmaceutical
and	biotechnology	companies.
So	far,	however,	these	approaches	have	yielded	little	more	than
disappointment
	and	dashed	hopes.	A	team	of	scientists	who	set	out	to	evaluate
all	the	peer-reviewed	intervention	studies	cited	on	the	websites	of	leading	brain-
training	companies	could	find	“little	evidence”
	within	those	studies	“that	training
improves	everyday	cognitive	performance.”	Engaging	in	brain	training	does
improve	users’	performance—but	only	on	exercises	highly	similar	to	the	ones
--- Page 24 ---
they’ve	been	practicing.	The	effect	does	not	seem	to	transfer	to	real-life	activities
involving	attention	and	memory.	A	2019	study	of	Cogmed	concluded	that	such
transfer	“is	rare,	or	possibly	inexistent.”
	A	2017	study	of	Lumosity	determined
that	“training	appears	to	have	no	benefits
	in	healthy	young	adults”;	similarly
dismal	results	have	been	reported	for	older	individuals.
	In	2016,	Lumosity	was
forced	to	pay	a	$2	million	fine
	for	deceptive	advertising	to	the	US	Federal	Trade
Commission.	Smart	pills	haven’t	fared	much	better;
	a	clinical	trial	of	one
“nootropic”	drug
	popular	among	Silicon	Valley	tech	workers	found	that	a	cup	of
coffee	was	more	effective	at	boosting	memory	and	attention.
Medications	and	technologies	that	might,	someday,	actually	enhance
intelligence
	remain	in	the	early	stages	of	laboratory	testing.	The	best	way—and,
at	least	for	now,	the	
only
	way—for	us	to	get	smarter	is	to	get	better	at	thinking
outside	the	brain.	Yet	we	dismiss	or	disparage	this	kind	of	cognition,	to	the
extent	that	we	consider	it	at	all.	Our	pronounced	bias	in	
favor	of	brainbound
thinking	is	long-standing	and	well	entrenched—but	a	bias	is	all	it	is,	and	one	that
can	no	longer	be	supported	or	sustained.	The	future	lies	in	thinking	outside	the
brain.
	
W
E	CAN	BETTER
	grasp	the	future	of	thinking	outside	the	brain	by	taking	a	look
back	at	the	time	when	the	idea	first	emerged.	In	1997,	Andy	Clark—then	a
professor	of	philosophy	at	Washington	University	in	St.	Louis,	Missouri—left
his	laptop
	behind	on	a	train.	The	loss	of	his	usually	ever-present	computer	hit
him,	he	later	wrote,	“like	a	sudden	and	somewhat	vicious
	type	of	(hopefully
transient)	brain	damage.”	He	was	left	“dazed,	confused,	and	visibly	enfeebled—
the	victim	of	the	cyborg	equivalent	of	a	mild	stroke.”	The	experience,	distressing
as	it	was,	provided	fodder	for	a	notion	he	had	been	pondering	for	some	time.	His
computer,	he	realized,	had	in	a	sense	become	a	
part
	of	his	mind,	an	integral
element	of	his	thinking	processes.	His	mental	capacities	were	effectively
extended	by	the	use	of	his	laptop,	allowing	his	brain	to	overachieve—to	think
more	efficiently	and	effectively,	more	
intelligently,
	than	it	could	without	the
device.	His	brain	plus	his	computer	equaled	his	mind,	extended.
Two	years	earlier,	Clark	and	his	colleague	David	Chalmers	had	coauthored	an
article	that	named	and	described	just	this	phenomenon.	Their	paper,	titled	“The
Extended	Mind,”	began	by	posing	a	question	that	would	seem	to	have	an
obvious	answer.	“Where	does	the	mind
	stop	and	the	rest	of	the	world	begin?”	it
asked.	Clark	and	Chalmers	went	on	to	offer	an	unconventional	response.	The
mind	does	
not
	stop	at	the	standard	“demarcations	of	skin	and	skull,”	they	argued.
Rather,	it	is	more	accurately	viewed	as	“an	extended	system,	a	coupling	of
biological	organism	and	external	resources.”	A	recognition	of	this	reality,	they
--- Page 25 ---
acknowledged,	“will	have	significant	consequences”—in	terms	of	“philosophical
views	of	the	mind,”	but	also	“in	moral	and	social	domains.”	The	authors	were
aware	that	the	vision	they	were	setting	out	would	require	a	thorough	reimagining
of	what	people	are	like	and	how	they	function,	a	reimagining	they	saw	as
necessary	and	right.	Once	“the	hegemony	of	skin	and	skull	is	usurped,”	they
concluded,	“we	may	be	able	to	see	ourselves	more	truly	as	creatures	of	the
world.”
The	world,	at	first,	was	not	so	sure.	Before	being	published	in	
Analysis
	in
1998,	the	paper	received	rejections	from	three	other	journals.
	Once	in	print,	“The
Extended	Mind”	was	greeted	with	perplexity—and	no	small	
amount	of	derision.
But	the	idea	it	proposed	turned	out	to	have	surprising	power,	within	the	academy
and	well	beyond	it.	What	at	first	appeared	radical	and	out-there	quickly	came	to
seem	less	so,	as	daily	life	in	the	digital	age	provided	a	continuous	proof-of-
concept	demonstration	of	people	extending	their	minds	with	their	devices.
Initially	derided	as	wacky,	the	notion	of	the	extended	mind	came	to	seem
eminently	plausible,	even	prescient.
In	the	more	than	twenty	years	since	the	publication	of	“The	Extended	Mind,”
the	idea	it	introduced	has	become	an	essential	umbrella	concept	under	which	a
variety	of	scientific	sub-fields	have	gathered.	Embodied	cognition,	situated
cognition,	distributed	cognition:	each	of	these	takes	up	a	particular	aspect	of	the
extended	mind,	investigating	how	our	thinking	is	extended	by	our	bodies,	by	the
spaces	in	which	we	learn	and	work,	and	by	our	interactions	with	other	people.
Such	research	has	not	only	produced	new	insights	into	the	nature	of	human
cognition;	it	has	also	generated	a	corpus	of	evidence-based	methods	for
extending	the	mind.
That’s	where	this	book	comes	in:	it	aims	to	
operationalize
	the	extended	mind,
to	turn	this	philosophical	sally	into	something	practically	useful.	In	chapter	1,
we’ll	learn	how	to	tune	in	to	our	interoception—the	sensations	that	arise	from
within	the	body—and	how	to	use	these	signals	to	make	sounder	decisions.	In
chapter	2,	we’ll	find	out	how	moving	our	bodies	can	nudge	our	minds	toward
deeper	understanding.	Chapter	3	looks	at	how	the	gestures	we	make	with	our
hands	can	bolster	our	memory.	Chapter	4	examines	how	time	spent	in	natural
spaces	can	restore	our	depleted	attention.	In	chapter	5,	we’ll	see	how	built	spaces
—the	interiors	we	inhabit	at	school	and	at	work—can	be	designed	to	promote
creativity.	In	chapter	6,	we	will	explore	how	moving	our	thoughts	out	of	our
heads	and	into	“the	space	of	ideas”	can	lead	us	to	new	insights	and	discoveries.
Chapter	7	probes	how	we	can	think	with	the	minds	of	experts;	chapter	8
considers	how	we	can	think	with	classmates,	colleagues,	and	other	peers.
--- Page 26 ---
Finally,	in	chapter	9,	we’ll	examine	how	groups	thinking	together	can	become
more	than	the	sum	of	their	members.
Across	these	varied	instantiations	of	the	extended	mind,	several	common
themes	are	apparent.	The	first	of	these	concerns	the	source	of	Andy	Clark’s
initial	inspiration:	the	role	of	technology	in	extending	our	thinking.	Our	devices
can	and	do	extend	our	minds,	of	course—but	not	al
ways;	sometimes	they	lead	us
to	think	
less
	intelligently,	as	anyone	who’s	been	distracted	by	clickbait	or	misled
by	a	GPS	system	can	tell	you.	The	failure	of	our	technology	to	consistently
enhance	our	intelligence	has	to	do	with	a	metaphor	we	encountered	earlier	in	this
introduction:	the	computer	as	brain.	Too	often,	those	who	design	today’s
computers	and	smartphones	have	forgotten	that	users	inhabit	biological	bodies,
occupy	physical	spaces,	and	interact	with	other	human	beings.	Technology	itself
is	brainbound—but	by	the	same	token,	technology	itself	could	be	extended,
broadened	to	include	the	extra-neural	resources	that	do	so	much	to	enrich	the
thinking	we	do	in	the	offline	world.	In	each	of	the	chapters	that	follow,	we’ll
encounter	examples	of	such	“extended	technology”—from	an	online	foreign-
language-learning	platform	that	encourages	its	users	to	make	gestures	and	not
just	repeat	words;	to	a	Waze-like	app	that	plots	not	the	fastest	route	but	the	one
most	filled	with	nature’s	greenery;	to	a	video	game	that	induces	players	to	look
not	at	the	screen	but	at	one	another,	synchronizing	their	movements	in	pursuit	of
a	shared	experience.
A	second	theme	to	emerge	from	a	review	of	research	on	the	extended	mind	is
its	distinctive	take	on	the	nature	of	expertise.	Traditional	notions	of	what	makes
an	expert	are	highly	brainbound,	focused	on	internal,	individual	effort	(think	of
the	late	psychologist	Anders	Ericsson’s	famous	finding	that	mastery	in	any	field
requires	“10,000	hours”
	of	practice).	The	literature	on	the	extended	mind
suggests	a	different	view:	experts	are	those	who	have	learned	how	best	to
marshal	and	apply	extra-neural	resources	to	the	task	before	them.	This
alternative	perspective	has	real	implications	for	how	we	understand	and	cultivate
superior	performance.	For	example:	although	the	conventional	take	on	expertise
highlights	economy,	efficiency,	and	optimality
	of	action—geniuses	and
superstars	“just	do	it”—research	in	the	vein	of	the	extended	mind	finds	that
experts	actually	do	
more
	experimenting,	more	testing,	and	more	backtracking
than	beginners.	They	are	more	apt	than	novices	to	make	skillful	use	of	their
bodies,	of	physical	space,	and	of	relationships	with	others.	In	most	scenarios,
researchers	have	found,	experts	are	less	likely	to	“use	their	heads”	and	more
inclined	to	extend	their	minds—a	habit	that	the	rest	of	us	can	learn	to	emulate	on
our	way	to	achieving	mastery.
--- Page 27 ---
Finally,	in	surveying	the	study	of	the	extended	mind,	there’s	one	more	theme
that	is	impossible	to	ignore:	the	matter	of	what	we	might	call	“extension
inequality.”	Our	schools,	our	workplaces,	the	very	structure	
of	our	society	are
based	on	the	assumption	that	some	people	are	able	to	think	more	intelligently
than	others.	The	reason	for	such	individual	differences	is	taken	as	self-evident:
obviously	it’s	because	those	people	are	smarter—because	they	have	more	of	the
stuff	called	“intelligence”	inside	their	heads.	Research	on	the	extended	mind
points	to	a	different	explanation.	That	is:	some	people	are	able	to	think	more
intelligently	because	they	are	
better	able	to	extend	their	minds.
	They	may	have
more	knowledge	about	how	mental	extension	works,	the	kind	of	knowledge	that
this	book	aims	to	make	accessible.	But	it’s	also	indisputable	that	the	extensions
that	allow	us	to	think	well—the	freedom	to	move	one’s	body,	say,	or	the
proximity	of	natural	green	spaces;	control	over	one’s	personal	workspace,	or
relationships	with	informed	experts	and	accomplished	peers—are	far	from
equally	distributed.	When	reading	the	chapters	that	follow,	we	should	keep	in
mind	the	way	access,	or	lack	of	access,	to	mental	extensions	might	be	shaping
the	thinking	of	our	students,	employees,	co-workers,	and	fellow	citizens.
Metaphors	are	powerful,	and	none	more	so	than	the	ones	we	use	to	understand
our	own	minds.	The	value	of	the	approach	described	in	these	pages	ultimately
lies	in	the	novel	analogy	it	offers,	an	analogy	we	can	apply	to	our	everyday
efforts	to	learn	and	remember,	to	solve	problems	and	imagine	possibilities.	We
extend	beyond	our	limits,	not	by	revving	our	brains	like	a	machine	or	bulking
them	up	like	a	muscle—but	by	strewing	our	world	with	rich	materials,	and	by
weaving	them	into	our	thoughts.
--- Page 28 ---
PART	I
THINKING	WITH	OUR	BODIES
--- Page 29 ---
1
Thinking	with	Sensations
D
URING	HIS	YEARS
	of	working	as	a	financial	trader
	at	Goldman	Sachs,	Merrill
Lynch,	and	Deutsche	Bank,	John	Coates	watched	it	happen	again	and	again.
“Using	my	best	analytical	efforts,	drawing	on	my	education”—Coates	has	a	PhD
in	economics	from	the	University	of	Cambridge—“and	a	wide	reading	of
economic	reports	and	statistics,”	he	would	devise	a	brilliant	trade,	one	that	was
impeccable	in	its	logic	and	unassailable	in	its	reasoning.	And—it	would	lose
money,	every	time.
Then	there	were	other	occasions,	equally	puzzling.	“I	would	catch	a	glimpse
with	peripheral	vision	of	another	possibility,	another	path	into	the	future.	It
showed	up	as	a	mere	blip	in	my	consciousness,	a	momentary	tug	on	my
attention,	but	it	was	a	flash	of	insight	coupled	with	a	gut	feeling	that	gave	it	the
imprimatur	of	the	highly	probable.”	When	he	obeyed	these	“gut	feelings,”
Coates	found,	he	was	usually	rewarded	with	a	profitable	outcome.	Against	all	his
assumptions,	all	his	training,	Coates	was	forced	to	arrive	at	an	unconventional
conclusion:	“Good	judgment	may	require	the	ability	to	listen	carefully	to
feedback	from	the	body.”
Further,	he	observes,	“some	people	may	be	better	at	this	than	others.”	On	any
Wall	Street	trading	floor	“you	will	find	high-IQ,	Ivy	League–educated	stars	who
cannot	make	any	money	at	all,	for	all	their	convincing	analyses;	while	across	the
aisle	sits	a	trader	with	an	undistinguished	degree	from	an	unknown	university,
who	cannot	keep	up	with	the	latest	analytics,	but	who	consistently	prints	money,
to	the	bafflement	and	irritation	of	his	seemingly	more	gifted	colleagues.”	It	is
possible,	muses	Coates,	
“though	odd	to	contemplate,	that	the	better	judgment	of
the	money-making	trader	may	owe	something	to	his	or	her	ability	to	produce
bodily	signals,	and	equally	to	listen	to	them.”
Coates	shares	these	reflections	in	a	captivating	book,	
The	Hour	Between	Dog
and	Wolf,
	which	draws	on	his	years	as	a	trader	as	well	as	on	his	surprising
--- Page 30 ---
second	career	as	an	applied	physiologist.	Over	time,	the	questions	generated	by
his	work	in	finance—“Could	we	tell	whether	one	person	has	better	gut	feelings
than	another?	Could	we	monitor	feedback	from	their	bodies?”—became	more
compelling	than	the	work	itself,	and	Coates	left	Wall	Street	to	pursue	the
answers	in	scientific	research.	He	presented	the	fruits	of	his	inquiry	in	2016,
detailing	the	results	of	a	collaboration	with	academic	neuroscientists	and
psychiatrists	in	the	journal	
Scientific	Reports.
Coates	and	his	new	colleagues	examined	a	group	of	financial	traders
	working
on	a	London	trading	floor,	asking	each	one	to	identify	the	successive	moments
when	he	felt	his	heart	beat—a	measure	of	the	individual’s	sensitivity	to	bodily
signals.	The	traders,	they	found,	were	much	better	at	this	task	than	were	an	age-
and	gender-matched	group	of	controls	who	did	not	work	in	finance.	What’s
more,	among	the	traders	themselves,	those	who	were	the	most	accurate	in
detecting	the	timing	of	their	heartbeats	made	more	money,	and	tended	to	have
longer	tenures	in	what	was	a	notably	volatile	line	of	work.	“Our	results	suggest
that	signals	from	the	body—the	gut	feelings	of	financial	lore—contribute	to
success	in	the	markets,”	the	team	concluded.	Confirming	Coates’s	informal
observations,	those	who	thrived	in	this	milieu	were	not	necessarily	people	with
greater	education	or	intellect,	but	rather	“people	with	greater	sensitivity	to
interoceptive	signals.”
Interoception	is,	simply	stated,	an	awareness	of	the	inner	state
	of	the	body.
Just	as	we	have	sensors	that	take	in	information	from	the	outside	world	(retinas,
cochleas,	taste	buds,	olfactory	bulbs),	we	have	sensors	inside	our	bodies	that
send	our	brains	a	constant	flow	of	data	from	within.	These	sensations	are
generated	in	places	all	over	the	body—in	our	internal	organs,	in	our	muscles,
even	in	our	bones—and	then	travel	via	multiple	pathways	to	a	structure	in	the
brain	called	the	insula.	Such	internal	reports	are	merged	with	several	other
streams	of	information—our	active	thoughts	and	memories,	sensory	inputs
gathered	from	the	external	world—and	integrated	into	a	single	snapshot	of	our
present	condition,	a	sense	
of	“how	I	feel”	in	the	moment,	as	well	as	a	sense	of
the	actions	we	must	take	to	maintain	a	state	of	internal	balance.
All	of	us	experience	these	bodily	signals—but	some	of	us	feel	them	more
keenly
	than	others.	To	measure	interoceptive	awareness,	scientists	apply	the
heartbeat	detection	test,
	the	one	John	Coates	used	with	his	group	of	financial
traders:	test	takers	are	asked	to	identify	the	instant	when	their	heart	beats,
without	placing	a	hand	on	the	chest	or	resting	a	finger	on	a	wrist.	Researchers
have	found	a	surprisingly	wide	range	in	terms	of	how	people	score.	Some
individuals	are	interoceptive	champions,	able	to	determine	accurately	and
consistently	when	their	heartbeats	happen.	Others	are	interoceptive	duds:	they
--- Page 31 ---
can’t	feel	the	rhythm.	Few	of	us	are	aware	that	this	spectrum	of	ability	even
exists,	much	less	where	we	fall	on	it—so	preoccupied	are	we	with	more
conventionally	brainbound	capacities.	We	may	remember	down	to	the	point	our
SAT	scores	or	our	high	school	GPA,	but	we	haven’t	given	this	particular
aptitude	a	moment’s	thought.
Vivien	Ainley	recalls	a	clear	demonstration	of	this	common	oversight.	Ainley,
an	interoception	researcher	at	Royal	Holloway,	University	of	London,	was
administering	the	heartbeat	detection	test	to	members	of	the	public	as	part	of	an
exhibit	at	London’s	Science	Museum.	Visitors	to	the	exhibit	were	instructed	to
place	a	finger	on	a	sensor	that	detected	their	pulse;	the	readout	of	the	sensor	was
visible	only	to	Ainley.
“Please	tell	me	when	your	heart	beats,”	she	would	say	to	each	patron	who
stepped	forward.	An	elderly	couple	who	stopped	by	the	booth	had	very	different
reactions	to	Ainley’s	request.
“How	on	earth
	would	I	know	what	my	heart	is	doing?”	the	woman	asked
incredulously.	Her	husband	turned	and	stared	at	her,	equally	dumbfounded.
“But	of	course	you	know,”	he	exclaimed.	“Don’t	be	so	stupid,	everyone
knows	what	their	heartbeat	is!”
“He	had	always	been	able
	to	hear	his	heart,	and	she	had	never	been	able	to
hear	hers,”	Ainley	observed	in	an	interview,	smiling	at	the	memory.	“They	had
been	married	for	decades,	but	they	had	never	talked	of	or	even	recognized	this
difference	between	them.”
Though	we	may	not	notice	such	differences,	they	are	real,	and	even	visible	to
scientists
	using	brain-scanning	technology:	the	size	and	activity	
level	of	the
brain’s	interoceptive	hub,	the	insula,	vary	among	individuals	and	are	correlated
with	their	awareness	of	interoceptive	sensations.	How	such	differences	arise	in
the	first	place	is	not	yet	known.	All	of	us	begin	life	with	our	interoceptive
capacities	already	operating;
	interoceptive	awareness	continues	to	develop
across	childhood	and	adolescence.	Differences	in	sensitivity
	to	internal	signals
may	be	influenced	by	genetic	factors,	as	well	as	by	the	environments	in	which
we	grow	up,	including	the	communications	we	receive
	from	caregivers	about
how	we	should	respond	to	our	bodily	prompts.
What	we	do	know	is	that	interoceptive	awareness	can	be	deliberately
cultivated.	A	series	of	simple	exercises	can	put	us	in	touch	with	the	messages
emanating	from	within,	giving	us	access	to	knowledge	that	we	already	possess
but	that	is	ordinarily	excluded	from	consciousness—knowledge	about	ourselves,
about	other	people,	and	about	the	worlds	through	which	we	move.	Once	we
establish	contact	with	this	informative	internal	source,	we	can	make	wise	use	of
what	it	has	to	tell	us:	to	make	sounder	decisions,	for	example;	to	respond	more
resiliently	to	challenges	and	setbacks;	to	savor	more	fully	the	intensity	of	our
--- Page 32 ---
resiliently	to	challenges	and	setbacks;	to	savor	more	fully	the	intensity	of	our
emotions	while	also	managing	them	more	skillfully;	and	to	connect	to	others
with	more	sensitivity	and	insight.	The	heart,	and	not	the	head,	leads	the	way.
	
T
O	UNDERSTAND	HOW
	interoception	can	act	as	such	a	rich	repository,	it’s
important	to	recognize	that	the	world	is	full	of	far	more	information	than	our
conscious	minds	can	process.	Fortunately,	we	are	also	able	to	collect	and	store
the	volumes	of	information	we	encounter	on	a	
non-conscious
	basis.	As	we
proceed	through	each	day,	we	are	continuously	apprehending	and	storing
regularities	in	our	experience,	tagging	them	for	future	reference.	Through	this
information-gathering	and	pattern-identifying	process,	we	come	to	
know
	things
—but	we’re	typically	not	able	to	articulate	the	content	of	such	knowledge	or	to
ascertain	just	how	we	came	to	know	it.	This	trove	of	data	remains	mostly	under
the	surface	of	consciousness,	and	that’s	usually	a	good	thing.	Its	submerged
status	preserves	our	limited	stores	of	attention	and	working	memory	for	other
uses.
A	study	led	by	cognitive	scientist	Pawel	Lewicki	demonstrates	this	process	in
microcosm.
	Participants	in	Lewicki’s	experiment	were	directed	to	watch	a
computer	screen	on	which	a	cross-shaped	target	would	appear,	then	disappear,
then	reappear	in	a	new	location;	periodically	they	were	
asked	to	predict	where
the	target	would	show	up	next.	Over	the	course	of	several	hours	of	exposure	to
the	target’s	movements,	the	participants’	predictions	grew	more	and	more
accurate.	They	had	figured	out	the	pattern	behind	the	target’s	peregrinations.	But
they	could	not	put	this	knowledge	into	words,	even	when	the	experimenters
offered	them	money	to	do	so.	The	subjects	were	not	able	to	describe	“anything
even	close	to	the	real	nature”	of	the	pattern,	Lewicki	observes.	The	movements
of	the	target	operated	according	to	a	pattern	too	complex	for	the	conscious	mind
to	accommodate—but	the	capacious	realm	that	lies	below	consciousness	was
more	than	roomy	enough	to	contain	it.
“Nonconscious	information	acquisition,”
	as	Lewicki	calls	it,	along	with	the
ensuing	application	of	such	information,	is	happening	in	our	lives	all	the	time.
As	we	navigate	a	new	situation,	we’re	scrolling	through	our	mental	archive
	of
stored	patterns	from	the	past,	checking	for	ones	that	apply	to	our	current
circumstances.	We’re	not	aware	that	these	searches	are	under	way;	as	Lewicki
observes,	“The	human	cognitive	system
	is	not	equipped	to	handle	such	tasks	on
the	consciously	controlled	level.”	He	adds,	“Our	conscious	thinking	needs	to
rely	on	notes	and	flowcharts	and	lists	of	‘if-then’	statements—or	on	computers
—to	do	the	same	job	which	our	non-consciously	operating	processing	algorithms
can	do	without	external	help,	and	instantly.”
--- Page 33 ---
But—if	our	knowledge	of	these	patterns	is	not	conscious,	how	then	can	we
make	use	of	it?	The	answer	is	that,	when	a	potentially	relevant	pattern	is
detected,	it’s	our	interoceptive	faculty	that	tips	us	off:	with	a	shiver	or	a	sigh,	a
quickening	of	the	breath	or	a	tensing	of	the	muscles.	The	body	is	rung	like	a	bell
to	alert	us	to	this	useful	and	otherwise	inaccessible	information.	Though	we
typically	think	of	the	brain	as	telling	the	body	what	to	do,	just	as	much	does	the
body	guide	the	brain	with	an	array	of	subtle	nudges	and	prods.	(One
psychologist	has	called	this	guide	our	“somatic	rudder.”)
	Researchers	have	even
captured	the	body	in	mid-nudge,	as	it	alerts	its	inhabitant	to	the	appearance	of	a
pattern	that	she	may	not	have	known	she	was	looking	for.
Such	interoceptive	prodding	was	visible	during	a	gambling	game
	that	formed
the	basis	of	an	experiment	led	by	neuroscientist	Antonio	Damasio,	a	professor	at
the	University	of	Southern	California.	In	the	game,	presented	on	a	computer
screen,	players	were	given	a	starting	purse	of	two	thousand	“dollars”	and	were
shown	four	decks	of	digital	cards.	Their	task,	
they	were	told,	was	to	turn	the
cards	in	the	decks	face-up,	choosing	which	decks	to	draw	from	such	that	they
would	lose	the	least	amount	of	money	and	win	the	most.	As	they	started	clicking
to	turn	over	cards,	players	began	encountering	rewards—bonuses	of	$50	here,
$100	there—and	also	penalties,	in	which	small	or	large	amounts	of	money	were
taken	away.	What	the	experimenters	had	arranged,	but	the	players	were	not	told,
was	that	decks	A	and	B	were	“bad”—they	held	lots	of	large	penalties	in	store—
and	decks	C	and	D	were	“good,”	bestowing	more	rewards	than	penalties	over
time.
As	they	played	the	game,	the	participants’	state	of	physiological	arousal	was
monitored	via	electrodes	attached	to	their	fingers;	these	electrodes	kept	track	of
their	level	of	“skin	conductance.”	When	our	nervous	systems	are	stimulated	by
an	awareness	of	potential	threat,	we	start	to	perspire	in	a	barely	perceptible	way.
This	slight	sheen	of	sweat	momentarily	turns	our	skin	into	a	better	conductor	of
electricity.	Researchers	can	thus	use	skin	conductance	as	a	measure	of	nervous
system	arousal.	Looking	over	the	data	collected	by	the	skin	sensors,	Damasio
and	his	colleagues	noticed	something	interesting:	after	the	participants	had	been
playing	for	a	short	while,	their	skin	conductance	began	to	spike	when	they
contemplated	clicking	on	the	bad	decks	of	cards.	Even	more	striking,	the	players
started	avoiding	the	bad	decks,	gravitating	increasingly	to	the	good	decks.	As	in
the	Lewicki	study,	subjects	got	better	at	the	task	over	time,	losing	less	and
winning	more.
Yet	interviews	with	the	participants	showed	that	they	had	no	awareness	of
why	they	had	begun	choosing	some	decks	over	others	until	late	in	the	game,
long	after	their	skin	conductance	had	started	flaring.	By	card	10	(about	forty-five
--- Page 34 ---
seconds	into	the	game),	measures	of	skin	conductance	showed	that	their	bodies
were	wise	to	the	way	the	game	was	rigged.	But	even	ten	turns	later—on	card	20
—“all	indicated	that	they	did	not	have	a	clue	about	what	was	going	on,”	the
researchers	noted.	It	took	until	card	50	was	turned,	and	several	minutes	had
elapsed,	for	all	the	participants	to	express	a	conscious	hunch	that	decks	A	and	B
were	riskier.	Their	bodies	figured	it	out	long	before	their	brains	did.	Subsequent
studies	supplied	an	additional,	and	crucial,	finding:	players	who	were	more
interoceptively	aware
	were	more	apt	to	make	smart	choices	within	the	game.	For
them,	the	body’s	wise	counsel	came	through	loud	and	clear.
Damasio’s	fast-paced	game	shows	us	something	important.
	The	body	
not	only
grants	us	access	to	information	that	is	more	
complex
	than	what	our	conscious
minds	can	accommodate.	It	also	marshals	this	information	at	a	pace	that	is	far
quicker
	than	our	conscious	minds	can	handle.	The	benefits	of	the	body’s
intervention	extend	well	beyond	winning	a	card	game;	the	real	world,	after	all,	is
full	of	dynamic	and	uncertain	situations,	in	which	there	is	no	time	to	ponder	all
the	pros	and	cons.	If	we	rely	on	the	conscious	mind	alone,	we	lose.
	
H
ERE,	THEN,
	is	a	reason	to	hone	our	interoceptive	sense:	people	who	are	more
aware	of	their	bodily	sensations	are	better	able	to	make	use	of	their	non-
conscious	knowledge.	Mindfulness	meditation
	is	one	way	of	enhancing	such
awareness.	The	practice	has	been	found	to	increase	sensitivity	to	internal	signals,
and	even	to	alter	the	size	and	activity
	of	that	key	brain	structure,	the	insula.	One
particular	component	appears	to	be	especially	effective;	this	is	the	activity	that
often	starts	off	a	meditation	session,	known	as	the	“body	scan.”	Rooted	in	the
Buddhist	traditions	of	Myanmar,	Thailand,	and	Sri	Lanka,	the	body	scan	was
introduced	to	Western	audiences	by	mindfulness	pioneer	Jon	Kabat-Zinn,	now	a
professor	emeritus	at	the	University	of	Massachusetts	Medical	School.	“People
find	the	body	scan
	beneficial	because	it	reconnects	their	conscious	mind	to	the
feeling	states	of	their	body,”	says	Kabat-Zinn.	“By	practicing	regularly,	people
usually	feel	more	in	touch	with	sensations	in	parts	of	their	body	they	had	never
felt	or	thought	much	about	before.”
To	practice	the	body	scan,	he	explains,	we	should	first	sit	or	lie	down	in	a
comfortable	place,	allowing	our	eyes	to	close	gently.	He	recommends	taking	a
few	moments	to	feel	the	body	as	a	whole	and	to	sense	the	rising	and	falling	of
the	abdomen	with	each	in-breath	and	out-breath.	We	then	begin	a	“sweep”	of	the
body,	starting	with	the	toes	of	the	left	foot.	Advises	Kabat-Zinn,	“As	you	direct
your	attention	to	your	toes,	see	if	you	can	channel	your	breathing	to	them	as
well,	so	that	it	feels	as	if	you	are	breathing	in	
to
	your	toes	and	out	
from
	your
toes.”	After	focusing	on	the	toes	for	a	few	breaths,	we	shift	our	attention	to	the
--- Page 35 ---
sole	of	our	foot,	the	heel,	the	ankle,	and	so	on	up	to	the	left	hip.	The	same
procedure	is	repeated	for	the	right	leg,	focusing	on	each	section	for	the	length	of
a	few	breaths.	The	roving	spotlight	of	our	attention	now	travels	up	through	the
torso,	the	abdomen	and	chest,	the	back	and	shoulders,	then	down	each	arm	to	the
elbows,	wrists,	and	hands.	Finally,	the	attentional	spotlight	
moves	up	through	the
neck	and	face.	If	our	attention	should	wander	during	the	exercise,	we	can	gently
guide	it	back	to	the	part	of	the	body	that	is	the	object	of	focus.	Kabat-Zinn
recommends	doing	the	body	scan	at	least	once	a	day.
The	aim	of	this	practice	is	to	bring	nonjudgmental	awareness	to	any	and	all
feelings	that	arise	within	the	body.	In	the	rush	of	everyday	life,	we	may	ignore	or
dismiss	these	internal	signals;	if	they	do	come	to	our	notice,	we	may	react	with
impatience	or	self-criticism.	The	body	scan	trains	us	to	observe	such	sensations
with	interest	and	equanimity.	But	tuning	in	to	these	feelings	is	only	a	first	step.
The	next	step	is	to	
name
	them.	Attaching	a	label	to	our	interoceptive	sensations
allows	us	to	begin	to	regulate	them;	without	such	attentive	self-regulation,	we
may	find	our	feelings	overwhelming,	or	we	may	misinterpret	their	source.
Research	shows	that	the	simple	act	of	giving	a	name	to	what	we’re	feeling	has	a
profound	effect
	on	the	nervous	system,	immediately	dialing	down	the	body’s
stress	response.
In	an	experiment	conducted	by	researchers	at	the	University	of	California,	Los
Angeles,	study	subjects	were	required	to	give	a	series	of	impromptu	speeches
	in
front	of	an	audience	(a	reliable	way	to	induce	anxiety).	Half	of	the	participants
were	then	asked	to	engage	in	what	the	researchers	call	“affect	labeling,”	filling
in	responses	to	the	prompt	“I	feel	_________,”	while	the	other	half	were	asked
to	complete	a	neutral	shape-matching	task.	The	affect-labeling	group	showed
steep	declines	in	heart	rate	and	skin	conductance	compared	to	the	control	group,
whose	levels	of	physiological	arousal	remained	high.	Brain-scanning	studies
offer	further	evidence	of	the	calming	effect	of	affect	labeling:	simply	naming
what	is	felt	reduces	activity	in	the	amygdala,
	the	brain	structure	involved	in
processing	fear	and	other	strong	emotions.	Meanwhile,	thinking	in	a	more
involved	way	about	feelings	and	the	experiences	that	evoked	them	actually
produces	
greater
	activity
	in	the	amygdala.
The	practice	of	affect	labeling,	like	the	body	scan,	is	a	kind	of	mental	training
intended	to	get	us	into	the	habit	of	noting	and	naming	the	sensations	that	arise	in
our	bodies.	Psychologists	recommend	keeping	two	things	in	mind	as	we	try	it
out.	The	first	is	to	be	as	
prolific
	as	possible:	the	UCLA	scientists	reported	that
study	participants	who	came	up	with	a	larger	number	of	terms
	for	what	they
were	feeling	subsequently	experienced	a	greater	reduction	in	their	physiological
arousal.	The	second	is	
to	be	as	
granular
	as	possible
:	that	is,	to	choose	words	that
--- Page 36 ---
are	precise	and	specific	when	describing	what	we	feel.	Accurately	distinguishing
among	interoceptive	sensations	is	associated	with	making	sounder	decisions,
acting	less	impulsively,
	and	planning	ahead	more	successfully—perhaps	because
it	gives	us	a	clearer	sense	of	what	we	need	and	what	we	want.
Sensing	and	labeling	our	internal	sensations	allows	them	to	function	more
efficiently	as	our	somatic	rudder,	steering	a	nimble	course	through	the	many
decisions	of	our	days.	But	does	the	body	really	have	anything	to	contribute	to
our	thinking—to	processes	we	usually	regard	as	taking	place	solely	in	our
heads?	It	does.	In	fact,	recent	research	suggests	a	rather	astonishing	possibility:
the	body	can	be	
more	rational
	than	the	brain.	Recall	that,	in	the	study	conducted
by	John	Coates,	traders	with	keener	interoceptive	awareness	earned	more
money:	that	is,	they	made	more	rational	choices	about	buying	and	selling,	as
judged	by	the	market,	than	investors	who	were	less	attuned	to	their	bodies.
Outcomes	like	these	may	result	from	the	fact	that	the	body	is	not	subject	to	the
cognitive	biases	that	so	often	distort	our	conscious	thought—the	glitches	that
appear	to	be	hardwired	into	the	human	brain.
Take,	for	example,	our	stubborn	tendency	to	insist	on	notions	of	fairness,	even
at	the	cost	of	spiting	ourselves.	In	the	“ultimatum	game,”	an	experimental
paradigm	often	employed	by	behavioral	economists,	participants	are	paired	up
with	a	partner;	one	of	the	partners	is	given	a	pot	of	money	to	divide	as	she
wishes.	The	other	partner	may	then	choose	to	accept	or	reject	the	proposed
division.	Accepting	even	a	very	low	offer	is	more	rational	than	rejecting	the
offer	outright,	which	leaves	the	receiving	partner	with	nothing.	Yet	studies
consistently	find	that	many	players	decline	low	offers
	out	of	a	sense	of	being
unjustly	wronged—a	sense	that	they	
should
	have	gotten	more.
In	a	study	published	in	2011,	researchers	from	Virginia	Tech	scanned	the
brains
	of	two	groups	of	people	as	they	played	the	ultimatum	game:	a	group	who
regularly	practiced	meditation,	and	a	group	of	control	subjects	who	did	not
meditate.	The	scans	revealed	that	in	the	meditators,	the	insula—the	brain’s
interoceptive	center—was	active	during	game	play,	indicating	that	they	were
relying	on	their	bodies’	signals	to	make	their	decisions.	The	controls	exhibited	a
different	pattern:	their	scans	showed	activity	in	the	prefrontal	cortex,	the	part	of
the	brain	that	makes	conscious	judgments	about	what’s	fair	and	unfair.	The	two
groups	also	diverged	in	
their	behavior,	researchers	reported.	The	interoceptively
aware	meditators	were	more	likely	to	elect	the	rational	option	of	accepting	a	low
offer	over	no	money	at	all,	while	the	cogitating	controls	were	more	apt	to	snub	a
proposed	division	that	was	tilted	in	their	partners’	favor.
Among	social	scientists,	a	character	named	
Homo	economicus
	is	often
invoked;	the	term	describes	an	idealized	agent	who	always	makes	the	perfectly
--- Page 37 ---
logical	and	rational	choice.	This	figure	has	proved	hard	to	find	in	the	real	world
—and	yet,	the	Virginia	Tech	researchers	write,	“in	this	study,	we	identified
	a
population	of	human	beings	who	play	the	ultimatum	game	more	like	
Homo
economicus.
”	In	a	tone	of	some	surprise,	they	continue,	“Experienced	meditators
were	willing	to	accept	even	the	most	asymmetrical	offers	on	more	than	half	of
the	trials,	whereas	control	members	of	
Homo	sapiens
	did	so	in	just	over	one-
quarter	of	the	trials.”
The	bias	shown	by	the	non-meditators	in	the	Virginia	Tech	study	is	one	of
many	catalogued	by	behavioral	economists.	Others	include	the	
anchoring	effect,
in	which	we	rely	too	heavily	as	a	point	of	reference	on	the	first	piece	of
information	we	encounter;	the	
availability	heuristic,
	in	which	we	overestimate
the	likelihood	of	events	that	come	more	readily	to	mind;	and	the	
self-serving
bias,
	in	which	our	personal	preferences	incline	our	beliefs	in	an	overly	optimistic
direction.	What	to	do	about	such	biases?	The	strategy	of	many	economists	and
psychologists	has	been	to	inform	people	of	their	existence,	then	recommend	that
people	monitor	their	mental	activity	for	signs	that	their	thinking	is	being	swayed.
In	the	terminology	popularized	by	psychologist
	Daniel	Kahneman,	we’re
supposed	to	use	rational,	reflective	“System	2”	thinking	to	override	the	bias-
riddled	responses	of	the	faster	“System	1.”
Mark	Fenton-O’Creevy,	a	professor	of	organizational	behavior	at	The	Open
University	in	the	UK,	was	once	a	believer	in	this	highly	brainbound	approach.
Then	he	conducted	a	series	of	interviews
	with	expert	traders	at	six	investment
banks	and	found	that	they	almost	never	proceeded	in	this	fashion.	Instead,	the
traders	told	him,	they	relied	heavily	on	the	sensations	they	felt	stirring	within
their	own	bodies.	One	investor	described	the	process	to	Fenton-O’Creevy	in
particularly	visceral	terms.	“You	have	to	trust
	your	instincts,	and	a	lot	of	the
decisions	are	split	second,	so	you	need	to	know	where	the	edge	is	and	what	you
are	going	to	do	about	it,”	he	related.	“Having	a	feeling	is	like	having	whiskers,
like	being	a	deer;	
just	hearing	something	that	the	human	ear	can’t	hear	and	all	of
a	sudden	you’re	on	edge.	Something	somewhere	just	gave	you	a	slight	shiver,
but	you’re	not	quite	sure	what,	but	it’s	something	to	be	careful	about,
something’s	around.”
Successful	financiers	are	exquisitely	sensitive	to	these	subtle	physiological
cues,	Fenton-O’Creevy	discovered.	What’s	more,	they	seem	to	pick	up	on	such
signals	early	on,	just	as	the	feelings	start	to	emerge—and	act	on	them	in	that
moment,
	rather	than	dismissing	them,	suppressing	them,	or	holding	them	off	for
later	inspection.	Because	this	approach	proceeds	rapidly	and	with	little	mental
effort,	it’s	much	better	suited	to	addressing	the	complex,	fast-paced	decisions
that	many	of	us	are	called	upon	to	make,	says	Fenton-O’Creevy.	And	going
--- Page 38 ---
around	our	cognitive	biases	in	this	way	is	more	effective	than	laboriously	trying
to	correct	them.	“De-biasing	approaches
	which	rely	primarily	on	shifting
cognition	from	System	1	to	System	2	are	unlikely	to	succeed,”	he	maintains.
“The	human	capacity	for	self-monitoring	and	effortful	System	2	cognition	is
limited	and	is	rapidly	depleted.	Attempts	to	reduce	biases	by	learning	about
biases	and	engaging	in	self-monitoring	rapidly	come	up	against	human	cognitive
limits.”
Fenton-O’Creevy	has	experimented	with	techniques	intended	to	increase
investors’	interoceptive	awareness—through	the	practice	of	mindfulness,	and
through	the	provision	of	frequent	physiological	feedback.	In	his	lab,	he	had
participants	play	a	specially	designed	video	game
	called	
Space	Investor
;	as	part
of	the	game,	they	periodically	estimated	how	fast	their	hearts	were	beating.	The
more	accurate	their	guesses,	as	gauged	by	a	wireless	sensor	placed	on	the	chest,
the	more	game	points	they	accrued.	Fenton-O’Creevy	reports	that	repeated	play
appears	to	produce	lasting	improvements	in	participants’	interoceptive
awareness.
This	approach	suggests	a	novel	way	to	support	smart	decision	making:	not
through	the	application	of	painstaking	deliberation	and	analysis,	but	through	the
cultivation	of	what	we	might	call	“interoceptive	learning.”
	This	is	a	process	of
learning,	first,	how	to	sense,	label,	and	regulate	our	internal	signals—and
second,	how	to	draw	connections	between	the	particular	sensations	we	feel
within	and	the	pattern	of	events	we	encounter	in	the	world.	When	we	
feel	a
flutter	in	the	stomach	as	we	embark	on	a	certain	course	of	action,	what
consequences	seem	to	follow?	When	we	feel	our	heart	leap	at	the	thought	of	one
option	before	us,	and	our	heart	sink	at	the	mention	of	another,	what	does	that
portend	for	the	choice	we	ultimately	make?
We	can	clarify	and	codify	the	body’s	messages	by	keeping	an	“interoceptive
journal”—a	record	of	the	choices	we	make,	and	how	we	felt	when	we	made
them.	Each	journal	entry	has	three	parts.	First,	a	brief	account	of	the	decision
we’re	facing.	Second,	a	description—as	detailed	and	precise	as	possible—of	the
internal	sensations	we	experience	as	we	contemplate	the	various	options
available.	An	interoceptive	journal	asks	us	to	consider	the	paths	that	lie	before
us,	one	by	one,	and	take	note	of	how	we	feel	as	we	imagine	choosing	one	path
over	another.	The	third	section	of	the	journal	entry	is	a	notation	of	the	choice	on
which	we	ultimately	settle,	and	a	description	of	any	further	sensations	that	arise
upon	our	making	this	final	selection.
Once	you	know	how	a	particular	decision	turned	out—Did	the	investment
make	money?	Did	the	new	hire	work	out?	Was	the	out-of-town	trip	a	good	idea?
—you	can	return	to	the	record	of	the	moment	when	you	made	that	choice.	Over
time,	you	may	perceive	that	these	moments	arrange	themselves	into	a	pattern.
--- Page 39 ---
time,	you	may	perceive	that	these	moments	arrange	themselves	into	a	pattern.
Perhaps	you’ll	see	in	retrospect	that	you	experienced	a	constriction	in	your	chest
when	you	contemplated	a	course	of	action	that	would,	in	fact,	have	led	to
disappointment—but	that	you	felt	something	subtly	different,	a	lifting	and
opening	of	the	ribcage,	when	you	considered	an	approach	that	would	prove
successful.	Such	distinctions	are	delicate	and	fleeting;	an	interoceptive	journal
can	help	us	fix	them	in	place	long	enough	to	see	them	clearly.
	
T
HE	BODY,	THEN,
	can	act	as	a	sagacious	guide	to	good	decision	making—in	the
words	of	John	Coates,	as	an	
“éminence	grise,”
	more	knowledgeable	and
judicious	than	the	easily	overwhelmed	conscious	mind.	The	body	and	its
interoceptive	capacities	can	also	play	another	role:	as	the	coach	who	pushes	us	to
pursue	our	goals,	to	persevere	in	the	face	of	adversity,	to	return	from	setbacks
with	renewed	energy.	In	a	word,	an	awareness	of	our	interoception	can	help	us
become	more	
resilient.
This	may	seem	surprising.	If	there’s	any	human	capacity	that	calls	for	mind
over	matter,	the	mental	over	the	corporeal,	it	would	seem	to	be	resilience.	We
think	of	ourselves	as	
deciding
	to	grit	it	out,	as	
resolving
	to	exert	willpower,	often
over	the	protests	of	an	unwilling	body.	But,	in	fact,	
resilience	is	rooted	in	our
awareness	of	the	sensations	that	originate	in	our	organs	and	extremities—and	the
more	alert	we	are	to	these	inner	signals,	the	more	resilient	we	are	able	to	be	in
the	face	of	life’s	hardships.
The	reason	for	this:	every	action	we	take	requires	the	expenditure	of	scarce,
precious	energy.
	On	a	level	below	awareness,	we’re	constantly	keeping	tabs	on
how	much	energy	we	have	on	hand	and	how	much	energy	we	will	need	to	take
the	actions	the	world	demands	of	us.	Interoception	acts	as	a	continually	updated
gauge	of	our	present	status.	Its	cues	let	us	know	when	we	can	push	ourselves	and
when	we	have	to	give	ourselves	a	rest.	They	help	us	match	our	effort	to	the
magnitude	of	the	challenge	and	pace	ourselves	so	that	we	can	see	it	through	to
the	end.	And	just	as	some	people	are	better	than	others	at	using	bodily	sensations
to	guide	their	decisions,	some	people	are	better	than	others	at	using	interoceptive
signals	to	monitor	and	manage
	their	moment-by-moment	expenditure	of	energy.
Martin	Paulus	is	a	professor	of	psychiatry	at	the	University	of	California,	San
Diego,	who	investigates	the	role	of	interoception	in	promoting	resilience.	In	a
study	he	conducted
	in	2016,	Paulus	gave	participants	a	list	of	statements
	like
these,	asking	them	to	agree	or	disagree	with	each	one:
	
I	can	deal	with	whatever	comes	my	way.
I	tend	to	bounce	back	after	a	hardship	or	illness.
--- Page 40 ---
I	give	my	best	effort,	no	matter	what.
When	things	look	hopeless,	I	don’t	give	up.
Under	pressure,	I	focus	and	think	clearly.
I	am	not	easily	discouraged	by	failure.
	
With	their	replies,	his	subjects	sorted	themselves	into	two	distinct	groups:
high	resilience	and	low	resilience.	By	their	own	accounts,	when	faced	with
adversity	or	challenge,	the	high-resilience	group	was	likely	to	push	on	through	to
success,	while	members	of	the	low-resilience	group	were	more	likely	to	struggle,
burn	out,	or	give	up.	Paulus	found	an	additional	difference	between	the	two
groups:	on	average,	the	low-resilience	individuals	exhibited	poor	interoception,
as	measured	by	the	heartbeat	detection	test,	while	the	high-resilience	people
possessed	a	keen	sense	of	their	internal	world.
In	order	to	explore	such	intriguing	findings,	Paulus	has	devised	a	protocol	that
exposes	volunteers	to	a	challenging	internal	experience	as	their	
brains	are	being
scanned.	Over	the	past	decade,	Paulus	has	administered	this	regimen,	called	the
inspiratory	breathing	load	task,	to	hundreds	of	people.	One	of	the	most	famous
of	his	guinea	pigs	is	the	champion	swimmer
	Diana	Nyad.	A	world-record	holder
in	distance	swimming,	Nyad	made	history	in	1975	by	becoming	the	first	woman
to	swim	around	Manhattan	Island.	Four	decades	later,	at	the	age	of	sixty-four,
she	set	out	to	swim	from	Cuba	to	Florida.	Nyad	was	a	model	of	resilience	as	she
battled	fatigue,	nausea,	and	potentially	deadly	jellyfish	stings	over	the	course	of
the	110-mile	swim.	She	failed	four	times	in	the	attempt	before	trying,	and
succeeding,	in	August	2013.
Later	that	same	year	she	became	a	pioneer	in	another	fashion,	arriving	at
Paulus’s	lab	to	be	studied.	Before	climbing	into	an	MRI	machine,	she	was	fitted
with	a	nose	clip,	which	prevented	her	from	breathing	through	her	nose,	and	with
a	tube	that	went	into	her	mouth.	At	the	end	of	the	tube	was	a	stopper.	When	the
stopper	was	removed,	it	was	possible	for	Nyad	to	breathe	freely	through	the
tube;	when	the	stopper	was	inserted,	only	a	very	small	amount	of	air	could	pass
through.
Once	inside	the	MRI	chamber,	Nyad	was	directed	to	look	at	a	computer
screen	mounted	in	front	of	her	eyes.	When	the	screen	turned	blue,	the	breathing
tube	was	left	open;	when	the	screen	turned	yellow,	there	was	a	25	percent
chance	that	the	tube	would	be	plugged,	forcing	Nyad	to	struggle	for	breath.
Observing	the	activity	of	Nyad’s	brain	under	each	condition	allowed	Paulus	and
his	colleagues	to	investigate	how	she	
anticipated
	a	stressor,	how	she	
responded
to	a	stressor,	and	how	she	
recovered
	from	a	stressor.	While	all	this	was	going	on,
Nyad	was	also	responding	to	questions	in	a	test	of	her	cognitive	ability.	(Writing
--- Page 41 ---
about	the	experience	in	her	autobiography,	Nyad	commented,	“Of	course	I’m
competitive,
	so	I	wanted	to	score	higher	than	anyone	who’s	ever	had	the	MRI.”)
The	scan	of	Nyad’s	brain	revealed	a	distinctive	response	to	this	uncomfortable
experience.	Her	insula	mounted	an	intense	anticipatory	response	
before
	the
stressor—when	the	screen	turned	yellow—but	settled	down	to	a	state	of	relative
quiescence	
during
	and	
after
	the	stressor.	As	for	the	cognitive	test,	Nyad	recalls
Paulus	showing	her	the	results,	presented	as	dots	charted	on	a	digitized	graph:
“Clumped	at	the	bottom
	are	ordinary	people,	who	did	very	poorly	on	the	test
during	the	periods	of	oxygen	restriction	and	when	they	were	anticipating	the
upcoming	oxygen	
restriction,”	she	recounts.	“Next	were	a	group	significantly
above	the	control	group,	who	did	much	better;	these	were	the	Marines.	The	next
group	was	a	big	bump	up	from	that:	Navy	SEALS.	Then	Dr.	Paulus	pointed	high
up	to	the	right,	almost	off	the	computer	screen.	This,	he	said,	is	me.”
Nyad	is	truly	an	outlier,	but	Paulus	has	found	the	same	pattern
	in	elite
performers	of	all	stripes.	Astonishingly,	putting	these	individuals	through	an
extremely	unpleasant	interoceptive	experience	actually	
improves
	their	cognitive
performance.	These	champions	have	a	superior	ability	to	sense
	their	bodies’
cues,	and	are	therefore	better	able	to	monitor	and	manage	their	bodies’	resources
as	they	rise	to	meet	a	challenge.	They	are	like	efficient,	well-calibrated	motors
that	don’t	waste	even	a	bit	of	power,	keeping	plenty	of	energy	in	reserve.
People	with	low	resilience,
	by	contrast,	present	a	very	different	profile.	When
undergoing	the	inspiratory	breathing	load	task,	their	brain	scans	show	a	pattern
that	is	the	opposite	of	Diana	Nyad’s:	low	levels	of	activity	
before
	a	stressor,	and
high	levels	
during
	and	
after
	the	stressor.	The	self-management	of	these
individuals	is	sloppy,	all	over	the	place,	like	poorly	calibrated	motors	that	leak
power.	They	are	brought	up	short	by	challenges,	and	then	waste	energy	in	the
scramble	to	catch	up.	They	begin	to	struggle	to	answer	the	test	questions.
Discouraged	by	their	failures,	their	energy	reserves	depleted,	they	lose
motivation	and	give	up.
Such	differences	clearly	matter	in	attempting	a	physical	feat	of	courage	or
endurance,	but	they	matter,	too,	when	the	pursuit	is	of	a	more	cerebral	sort.
Mental	activity,	like	any	other	we	undertake,	requires	the	mobilization	and
management	of	energy;	indeed,	the	brain	consumes	fully	20	percent	of	the
body’s	energy	supply.	The	ability	to	allocate	our	internal	resources	effectively	in
tackling	mental	challenges	is	a	capacity	researchers	call	“cognitive	resilience.”
For	one	of	Martin	Paulus’s	collaborators,	cognitive	resilience	holds	a	special
importance.	Elizabeth	Stanley,	an	associate	professor	of	security	studies	at
Georgetown	University,	is	a	member	of	a	storied	military	family	who	spent
years	working	as	an	intelligence	officer	in	the	US	Army,	including	postings	in
--- Page 42 ---
Germany,	South	Korea,	and	the	Balkans.	In	military	service	and	in	civilian	life,
Stanley	drove	herself	relentlessly;	she	describes	her	modus	operandi	as	“dig	in,
access	deep	wells
	of	willpower	and	determination,	and	power	through.”	For
decades,	she	writes,	“I	considered	my	capacity	to	ignore	and	override	my	body
and	my	emotions	in	this	way	to	
be	a	good	thing—a	sign	of	strength,	self-
discipline,	and	determination.”	Eventually,	however,	she	came	to	recognize	that
“this	default	strategy	was	actually	undermining	my	performance	and	well-
being.”	(The	time	she	threw	up	all	over	her	computer	keyboard,	after	months	of
sixteen-hour	days	at	work	on	her	PhD	dissertation,	was	one	hint.)
Seeking	a	different	approach,	Stanley	found	her	way	to	mindfulness
meditation,	which	she	practices	daily;	she	also	created	a	program,
	called
Mindfulness-based	Mind	Fitness	Training,	designed	to	bolster	the	cognitive
resilience	of	service	members	facing	high-stress	situations.	MMFT,	as	it	is
known,	places	an	emphasis	on	recognizing	and	regulating	the	body’s	internal
signals.	In	collaboration	with	academic	psychologists	and	neuroscientists,
Stanley	has	tested	the	efficacy	of	the	program	among	troops	as	they	prepare	to
deploy	to	combat;	results	show	that	the	training	helps	participants	maintain	their
attentional	focus
	and	preserve	their	working	memory
	even	under	the	most
challenging	circumstances.	In	workshops	around	the	country,	Stanley	teaches	the
method	not	only	to	members	of	the	military	but	also	to	others	in	high-stress
occupations:	firefighters,	police	officers,	social	workers,	health	care	providers,
disaster	relief	workers.
Like	the	expert	traders	interviewed	by	Mark	Fenton-O’Creevy,	and	like	the
elite	athletes	studied	by	Martin	Paulus,	Stanley	has	found	that	the	most
cognitively	resilient	soldiers	pay	close	attention	to	their	bodily	sensations	
at	the
early	stage
	of	a	challenge,	when	signs	of	stress	are	just	beginning	to	accumulate.
She	instructs	her	workshop	participants	to	do	the	same,	using	mindfulness
techniques	similar	to	the	ones	described	by	Jon	Kabat-Zinn.	By	remaining	alert
to	these	preliminary	signals,	she	says,	we	can	avoid	being	taken	by	surprise	and
then	overreacting,	entering	a	state	of	physiological	arousal	from	which	it	is	hard
to	come	down.	(Stanley	notes	ruefully	that	many	of	us	take	just	the	opposite
approach,	as	she	once	did:	pushing	aside	internal	red	flags	in	the	hope	that	we
can	“power	through”	and	get	the	job	done.)
Stanley	also	demonstrates	for	her	students	a	technique	she	calls	“shuttling”
—
moving	one’s	focus	back	and	forth	between	what	is	transpiring	internally	and
what	is	going	on	outside	the	body.	Such	shifts	are	useful	in	ensuring	that	we	are
neither	too	caught	up	in	external	events	nor	too	overwhelmed	by	our	internal
feelings,	but	instead	occupy	a	place	of	balance	that	incorporates	input	from	both
realms.	This	alternation	of	attention	can	be	practiced	at	relaxed	moments	until	it
--- Page 43 ---
becomes	second	nature:	
a	continuously	repeated	act	of	checking	in	that	provides
a	periodic	infusion	of	interoceptive	information.	The	point	is	to	keep	in	close
contact	with	our	internal	reality	at	all	times—to	train	ourselves	“to	pay	attention
and	notice	what’s	happening
	while	it’s	happening,”	as	Stanley	puts	it.	The	vision
of	resilience	she	offers	is	not	a	formidable	display	of	will	and	grit	of	the	kind	she
once	would	have	embraced;	it	is,	rather,	a	flexible,	moment-by-moment
responsiveness	to	changing	conditions—both	inside	and	out.
	
A
N	AWARENESS	OF
	our	interoceptive	signals	can	assist	us	in	making	sounder
decisions	and	in	rebounding	more	readily	from	stressful	situations.	It	can	also
allow	us	to	enjoy	a	richer	and	more	satisfying	emotional	life.	Research	finds	that
people	who	are	more	interoceptively	attuned	feel	their	emotions	more	intensely,
while	also	managing	their	emotions	more	adeptly.
	This	is	so	because
interoceptive	sensations	form	the	building	blocks	of	even	our	most	subtle	and
nuanced	emotions:	affection,	admiration,	gratitude;	sorrow,	longing,	regret;
irritation,	envy,	resentment.	People	who	are	more	interoceptively	aware	can
interact	more	intimately	and	more	skillfully	with	the	emotions	that	interoceptive
sensations	help	construct.
But	first—understanding	the	relationship	between	interoception	and	emotion
requires	correcting	a	basic	misconception	most	of	us	hold	about	how	feelings
come	about.	The	story	we’re	used	to	telling	goes	like	this:	on	the	basis	of	what’s
happening	to	us,	the	brain	determines	the	appropriate	emotion	(happy,	sad,
scared),	then	directs	the	body	to	act	accordingly	(smile,	cry,	scream).	In	fact,	the
causal	arrow	points	in	the	
opposite
	direction.	The	body	produces	sensations,	the
body	initiates	actions—and	only	then	does	the	mind	assemble	these	pieces	of
evidence	into	the	entity	we	call	an	emotion.
The	pioneering	American	psychologist	William	James	deduced	this	more	than
a	century	ago.	Imagine	you	meet	a	bear	in	the	woods,	James	wrote.	Your	heart
pounds,	your	palms	sweat,	your	legs	break	into	a	run—why?	It	might	seem	that
it’s	because	your	brain	generates	a	feeling	of	fear,	and	then	tells	your	body	to	get
moving.	But	James	suggested	that	it	works	the	other	way	around:	we	feel	fear
because
	our	heart	is	racing,	
because
	our	palms	are	sweating,	
because
	our	legs
are	propelling	us	forward.	As	he	put	it:	“Common	sense	says,
	we	lose	our
fortune,	are	sorry	and	weep;	we	meet	a	bear,	are	frightened	and	run;	we	are
insulted	by	a	rival,	are	angry	and	
strike.”	But,	he	went	on,	“this	order	of
sequence	is	incorrect.”	It	would	be	more	accurate,	wrote	James,	to	say	that	“we
feel	sorry	because	we	cry,	angry	because	we	strike,	afraid	because	we	tremble.”
In	recent	years,	scientists	have	begun	to	elaborate	on	James’s	theory	with	the
help	of	modern	investigative	techniques	like	brain	scanning.	Their	research	has
--- Page 44 ---
confirmed	that	the	thing	we	call	“emotion”	(and	experience	as	a	unified	whole)
is	actually	constructed	from	more	elemental	parts;
	these	parts	include	the	signals
generated	by	the	body’s	interoceptive	system,	as	well	as	the	beliefs	of	our
families	and	cultures	regarding	how	these	signals	are	to	be	interpreted.	This
perspective	carries	two	important	implications.	First:	the	greater	our	awareness
of	interoceptive	sensations,	the	richer	and	more	intense	our	experience	of
emotion	can	be.	And	second:	equipped	with	interoceptive	awareness,	we	can	get
in	on	the	ground	floor	of	emotion	construction;	we	can	participate	in	creating	the
type	of	emotion	we	experience.
Psychologists	who	study	the	construction	of	emotion	call	this	practice
“cognitive	reappraisal.”	It	involves	sensing	and	labeling	an	interoceptive
sensation,	as	we’ve	learned	to	do	here,	and	then	“reappraising”	it—reinterpreting
it	in	an	adaptive	way.	We	can,	for	example,	reappraise	“nervousness”	as
“excitement.”	Consider	the	interoceptive	sensations	that	accompany	these	two
emotions:	a	racing	heart,	sweaty	palms,	a	fluttering	stomach.	The	
feelings
	are
almost	identical;	it’s	the	
meaning
	we	assign	to	them	that	makes	them,	variously,
an	ordeal	to	be	dreaded	or	a	thrill	to	be	enjoyed.	The	one	thing	we	are	not,	in
such	moments,	is	cool	or	calm—and	yet	most	of	us	are	convinced	that	when	we
are	in	anxiety’s	grip,	what	we	ought	to	do	is	try	to	
calm	down.
Alison	Wood	Brooks,	an	associate	professor	at	Harvard	Business	School,	had
a	different	notion	of	how	to	handle	nervousness.	In	a	series	of	three	studies,
	she
subjected	groups	of	people	to	experiences	that	most	everyone	would	find	nerve-
racking:	completing	“a	very	difficult	IQ	test”	administered	“under	time
pressure”;	delivering,	on	the	spot,	“a	persuasive	public	speech	about	‘why	you
are	a	good	work	partner’
 
”;	and	most	excruciating	of	all,	belting	out	an	80s	pop
song	(“Don’t	Stop	Believin’,”	by	Journey).	Before	beginning	the	activity,
participants	were	to	direct	themselves	to	stay	calm,	or	to	tell	themselves	that	they
were	excited.
Reappraising	nervousness	as	excitement	yielded	a	noticeable	difference	
in
performance.	The	IQ	test	takers	scored	significantly	higher.	The	speech	givers
came	across	as	more	persuasive,	competent,	and	confident.	Even	the	singers
performed	more	passably	(as	judged	by	the	Nintendo	Wii	
Karaoke	Revolution
program	they	used).	All	reported	genuinely	feeling	the	pleasurable	emotion	of
excitement—a	remarkable	shift	away	from	the	unpleasant	discomfort	such
activities	might	be	expected	to	engender.
In	a	similar	fashion,	we	can	choose	to	reappraise	debilitating	“stress”
	as
productive	“coping.”	A	2010	study	carried	out	with	Boston-area	undergraduates
looked	at	what	happens	when	people	facing	a	stressful	experience	are	informed
about	the	
positive
	effects	of	stress
	on	our	thinking—that	is,	the	way	it	can	make
--- Page 45 ---
us	more	alert	and	more	motivated.	Before	taking	the	GRE,	the	admissions	exam
for	graduate	school,	one	group	of	students	was	given	the	following	message	to
read:	“People	think	that	feeling	anxious	while	taking	a	standardized	test	will
make	them	do	poorly	on	the	test.	However,	recent	research	suggests	that	arousal
doesn’t	hurt	performance	on	these	tests	and	can	even	help	performance.	People
who	feel	anxious	during	a	test	might	actually	do	better.	This	means	that	you
shouldn’t	feel	concerned	if	you	do	feel	anxious	while	taking	today’s	GRE	test.	If
you	find	yourself	feeling	anxious,	simply	remind	yourself	that	your	arousal
could	be	helping	you	do	well.”	A	second	group	received	no	such	message	before
taking	the	exam.	Three	months	later,	when	the	students’	GRE	scores	were
released,	the	students	who	had	been	encouraged	to	reappraise	their	feelings	of
stress	scored	an	average	of	65	points	higher.
Reappraisal	research	has	begun	to	elucidate	the	mechanisms	by	which	this
technique	exerts	its	effects.	In	the	GRE	study,	saliva	samples	were	collected
from	all	the	participants	and	analyzed	for	the	presence	of	a	hormone	associated
with	nervous	system	arousal.	Among	the	students	who	engaged	in	reappraisal,
the	level	of	this	hormone	was	elevated—suggesting	that	their	bodies	had
identified	the	presence	of	a	challenge	and	were	mounting	an	effective	response,
enhancing	their	alertness	and	sharpening	their	attention.	Another	study	explored
the	neural	effects	of	the	reappraisal	technique
	on	students	who	struggle	with
math	anxiety.	Their	brains	were	scanned	twice	as	they	completed	a	set	of	math
problems	inside	an	fMRI	machine.	Before	the	first	round,	participants	were	told
to	use	whatever	strategies	they	usually	employed.	Before	the	second	round,
participants	were	given	instructions	on	how	to	engage	in	reappraisal.	
When
employing	the	reappraisal	approach,	the	students	answered	more	of	the	math
questions	correctly,	and	the	scans	showed	why:	brain	areas	involved	in	executing
arithmetic	were	more	active	under	the	reappraisal	condition.	The	increased
activity	in	these	areas	suggests	that	the	act	of	reappraisal	allowed	students	to
redirect	the	mental	resources	that	previously	were	consumed	by	anxiety,
applying	them	to	the	math	problems	instead.
Psychologists	offer	two	additional	points	of	interest	for	those	adopting	the
strategy	of	reappraisal.	The	first	is	that	reappraisal	works	best
	for	those	who	are
interoceptively	aware:	we	have	to	be	able	to	identify	our	internal	sensations,
after	all,	before	we	can	begin	to	modify	the	way	we	think	about	them.	Second,
the	sensations	we’re	actually	feeling
	have	to	be	
congruent
	with	the	emotion
we’re	aiming	to	construct.	We’re	able	to	reappraise	nervousness	as	excitement
because	the	physiological	cues	associated	with	the	two	emotions	are	so	similar;
if	what	we’re	feeling	is	a	heavy	sense	of	apathy	or	lassitude,	exclaiming	“I’m	so
excited!”	isn’t	going	to	work.
--- Page 46 ---
Becoming	aware	of	our	internal	sensations	can	help	us	handle	our	own
emotions.	Perhaps	more	surprisingly,	the	body’s	interoceptive	faculty	can	also
bring	us	into	closer	contact	with	
other
	people’s	emotions.	That’s	because	the
brain,	on	its	own,	has	no	direct	access	to	the	contents	of	other	people’s	minds,	no
way	to	feel	what	others	are	feeling.	Interpreting	others’	spoken	words	and	facial
expressions	may	yield	only	a	coolly	abstract	sense	of	the	emotions	that	churn
within.	The	body	acts	as	a	critical	conduit,	supplying	the	brain	with	the	visceral
information	it	lacks.	It	does	so	in	this	way:	When	interacting	with	other	people,
we	subtly	and	unconsciously	mimic
	their	facial	expressions,	gestures,	posture,
and	vocal	pitch.	Then,	via	the	interoception	of	our	own	bodies’	signals,	we
perceive	what	the	other	person	is	feeling	
because	we	feel	it	in	ourselves.
	We
bring	other	people’s	feelings	onboard,	and	the	body	is	the	bridge.	In	an	act	akin
to	taking	a	bite	off	our	partner’s	plate,	or	borrowing	an	earbud	to	hear	the	song
our	friend	is	listening	to,	we	are	sampling	their	emotions.
When	people	can’t	engage	in	such	mimicking,
	they	have	a	harder	time
figuring	out	what	others	are	feeling.	A	striking	example:	people	injected	with	the
wrinkle	reducer	Botox,	which	works	by	inducing	mild	paralysis	of	the	muscles
used	to	generate	facial	expressions,	are	less	accurate	
in	their	perceptions	of
others’	emotions—presumably	because	they	can’t	simulate	others’	feelings
within	themselves.	On	the	other	end	of	the	spectrum,	interoceptively	attuned
people	are	more	likely	to	mimic
	the	expressions	of	others,	and	more	accurate	in
their	interpretation
	of	others’	feelings,	than	are	people	who	are	less	aware	of
their	bodily	sensations.	They	also	tend	to	have	more	empathy
	for	others.	Via
mimicking,	all	of	us	“feel”	the	pain	of	others:	research	demonstrates	that	the
areas	of	the	brain	involved	in	sensing	our	own	pain	are	also	activated	when	we
see	other	people	experience	physical	harm.	But	when	interoceptively	attuned
people	view	someone	experiencing	pain,	they	rate	the	other	person’s	pain	as
more	intense.
The	interoceptive	champions	among	us	may	be	clinical	psychologists,	who	are
professionally	trained	to	read	their	own	bodies’	signals
	for	clues	to	what	their
patients	are	feeling—even	when	their	clients	are	not	yet	able	to	verbalize	their
emotions.	“For	me	it’s	like	using
	the	body	as	radar,	you	think	of	those	sort	of
dishes	that	collect	satellite	messages	and	funnel	them	down—well,	I	see	the
body	in	that	way,”	observed	one	clinician	in	a	2004	study	of	how	therapists	use
their	bodies	to	understand	their	patients.	In	similar	fashion,	Susie	Orbach,	a
clinical	psychologist	and	the	author	of	groundbreaking	books	on	women	and
body	image,	has	found	that	her	own	body	is	a	sensitive	instrument	for	picking	up
on	what	her	patients	are	feeling.	Focusing	on	the	sensations	that	well	up	inside
--- Page 47 ---
her	during	therapy,	says	Orbach,	“has	helped	me	to	realize
	that	the	body’s
development	is	every	bit	as	crucial	as	the	mind’s.”
Like	psychotherapists,	we	can	develop	the	capacity	of	the	body	to	enhance	our
connections	with	others—a	faculty	called	“social	interoception.”
	Research
suggests	that	looking	our	conversational	partner	directly	in	the	eye
	increases	our
interoceptive	attunement,	as	does	a	brief	touch
	on	the	hand	or	the	arm.	Studies
also	show	that	when	interpersonal	situations	become	challenging—when	we	feel
socially	rejected	or	excluded,	for	example—we	tend	to	shift	our	focus
	away
from	our	own	internal	sensations	and	toward	external	events,	perhaps	in	an
urgent	effort	to	repair	the	breach.	This	shift,	however	well	intentioned,	may	cut
us	off	from	a	source	of	insight	about	the	other	person	just	when	we	need	it	most.
Better	to	attempt	a	flexible	back-and-forth	movement
	between	attending	to
others’	social	cues	and	to	our	own	interoceptive	signals	(a	process	that	
recalls
Elizabeth	Stanley’s	technique	of	“shuttling”).	By	drawing	on	data	from	both
sources,	we	can	feel	our	way	into	the	other	person’s	emotional	world	while
maintaining	a	vivid	sense	of	our	own.
	
J
OHN	COATES,
	the	trader	turned	scientist	we	met	at	the	beginning	of	this	chapter,
likens	our	bodies	to	“sensitive	parabolic	reflectors,
	registering	a	wealth	of
predictive	information.”	These	biological	antennae	are	continually	receiving	and
sending	important	messages,	he	notes,	yet	“these	messages	are	notoriously,
frustratingly	hard	to	hear.	They	fade	in	and	out	like	a	radio	picking	up	a	distant
station.”	Coates	believes	that	technology	can	help—not	by	replacing	gut	feelings
with	data-driven	algorithms,	but	by	amplifying	the	body’s	own	accumulated
insight.	He	has	now	embarked	on	a	third	career,	this	time	as	an	entrepreneur.	His
company,	Dewline	Research,	collects	data	on	financial	traders’	physiological
signals	via	wearable	sensors,	tracking	the	relationship	between	the	gyrations	of
the	market	and	the	traders’	bodily	reactions.
Another	group	of	interoception	researchers,	meanwhile,	have	developed	a
similar	device
—this	one	oriented	around	enhancing	the	body’s	role	in	promoting
resilience.	Heartrater,	a	technology	introduced	by	scientists	at	the	Brighton	and
Sussex	Medical	School	in	the	UK,	allows	athletes	to	monitor	their	internal
climate	more	closely,	permitting	a	more	efficient	use	of	energy	and	a	more	rapid
recovery	from	exertion.	Perhaps	the	most	intriguing	use	of	such	extended
technology—that	is,	digital	tools	extended	by	the	body—has	been	pioneered	by
interoception	researcher	Manos	Tsakiris,	a	professor	of	psychology	at	Royal
Holloway,	University	of	London.	With	a	team	from	the	firm	Empathic
Technologies,	he	helped	develop	a	device	called	doppel.	It	provides	users	with
bodily	feedback	that	is	not	amplified	but	rather	deliberately	distorted;
	in	effect,
--- Page 48 ---
doppel	seeks	to	trick	the	user	into	believing	that	her	heart	is	beating	slower	or
faster	than	it	actually	is.
Recall	that—as	William	James	explained	so	eloquently—our	brains	take	their
cues	about	the	emotions	we’re	experiencing	from	the	sensations	generated	by	the
body.	Tsakiris’s	device	intervenes	in	this	loop	by	offering	the	brain	a	message
that	is	different	from	the	one	the	body	is	actually	producing.	Worn	on	the	wrist
like	a	watch	or	a	Fitbit,	doppel	generates	the	persuasive	sensation	of	a	slow,
relaxed	heartbeat—or,	on	a	different	setting,	of	a	fast,	excited	one.	When	set	to
slow	mode,	doppel	induces	
a	sense	of	calm
	in	people	who	are	nervous	about
having	to	engage	in	public	speaking;	when	it’s	in	fast	mode,	people	wearing	the
device	are	more	alert	and	more	accurate
	in	their	performance	on	a	challenging
test	of	sustained	attention.	The	technology	allows	us,	says	Tsakiris,	“to	harvest
our	natural	responses
	to	heartbeat-like	rhythms”	in	the	interest	of	improving	our
performance.
That	such	trickery	is	even	possible	only	serves	to	underline	the	robustness	of
the	connection	between	body	and	mind,	the	two-way	flow	of	information	that
does	so	much	to	shape	our	daily	decisions,	our	everyday	efforts,	our	most
intimate	relationships.	This	link	may	also	form	the	foundation	of	something	even
more	fundamental:	our	sense	of	self.	Among	all	their	other	functions,	the	steady
flow	of	internal	sensations	we	experience	provides	us	with	a	sense	of	personal
continuity.	Thinkers	have	long	mused	on	how	it	is	that	we	can	regard	ourselves
as	unique	and	persistently	existing	entities.	“What	makes	me	the	same	person
throughout	my	life,	and	a	different	person	from	you?”	wondered	the	late
philosopher	Derek	Parfit.	Their	answers	have	usually	had	something	to	do	with
the	brain—with	our	thoughts	or	our	memories.	As	the	French	philosopher	René
Descartes	declared,	“I	think,	therefore	I	am.”
According	to	neuroanatomist	and	interoception	expert	A.	D.	Craig,	it	would
be	more	accurate	to	say,	“I	
feel,
	therefore	I	am.”
	Craig	maintains	that
interoceptive	awareness	is	the	basis	of	the	“material	me,”	the	source	of	our	most
fundamental	knowledge	of	ourselves.	Because	our	hearts	beat,	because	our	lungs
expand,	because	our	muscles	stretch	and	our	organs	rumble—and	because	all
these	sensations,	unique	to	us,	have	carried	on	without	interruption	since	the	day
of	our	birth—we	know	what	it	is	to	be	one	continuous	self,	to	be	ourselves	and
no	other.	Interoception,	says	Craig,	is	nothing	less	than	“the	feeling	of	being
alive.”
--- Page 49 ---
2
Thinking	with	Movement
D
R.	JEFF	FIDLER
	is	a	radiologist	at	the	Mayo	Clinic	in	Rochester,	Minnesota.
In	the	course	of	his	professional	duties,	he	regularly	reviews	fifteen	thousand	or
more	images	
a	day
—and	he	used	to	do	so	sitting	down.	Not	anymore.	These
days	Fidler	walks	as	he	looks,
	having	set	up	a	treadmill	in	front	of	the	large
screen	that	displays	the	radiological	slides	he	is	charged	with	examining.	Within
the	first	year	of	creating	his	“walking	workstation,”	Fidler	lost	twenty-five
pounds—and,	he	felt	convinced,	he	was	doing	a	better	job	of	identifying	the
abnormalities	hidden	in	the	X-ray	images	he	scrutinized.
With	a	colleague,	Fidler	designed	a	study	to	test	his	hunch.	Radiologists
inspected	a	batch	of	images
	while	seated,	and	while	walking	on	a	treadmill	at
one	mile	per	hour.	The	participating	physicians	identified	a	total	of	1,582	areas
of	concern	in	the	slides,	and	rated	459	of	these	as	posing	potentially	serious	risks
to	the	health	of	the	patient.	When	they	compared	the	“detection	rates”	they
achieved	while	sitting	and	while	moving,	the	results	were	clear:	radiologists	who
remained	seated	spotted	an	average	of	85	percent	of	the	irregularities	present	in
the	images,	while	those	who	walked	identified,	on	average,	fully	99	percent	of
them.
Other	evidence	supports	Fidler’s	findings.	A	study	conducted	at	the
University	of	Maryland	Medical	Center,	for	example,	found	that	radiologists
reviewing	images	of	patients’	lungs
	were	more	likely	to	identify	potentially
problematic	nodules	if	they	walked	rather	than	sat	as	they	worked.	And	a	study
conducted	by	physicians	in	the	radiology	department	of	the	Naval	Medical
Center	in	Portsmouth,	Virginia,	found	that	
radiologists	who	used	a	treadmill
workstation
	did	their	work	faster,	with	no	loss	of	accuracy.
A	different	set	of	research	findings	helps	to	explain	the	radiologists’	results.
When	we’re	engaged	in	physical	activity,	our	visual	sense	is	sharpened,
especially	with	regard	to	stimuli	appearing	in	the	periphery	of	our	gaze.
	This
--- Page 50 ---
shift,	which	is	also	found	in	non-human	animals,	makes	evolutionary	sense:	the
visual	system	becomes	more	sensitive	when	we	are	actively	exploring	our
environment.	When	our	bodies	are	at	rest—that	is,	sitting	still	in	a	chair—this
heightened	acuity	is	dialed	down.
Such	activity-induced	alterations	in	the	way	we	process	visual	information
constitute	just	one	example	of	how	moving	our	bodies	changes	the	way	we
think.	Scientists	have	long	known	that	overall	physical	fitness
	supports	cognitive
function;	people	who	have	fitter	bodies	generally	have	keener	minds.	In	recent
years,	however,	researchers	have	begun	to	explore	an	exciting	additional
possibility:	that	single	bouts	of	physical	activity	can	enhance	our	cognition	in	the
short	term.	By	moving	our	bodies	in	certain	ways,	that	is,	we’re	immediately
able	to	think	more	intelligently.	Scientists	investigating	this	phenomenon	have
approached	it	from	two	different	directions:	the	
intensity
	of	the	movement	and
the	
type
	of	movement.	As	we’ll	soon	see,	low-,	medium-,	and	high-intensity
physical	activity	each	exerts	a	distinct	effect	on	our	cognition.	Later	on	in	the
chapter,	we’ll	explore	how	certain	types	of	movement—congruent	movements,
novel	movements,	self-referential	movements,	and	metaphorical	movements—
can	also	extend	our	thinking	beyond	what	is	possible	when	we	remain	stationary.
The	tight	connection	between	thinking	and	moving	is	a	legacy	of	our	species’s
evolutionary	history.	The	human	brain	is	approximately	three	times	larger	than	it
“should”	be,
	given	the	dimensions	of	the	human	body;	according	to	fossil
evidence,	a	remarkable	expansion	in	the	size	of	the	brain	took	place	about	2
million	years	ago.	Scientists	have	proposed	various	reasons	for	this	increase,
such	as	the	growing	complexity	of	our	forebears’	social	interactions	or	the	need
to	adapt	to	changing	ecological	conditions.	Recently,	another	explanation	has
been	put	forth:	“At	the	same	time
	as	brain	size	began	to	increase	in	the	human
lineage,	aerobic	activity	levels	appear	to	have	changed	dramatically,”	notes
David	Raichlen,	a	professor	of	biological	sciences	at	the	University	of	Southern
California.	“Human	ancestors	transitioned
	from	a	relatively	sedentary	
ape-like
existence	to	a	hunting	and	gathering	lifestyle	which	required	an	increased
amount	of	physical	activity	compared	to	earlier	hominins.”
Raichlen,	who	has	conducted	extensive	studies	of	some	of	the	world’s
remaining	hunter-gatherer	tribes,	points	out	that	this	way	of	life	is	both
physically	
and
	cognitively	demanding.	Foraging	requires	vigorous,	sustained
physical	activity;
	it	also	makes	demands	on	attention,	memory,	spatial
navigation,	motor	control,	and	executive	functions	like	planning	and	decision
making.	Hunting,	too,	poses
	both	a	mental	and	a	physical	challenge:	the	hunter
has	to	locate	the	animal	and	track	its	unpredictable	movements	even	while
mustering	the	energy	to	outrun	it.	Such	are	the	conditions	under	which	the
--- Page 51 ---
unique	human	brain	evolved.	The	dual	demands	of	physical	challenge	and
cognitive	complexity	shaped	our	special	status	as	
Homo	sapiens;
	to	this	day,
bodily	activity	and	mental	acuity	are	still	intimately	intertwined.
Of	course,	things	have	changed	for	those	of	us	who	live	in	modern	societies;
we	are	no	longer	a	species	on	the	move.	While	the	Hazda	people	of	East	Africa
—one	of	the	hunter-gatherer	tribes	studied	by	Raichlen—spend	an	average	of
135	minutes	a	day
	engaged	in	moderate	to	vigorous	physical	activity,	most
inhabitants	of	industrialized	countries	fail	to	meet	health	experts’	minimum
recommendation	of	150	minutes	of	activity	
a	week.
	Put	another	way,
contemporary	hunter-gatherers	engage	in	more	than	fourteen	times	as	much
moderate-to-vigorous	physical	activity	as	the	typical	American.	The	lack	of
physical	movement	in	our	society	is	due	in	large	part	to	the	dominance	of
academic	learning	and	of	knowledge	work,	and	to	the	habits	and	convictions	that
have	grown	up	around	these	endeavors.	While	we’re	thinking,	we	believe,	we
should	be	sitting	still.
Challenges	to	this	belief	may	be	met	with	derision.	When	Jeff	Fidler
published	his	findings	in	the	
Journal	of	the	American	College	of	Radiology,
some	of	his	colleagues	reacted	with	mocking	ridicule.	“I	see	that	I	can	depend
	on
this	publication	for	comic	relief,”	wrote	Robert	Feld,	a	radiologist	from	Hartford,
Connecticut,	in	a	letter	to	the	editor.	Fidler’s	study,	he	declared,	was	“a	parody
of	clinical	research	gone	awry”;	in	Feld’s	view,	making	provisions	for
physicians	to	move	as	they	work	is	“a	staggering	waste	of	effort	and	resources.”
Such	attitudes	are	widely	reflected	in	the	way	students	and	workers	use	their
time.	Children	spend	an	average	of	50	percent	of	the	school	day
	sitting,	a
proportion	that	increases	as	they	enter	adolescence.	Adults	in	
the	workplace
move	even	less,	remaining	seated	for	more	than	two-thirds	of	the	average
workday.
	We	inherited	a	“mind	on	the	hoof,”
	in	the	phrase	of	philosopher	Andy
Clark—but	in	today’s	classrooms	and	offices,	the	vigorous	clatter	of	hoofs	has
come	to	an	eerie	halt.
	
T
HAT’S	EMPHATICALLY
	not	the	case	in	the	classroom	helmed	by	Maureen	Zink,	a
fourth-grade	teacher	at	Vallecito	Elementary	School	in	San	Rafael,	California.
Her	students	don’t	sit	still
	at	their	desks;	in	fact,	most	of	them	are	not	sitting	at
all.	In	2013,	the	entire	school	replaced	traditional	desks	and	chairs	with	standing
desks,	and	the	school’s	“activity-permissive”	ethos	allows	pupils	to	stand
upright,	perch	on	stools,	sit	on	the	floor,	and	otherwise	move	around	as	they
wish.	Though	some	were	hesitant	about	the	change,	Zink	and	the	other	teachers
at	Vallecito	now	say	it’s	been	a	resounding	success;	students	are	more	alert,
more	attentive,	and	more	engaged.	“I	taught	at	sitting	desks
	for	30	years,”	says
--- Page 52 ---
Zink,	“and	I’ll	never	go	back.”	Tracy	Smith,	the	principal	at	Vallecito	during	the
switch	to	standing	desks,	agrees	that	students	are	“more	focused,	confident,	and
productive”	when	given	license	to	move.
The	community’s	initial	trepidation	is	telling.	We	associate	stillness	with
steadiness,	seriousness,	and	industriousness;	we	believe	there’s	something
virtuous	about	controlling	the	impulse	to	move.	At	times	and	places	where
there’s	work	to	be	done,	physical	movement	is	regarded	with	disapproval,	even
suspicion.	(Consider	the	way	we	associate	fidgeting	with	a	certain	moral
shiftiness.)	What	this	attitude	overlooks	is	that	the	capacity	to	regulate	our
attention	and	our	behavior	is	a	limited	resource,
	and	some	of	it	is	used	up	by
suppressing	the	very	natural	urge	to	move.
This	trade-off	is	highlighted	by	the	work	of	Christine	Langhanns	and
Hermann	Müller	of	Justus	Liebig	University	in	Germany.	For	a	study	published
in	2018,	they	asked	groups	of	volunteers	to	solve	a	set	of	math	problems
	in	their
heads	while	staying	still,	while	remaining	relaxed	“but	without	substantial
movement,”	or	while	moving	slightly	in	a	rhythmic	pattern.	All	the	while,	the
participants’	cognitive	load—how	hard	their	brains	were	working—was	being
measured	with	a	brain-scanning	technology	called	functional	near-infrared
spectroscopy	(fNIRS).	The	results	were	illuminating.	Subjects’	cognitive	load
“considerably	increased	under	the	instruction	‘not	to	move,’
 
”	Langhanns	and
Müller	report.	Significantly,	the	stay-still	command	increased	brain	activity	in
the	same	area	as	
did	the	mental	calculations:	the	prefrontal	cortex,	responsible
for	carrying	out	intellectual	tasks	like	arithmetic	
and
	for	keeping	our	impulses	in
check.	Of	the	three	conditions,	the	requirement	to	remain	still	produced	the
poorest	performance	on	the	math	problems;	the	greater	their	overall	cognitive
load	as	registered	by	fNIRS,	the	worse	the	subjects	did	on	the	calculations.
“Sitting	quietly,”	the	researchers	conclude,	“is	not	necessarily	the	best	condition
for	learning	in	school.”
The	continual	small	movements	we	make	when	standing	as	opposed	to	sitting
—shifting	our	weight	from	one	leg	to	another,	allowing	our	arms	to	move	more
freely—constitute	what	researchers	call	“low-intensity”	activity.	As	slight	as
these	movements	appear,	they	have	a	marked	effect	on	our	physiology:	an
experiment	carried	out	by	researchers	at	the	Mayo	Clinic	determined	that	simply
by	standing
	rather	than	sitting,	study	participants	expended	13	percent	more
energy.	The	impact	on	our	cognitive	functioning	is	also	significant.	Research	has
found	that	the	use	of	a	standing	desk	is	associated	with	an	enhancement	in
students’	executive	function
—that	crucial	capacity	for	planning	and	decision
making—and	with	an	increase	in	“on-task	engagement.”
	In	adults,	working	at	a
standing	desk	has	been	shown	to	boost	productivity.
--- Page 53 ---
It’s	not	only	that	such	activity-permissive	setups	relieve	us	of	the	duty	to
monitor	and	control	our	inclination	to	move;	they	also	allow	us	to	fine-tune	our
level	of	physiological	arousal.	Such	variable	stimulation
	may	be	especially
important	for	young	people	with	attention	deficit	disorders.	The	brains	of	kids
with	ADHD	appear	to	be	chronically	
under
-aroused;
	in	order	to	muster	the
mental	resources	needed	to	tackle	a	difficult	assignment,	they	may	tap	their
fingers,	jiggle	their	legs,	or	bounce	in	their	seats.	They	move	as	a	means	of
increasing	their	arousal—not	unlike	the	way	adults	down	a	cup	of	coffee	in	order
feel	more	alert.
Julie	Schweitzer,	a	professor	of	psychiatry	at	the	University	of	California,
Davis,	led	a	2016	study	of	children	aged	ten	to	seventeen
	who	had	been
diagnosed	with	ADHD.	As	the	young	participants	worked	on	a	challenging
mental	task,	their	movements	were	monitored	by	a	sensor,	called	an	actometer,
strapped	to	their	ankles.	She	found	that	more	intense	physical	movement	was
associated	with	better	cognitive	performance	on	the	task.	The	more	the	children
moved,	in	other	words,	the	more	effectively	they	were	able	to	think.	Parents	and
teachers	often	believe	they	have	to	get	kids	to	stop	moving	around	before	they
can	focus	and	get	
down	to	work,	Schweitzer	notes;	a	more	constructive	approach
would	be	to	allow	kids	to	move	around	
so	that
	they	can	focus.
Even	among	those	without	an	ADHD	diagnosis,	the	amount	of	stimulation
required	to	maintain	optimal	alertness	varies	from	person	to	person.	Indeed,	it
may	differ	for	the	same	individual	over	the	course	of	a	day.	We	have	at	our
disposal	a	flexible	and	sensitive	mechanism	for	making	the	necessary
adjustments:	fidgeting.	At	times	we	may	use	small	rhythmic	movements	to	calm
our	anxiety	and	allow	us	to	focus;	at	other	moments,	we	may	drum	our	fingers	or
tap	our	feet	to	stave	off	drowsiness,	or	toy	with	an	object	like	a	pen	or	a
paperclip	as	we	ponder	a	difficult	concept.	All	of	these	activities,
	and	many
others,	were	submitted	to	researcher	Katherine	Isbister	after	she	put	out	a	call	on
social	media	for	descriptions	of	people’s	favorite	“fidget	objects”	and	how	they
used	them.
Isbister,	a	professor	of	computational	media	at	the	University	of	California,
Santa	Cruz,	believes	that	the	social	disapproval	directed	at	fidgeting	is
misplaced.	Though	we	imagine	that	we	can	manage	our	mental	activity	from
within	our	heads,	it’s	often	more	effective	to	employ	the	movements	of	our
bodies	for	that	purpose—to	engage	in	what	she	calls	“embodied	self-regulation.”
Isbister	would	reverse	the	usual	chain	of	command	in	which	the	brain	tells	the
body	what	to	do.	“Changing	what	the	
body
	does,”
	she	notes,	“can	change	our
feelings,	perceptions,	and	thoughts.”
--- Page 54 ---
Her	research	and	that	of	others	suggests	that	fidgeting	can	extend	our	minds	in
several	ways	beyond	simply	modulating	our	arousal.	The	playful	nature	of	these
movements	may	induce	in	us	a	mildly	positive	mood	state,
	of	the	kind	that	has
been	linked	to	more	flexible	and	creative	thinking.
	Alternatively,	their	mindless
and	repetitive	character	may	occupy	just	enough	mental	bandwidth	to	keep	our
minds	from	wandering	from	the	job	at	hand.	One	study	found	that	people	who
were	directed	to	doodle
	while	carrying	out	a	boring	listening	task	remembered
29	percent	more	information	than	people	who	did	not	doodle,	likely	because	the
latter	group	had	let	their	attention	slip	away	entirely.
Perhaps	most	intriguing	is	Isbister’s	theory	that	fidgeting	can	supply	us	with	a
range	of	sensory	experiences	entirely	missing	from	our	arid	encounters	with
screen	and	keyboard.	“Today’s	digital	devices
	tend	to	be	smooth,	hard,	and
sleek,”	she	writes,	while	the	fidget	objects	she	crowdsourced	exhibit	“a	wide
range	of	textures,	from	the	smoothness	of	a	stone	
to	the	roughness	of	a	walnut
shell	to	the	tackiness	of	cellophane	tape.”	The	words	contributors	used	to
describe	their	favored	objects	were	vivid:	such	articles	were	“crinkly,”
“squishy,”	“clicky-clackety”;	with	them	they	could	“scrunch,”	“squeeze,”
“twirl,”	“roll,”	and	“rub.”	It’s	as	if	we	use	fidgeting	to	remind	ourselves	that	we
are	more	than	just	a	brain—that	we	have	a	body,	too,	replete	with	rich	capacities
for	feeling	and	acting.	Thinking	while	moving	brings	the	full	range	of	our
faculties	into	play.
	
A
CTIVITY-PERMISSIVE	SETTINGS
	are	still	the	exception	in	schools	and	workplaces,
but	we	ought	to	make	them	the	rule;	we	might	even	dispense	with	that
apologetic-sounding	name,	since	low-intensity	physical	activity	clearly	belongs
in	the	places	where	we	do	our	thinking.	Meanwhile,	medium-	and	high-intensity
activity	each	exerts	its	own	distinct	effect	on	cognition—as	the	psychologist
Daniel	Kahneman	has	discovered	for	himself.
Kahneman	spends	a	few	months	each	year	in	Berkeley,	California,	and	on
most	days	he	takes	a	four-mile	walk	on	a	marked	path	in	the	hills,	with	a	view	of
San	Francisco	Bay.	Ever	the	scientist,	Kahneman	has	subjected	the	experience	to
close	analysis.	“I	usually	keep	track
	of	my	time	and	have	learned	a	fair	amount
about	effort	from	doing	so,”	he	writes.	“I	have	found	a	speed,	about	17	minutes
for	a	mile,	which	I	experience	as	a	stroll.	I	certainly	exert	physical	effort	and
burn	more	calories	at	that	speed	than	if	I	sat	in	a	recliner,	but	I	experience	no
strain,	no	conflict,	and	no	need	to	push	myself.	I	am	also	able	to	think	and	work
while	walking	at	that	rate.	Indeed,	I	suspect	that	the	mild	physical	arousal	of	the
walk	may	spill	over	into	greater	mental	alertness.”
He	noted,	however,	that	“accelerating	beyond	my	strolling	speed	completely
changes	the	experience	of	walking,	because	the	transition	to	a	faster	walk	brings
--- Page 55 ---
changes	the	experience	of	walking,	because	the	transition	to	a	faster	walk	brings
about	a	sharp	deterioration	in	my	ability	to	think	coherently.	As	I	speed	up,	my
attention	is	drawn	with	increasing	frequency	to	the	experience	of	walking	and	to
the	deliberate	maintenance	of	the	faster	pace.	My	ability	to	bring	a	train	of
thought	to	a	conclusion	is	impaired	accordingly.	At	the	highest	speed	I	can
sustain	on	the	hills,	about	14	minutes	for	a	mile,	I	do	not	even	try	to	think	of
anything	else.”
Kahneman’s	careful	self-observations	are	backed	up	by	empirical	research.
Moderate-intensity	exercise,	practiced	for	a	moderate	length	of	time,	improves
our	ability	to	think	both	during	and	immediately	
after	the	activity.	The	positive
changes	documented	by	scientists
	include	an	increase	in	the	capacity	to	focus
attention	and	resist	distraction;	greater	verbal	fluency	and	cognitive	flexibility;
enhanced	problem-solving	and	decision-making	abilities;	and	increased	working
memory,	as	well	as	more	durable	long-term	memory	for	what	is	learned.	The
proposed	mechanisms	by	which	these	changes	occur	include	heightened	arousal
(as	Kahneman	speculated),	increased	blood	flow	to	the	brain,	and	the	release	of	a
number	of	neurochemicals,	which	increase	the	efficiency	of	information
transmission	in	the	brain	and	which	promote	the	growth	of	neurons,	or	brain
cells.	The	beneficial	mental	effects	of	moderately	intense	activity	have	been
shown	to	last	for	as	long	as	two	hours	after	exercise	ends.
The	encouraging	implication	of	this	research	is	that	we	have	it	within	our
power	to	induce	in	ourselves	a	state	that	is	ideal	for	learning,	creating,	and
engaging	in	other	kinds	of	complex	cognition:	by	exercising	briskly	just	before
we	do	so.	As	things	stand,	however,	we	don’t	often	take	intentional	advantage	of
this	opportunity.	Our	culture	conditions	us	to	see	mind	and	body	as	separate—
and	so	we	separate,	in	turn,	our	periods	of	thinking	from	our	bouts	of	exercise.
Consider	how	many	of	us	make	our	visits	to	the	gym	only	
after
	work,	for
example,	or	on	weekends.	Instead,	we	should	be	figuring	out	how	to	incorporate
bursts	of	physical	activity	into	the	work	day	and	the	school	day—which	means
rethinking	how	we	approach	our	breaks.	Lunch	breaks,	coffee	breaks,	downtime
between	tasks	or	meetings:	all	become	occasions	to	use	exercise	to	maneuver	our
brains	into	an	optimally	functioning	state.
For	children,	this	is	precisely	the	role	played	by	recess;	research	shows	that
kids	return	from	a	session	on	the	playground	better	able	to	focus	their	attention
and	to	engage	their	executive	function	faculties.
	Yet	at	schools	all	over	the
country,	recess	has	been	reduced
	or	even	eliminated	in	order	to	generate	more
“seat	time”	spent	on	academic	learning.	The	notion	that	time	away	from
concentrated	mental	work	is	effectively	time	wasted	is	one	of	several
wrongheaded	notions	we	hold	regarding	breaks—wrongheaded,	in	this	case,
--- Page 56 ---
because	the	ability	to	attend	to	such	work	declines	steadily	over	time,	and	is
actually	refreshed	by	a	bout	of	bodily	exertion.	Parents,	teachers,	and
administrators	who	want	students	to	achieve	academically	should	be	advocating
for	an	increase	in	physically	active	recess	time.
Another	misguided	idea	about	breaks:	they	should	be	used	to	rest	the	
body,	so
as	to	fortify	us	for	the	next	round	of	mental	labor.	As	we’ve	seen,	it’s	through
exerting
	the	body	that	our	brains	become	ready	for	the	kind	of	knowledge	work
so	many	of	us	do	today.	The	best	preparation	for	such	(metaphorical)	acts	as
wrestling	with	ideas	or	running	through	possibilities	is	to	work	up	an	(actual)
sweat.	Instead	of	languidly	sipping	a	latte	before	tackling	a	difficult	project,	we
should	be	taking	an	energetic	walk	around	the	block.
There’s	one	more	erroneous	assumption	about	breaks	to	address:	we	imagine
that	we’re	replenishing	the	brain’s	depleted	resources	when	we	spend	our	breaks
doing	something	that	
feels
	different	from	work—scrolling	through	Twitter,
checking	the	news,	looking	at	Facebook.	The	problem	is	that	such	activities
engage	the	same	brain	regions	and	draw	down	the	same	mental	capital	we	use	to
do	our	cognition-centric	jobs.	We	resume	our	duties	just	as	frazzled	as	before	the
pause,	and	maybe	more	so.	Turning	coffee	breaks	into	what	some	public	health
experts	call	
“movement	breaks”	allows	us	to	return	to	our	work	a	bit	smarter
than	when	we	left	it.
On	his	walks	along	the	coastal	California	hills,	Daniel	Kahneman	noticed	that
moving	very	fast	“brings	about	a	sharp	deterioration	in	my	ability	to	think
coherently.”	This	observation,	too,	is	supported	by	research:	scientists	draw	what
they	call	an	“inverted	U-shaped	curve”
	to	describe	the	relationship	between
exercise	intensity	and	cognitive	function,	with	the	greatest	benefits	for	thinking
detected	in	the	moderate-intensity	middle	part	of	the	hump.	On	the	right
downward	slope	of	the	curve,	where	high-intensity	activity	is	charted,	control
over	cognition	does	indeed	start	to	slacken—but	this	is	not	always	a	bad	thing.
Very	intense	exercise,	extended	over	a	relatively	long	period,	can	induce	a	kind
of	altered	state	conducive	to	creative	thought.
Such	is	the	experience	of	Haruki	Murakami,	the	celebrated	Japanese	novelist.
Murakami	is	a	committed	runner,	a	veteran	of	more	than	two	dozen	marathons
who	logs	as	many	as	fifty	miles	a	week.
	He	has	even	authored	a	book	about	it,
titled	
What	I	Talk	About	When	I	Talk	About	Running.
	“I’m	often	asked
	what	I
think	about	as	I	run,”	Murakami	writes.	“Usually	the	people	who	ask	this	have
never	run	long	distances	themselves.	I	always	ponder	the	question.	What	exactly
do	I	think	about	when	I’m	running?”	Not	much,	he	concludes.	That’s	kind	of	the
point.	“As	I	run,	I	don’t	think	much	of	anything	worth	mentioning.	I	just	run.	I
--- Page 57 ---
run	
in	a	void.	Or	maybe	I	should	put	it	the	other	way:	I	run	in	order	to	
acquire
	a
void.”
Scientists	have	a	term	for	the	“void”	Murakami	describes:	“transient
hypofrontality.”
	
Hypo
	means	low	or	diminished,	and	
frontality
	refers	to	the
frontal	region	of	the	brain—the	part	that	plans,	analyzes,	and	critiques,	and	that
usually	maintains	firm	control	over	our	thoughts	and	behavior.	When	all	of	our
resources	are	devoted	to	managing	the	demands	of	intense	physical	activity,
however,	the	influence	of	the	prefrontal	cortex	is	temporarily	reduced.	In	this
loose	hypofrontal	mode,	ideas	and	impressions	mingle
	more	freely;	unusual	and
unexpected	thoughts	arise.	Scientists	speculate	that	the	phenomenon	of	transient
hypofrontality	may	underlie	all	kinds	of	altered	states,
	from	dreaming	to	drug
trips—but	intense	exercise	may	be	the	most	reliable	way	to	induce	it.	Low-	and
moderate-intensity	exercise	does	not	generate	this	disinhibiting	effect.
	(Indeed,
as	we’ve	seen,	moderately	intense	physical	activity	actually	
enhances
	executive
function.)	Achieving	transient	hypofrontality	generally	requires	exercising
	at
one’s	“ventilatory	threshold”—the	point	at	which	breathing	becomes	labored,
corresponding	to	about	80	percent	of	the	exerciser’s	maximum	heart	rate—for
forty	minutes	or	more.
It’s	a	daunting	summit	to	scale,	but	when	it	is	reached,	observes	Kathryn
Schulz,	another	writer-runner,	it	can	“provoke	a	kind	of	Cartesian	collapse”
:
mind	and	body	melding	together	in	what	she	calls	a	“glorious	collusion.”
	
I
N	CONSIDERING	THE	IMPACT
	of	motion	on	thought,	the	releasing	or	enhancing	or
disinhibiting	effects	of	physical	activity	are	only	half	the	story.	Also	important
are	the	many	varied	and	nuanced	ways	that	particular	physical	movements,
which	carry	their	own	load	of	meaning	and	information,	participate	in	our
thinking	processes.	Over	the	past	several	decades,	the	field	of	embodied
cognition	has	produced	persuasive	evidence
	that	our	thoughts—even,	or
especially,	those	of	an	abstract	or	symbolic	nature—are	powerfully	shaped	by
the	way	we	move	our	bodies.	According	to	the	conventional,	brainbound
understanding	of	cognition,	we	first	have	a	thought,	and	then	direct	our	bodies	to
move	accordingly.	This	more	recent	corpus	of	research	turns	that	causal	arrow
around	so	that	it	points	in	the	opposite	direction:	we	move	our	bodies,	and	our
thoughts	
are	influenced	in	turn.	The	exciting	implication	of	such	findings	is	that
we	can	intentionally	enhance	our	
mental
	functioning	through	an	application	of
physical
	activity—that	we	can,	for	example,	improve	our	memory	not	through
working	our	brains	ever	harder,	but	by	looping	in	the	meaning-bearing
movements	of	our	limbs.
--- Page 58 ---
When	we’re	charged	with	learning	and	remembering	new	material,	our
tendency	is	to	lean	heavily	on	visual	and	auditory	modes:	reading	it	over,	saying
it	aloud.	This	approach	has	its	limits;	in	particular,	research	demonstrates	that
our	memory	for	what	we	have	
heard
	is	remarkably	weak.
	Our	memory	for	what
we	have	
done,
	however—for	physical	actions	we	have	undertaken—is	much
more	robust.
	Linking	movement	to	the	material	to	be	recalled	creates	a	richer
and	therefore	more	indelible	“memory	trace”	in	the	brain.	In	addition,
movements	engage	a	process
	called	
procedural	memory
	(memory	of	how	to	do
something,	such	as	how	to	ride	a	bike)	that	is	distinct	from	
declarative	memory
(memory	of	informational	content,	such	as	the	text	of	a	speech).	When	we
connect	movement	with	information,	we	activate	both	types	of	memory,	and	our
recall	is	more	accurate	as	a	result—a	phenomenon	that	researchers	call	the
“enactment	effect.”
Fittingly,	professional	actors	can	shed	light
	on	the	way	physical	enactment
reinforces	memory.	Helga	Noice,	a	professor	emeritus	of	psychology	at
Elmhurst	University	in	Illinois,	and	her	husband,	Tony	Noice,	a	professor	of
theater	at	Elmhurst	as	well	as	a	Chicago-area	actor,	have	spent	years	studying
actors’	ability	to	memorize	pages	and	pages	of	lines.	They	have	determined	that
during	performance,	actors	render	written	lines	with	98	percent	accuracy,
	on
average;	months	after	a	play’s	run	has	ended,	the	Noices	found,	actors	can	still
recall	verbatim	some	90	percent	of	the	script.	How	do	they	do	it?	Actors’	mental
feats	of	memory,	the	Noices	have	concluded,	are	intimately	connected	to	the
movements	they	make	with	their	bodies.	In	the	course	of	their	research,	many
actors	commented	that	they	never	tried	to	learn	their	lines	until	a	play	had	been
“blocked”—that	is,	until	all	the	physical	movements	to	be	made	onstage	had
been	planned	out.	“You’ve	got	to	have	these	two	tracks
	going	simultaneously
—‘This	is	what	I	say,	and	this	is	when	and	where	I	move’	.
 
.
 
.	One	feeds	the
other,”	an	actor	observed	in	one	of	their	interviews.
In	a	study	they	conducted	in	2000,	the	Noices	gathered	together	six	actors
from	a	repertory	company
	who	had	earlier	performed	together	
in	a	production	of
The	Dining	Room,
	by	the	American	playwright	A.	R.	Gurney	Jr.	In	this	scene
from	the	play,
	adult	siblings	Arthur	and	Sally	debate	what	to	do	with	the
contents	of	their	parents’	house,	which	is	being	sold:
ARTHUR:	You	sure	Mother	doesn’t	want	this	stuff	in	Florida?
SALLY:	She	hardly	has	room	for	what	she’s	got.	She	wants	us	to	take
turns.	Without	fighting.
ARTHUR:	We’ll	just	have	to	draw	lots	then.
SALLY:	Unless	one	of	us	wants	something,	and	one	of	us	doesn’t.
ARTHUR:	We	have	to	do	it	today.
--- Page 59 ---
ARTHUR:	We	have	to	do	it	today.
SALLY:	Do	you	think	that’s	enough	time	to	divide	up	a	whole	house?
ARTHUR:	I	have	to	get	back,	Sal.	(
He	looks	in	the	sideboard.
)	We’ll
draw	lots	and	then	go	through	the	rooms	taking	turns.	(
He	brings	out
a	silver	spoon.
)	Here.	We’ll	use	this	salt	spoon.	(
He	shifts	it	from
hand	to	hand	behind	his	back,	then	holds	out	two	fists.
)	Take	your
pick.	You	get	the	spoon,	you	get	the	dining	room.
SALLY:	You	mean	you	want	to	start	here?
ARTHUR:	Got	to	start	somewhere.
Even	though	the	run	of	
The	Dining	Room
	had	ended	five	months	earlier,	and
many	of	the	actors	had	learned	new	roles	since	then,	they	still	remembered	the
lines	from	Gurney’s	play	that	had	been	accompanied	onstage	by	movement	or
gestures	(as	when	Arthur	holds	out	the	spoon	to	Sally).	Lines	they	had	delivered
while	standing	or	sitting	still,	the	Noices	discovered,	were	much	more	likely	to
be	forgotten.
In	other	studies,	the	Noices	have	shown	that	connecting	words	to	movements
improves	recall	among	people	who	are	
not
	actors—college	students,	for
example,	and	older	people	residing	in	assisted	living	facilities.	Most	activities
advertised	to	forestall	age-related	memory	loss—such	as	crossword	puzzles,
sudoku,	and	commercial	brain-training	programs	like	Lumosity—conform	to	our
society’s	brainbound	model	of	how	thinking	works:	users	sit	still	and	use	their
heads.	By	contrast,	Helga	and	Tony	Noice	have	found	that	moving	the	body
makes	an	essential	contribution	to	strengthening	memory—and	other	mental
capacities	as	well.
In	a	series	of	studies
	conducted	with	people	aged	sixty-five	to	eighty-five,	the
Noices	instructed	participants	in	professional	acting	techniques	
and	then	led
them	in	the	rehearsal	and	performance	of	theatrical	scenes.	Before	and	after	the
four-week-long	program,	they	tested	participants	on	general	cognitive	capacities
like	word	memory,	verbal	fluency,	problem	solving,	and	handling	daily	tasks,
such	as	comparing	nutrition	labels,	paying	bills	by	check,	and	looking	up	phone
numbers.	Compared	to	people	the	same	age	who	did	not	enroll	in	any	program,
or	who	took	part	in	activities	that	did	not	involve	movement	(an	art	appreciation
class,	for	example),	individuals	who	had	participated	in	the	theatrical	program
became	mentally	sharper.	Participants	were	apparently	able	to	borrow	strategies
they	learned	in	acting	class—such	as	linking	movement	to	material	to	be
remembered—and	apply	them	to	the	activities	of	everyday	life.
Similar	results	have	been	found	among	younger	people;	again,	movement
seems	to	be	key	to	remembering.	In	a	study	of	undergraduates
	published	in
--- Page 60 ---
2001,	for	example,	the	Noices	reported	that	the	effects	of	physical	movement
“previously	found	after	lengthy	real-world	rehearsal	and	repeated	performances
by	professional	actors	could	be	produced	by	giving	a	few	minutes	of	instruction
to	non-actors	with	little	or	no	performing	experience.”	The	difference	such
minimal	instruction	made	in	participants’	ability	to	recall	information,	they
noted,	was	“striking”:	students	who	incorporated	movement	into	their	learning
strategy	remembered	76	percent	of	the	material,	while	those	who	engaged	in
“deliberate	memorization”	recalled	only	37	percent.
The	implications	of	the	Noices’	research	are	clear.	First:	information	is	better
remembered	when	we’re	moving	as	we	learn	it.	This	is	the	case	even	when	the
movement	is	not	a	literal	enactment
	of	the	meaning	of	the	information	to	be
recalled	but	simply	a	movement	of	the	body,	meaningfully	related	to	the
information	and	made	at	the	same	time	the	information	is	absorbed.	Second:
information	that	has	become	associated	with	a	movement	is	better	remembered
when	we	can	reproduce	that	same	movement	later,
	when	we’re	calling	it	up	from
memory.	This	may	be	possible	in	some	situations—for	example,	when	giving	a
speech	for	which	we	have	practiced	accompanying	gestures—but	moving	while
learning	is	still	beneficial	even	when	those	movements	can’t	be	replicated	at	the
point	of	recall	(during	an	exam,	for	instance).
Indeed,	simply	forming	the	
intention
	to	move
	in	connection	with	a	piece	of
information	seems	to	tag	that	information	with	a	mental	marker	
of	importance.
Our	natural	egocentric	bias	leads	us	to	preferentially	attend	to	and	remember	that
information	that	we	have	connected	in	some	way	to	ourselves:	my	intention,	my
body,	my	movement.	Concluded	Helga	and	Tony	Noice	in	one	of	their	academic
articles,	“One	might	paraphrase	Descartes	and	say,	‘I	move,	therefore	I
remember.’
 
”
Moving	while	learning	can	help	us	to	remember	information	more	accurately.
It	may	also	be	the	case	that	moving	while	learning	can	help	us	understand
information	differently:	more	deeply,	“from	the	inside,”	as	it	were.	A	stray
comment	from	an	undergraduate	working	in	her	lab	got	psychologist	Sian
Beilock—then	an	assistant	professor	at	Miami	University	in	Oxford,	Ohio—
wondering	about	the	body’s	role	in	the	act	of	understanding.	The	student	played
on	the	university’s	hockey	team,	and	he	mentioned	to	his	professor	that	when
watching	hockey	on	television,	he	seemed	to	understand	the	action	as	it	unfolded
in	a	way	that	was	different	from	that	of	his	friends	who	had	not	been	out	on	the
ice.
Beilock	and	her	colleagues	designed	a	study
	to	test	his	impression.	First,
experimenters	read	action	sequences	drawn	from	hockey	games	(“The	hockey
player	shot	the	puck”)	and	from	everyday	life	(“The	child	saw	the	balloon	in	the
--- Page 61 ---
air”)	to	two	groups	of	study	participants;	one	group	was	made	up	of	experienced
hockey	players,	while	the	other	group	had	never	played	the	sport.	Then
participants	were	shown	pictures	that	either	did	or	did	not	correspond	to	the
action	sequences	they’d	heard	(for	instance,	an	image	depicting	a	child	seeing	a
balloon	in	the	air,	or	a	child	seeing	a	deflated	balloon	on	the	ground).
For	each	sentence-picture	pair,	all	the	participants	were	able	to	correctly
identify	whether	the	two	matched	or	not—but	when	the	action	concerned	a
hockey	game,	the	hockey	players	were	much	quicker	than	their	non-playing
counterparts	to	make	the	identification;	they	exhibited	what	Beilock	calls
“facilitated	comprehension.”	Brain	scans	conducted	on	both	groups	showed	that
a	particular	neural	region	was	activated	more	strongly	in	the	hockey	players’
brains	than	in	the	non-players’	brains	when	they	listened	to	hockey-specific
language:	the	left	dorsal	premotor	cortex,	responsible	for	executing	well-
practiced	physical	movements.	This	area	isn’t	typically	associated	with	language
processing,	but	the	players’	personal	history	with	the	game	gave	them	a	body-
based	experience	that	they	could	connect	to	the	words	they	heard.	The	surprising
import	
of	Beilock’s	study	is	that	people	who	have	
moved
	in	different	ways	go	on
to	
think
	in	different	ways—an	insight	that	can	be	applied	well	beyond	sports.
The	research	on	using	movement	to	enhance	thinking	identifies	four	types	of
helpful	motion:	congruent	movements,	novel	movements,	self-referential
movements,	and	metaphorical	movements.	The	first	of	these,	congruent
movements,	express	in	physical	form	the	content	of	a	thought.	With	the	motions
of	our	bodies,	we	enact	the	meaning	of	a	fact	or	concept.	Congruent	movements
are	an	effective	way	to	reinforce	still	tentative	or	emerging	knowledge	by
introducing	a	corporeal	component	into	the	process	of	understanding	and
remembering.	A	familiar	example	is	moving	the	body	along	a	number	line:
children	who	are	learning	about	math	benefit	from	taking	steps	on	an	oversized
number	line	placed	on	the	floor	as	they	count	or	as	they	carry	out	procedures	like
addition	and	subtraction.	Moving	their	bodies	up	or	down	the	number	line	is
congruent	with	the	mental	operation	of	counting	up	or	down;	taking	small	steps
is	congruent	with	the	mental	operation	of	counting	one	unit	at	a	time,	while
venturing	a	bigger	leap	is	congruent	with	the	mental	operation	of	adding	or
subtracting	a	number	of	units	at	once.	Students	who	practice	connecting	numbers
with	movements	in	this	way	later	demonstrate
	more	mathematics	knowledge	and
skill.
Moving	the	body	in	ways	congruent	with	thinking	is	beneficial	in	part	because
it	helps	students	make	the	tricky	transition	from	the	concrete	to	the	abstract.	This
is	the	challenge	facing	children	when	they	first	learn	to	read:	they	must	forge
connections	between	the	solid	stuff	of	the	world	and	the	abstract	symbols	we	use
--- Page 62 ---
to	represent	it.	In	everyday	life,	children	typically	encounter	the	word	“ball”	or
“cup”	when	there’s	an	actual	ball	or	cup	around,	notes	Arthur	Glenberg,	a
professor	of	psychology	at	Arizona	State	University.	But	within	the	pages	of	a
book,	words	must	be	understood	in	the	absence	of	such	real-world	referents.
Glenberg	uses	congruent	movement	to	bridge	this	gap.	His	“Moved	by	Reading”
intervention
	teaches	children	how	to	simulate	(with	concrete,	physical	action)
the	text	they	are	reading	(abstract	symbols).	Such	simulation	leads	to	large	gains
in	learning;	when	children	act	out	the	words	on	the	page,	Glenberg	has	found,
their	reading	comprehension	can	actually	double.
In	one	such	study,	Glenberg	asked	first-	and	second-graders	to	read	stories
about	life	on	a	farm.
	The	children	were	also	provided	with	farm-
related	toys,
such	as	a	miniature	barn,	tractor,	and	cow.	Half	of	the	kids	were	directed	simply
to	read	the	stories	a	second	time.	The	other	half	were	instructed	to	use	the	toys	to
enact	what	they	were	reading.	After	reading	the	sentence	“The	farmer	drove	the
tractor	to	the	barn,”	for	example,	the	child	would	move	the	toy	tractor	over	to	the
toy	barn.	Youngsters	who	acted	out	the	sentences	were	better	able	to	make
inferences	about	the	text,	and	they	later	remembered	much	more	about	the
stories	than	their	peers	who	merely	reread	them.
Other	studies	have	shown	that	congruent	movements	of	this	type	can	help
children	with	math
	as	well.	In	another	of	Glenberg’s	experiments,	elementary
school	students	were	asked	to	act	out	a	zookeeper’s	distribution	of	food	to	his
animals	while	figuring	out	how	many	fish	went	to	each	of	the	hippos	and
alligators.	Glenberg	reports	that	the	students	who	moved	in	ways	congruent	with
text	of	word	problems	were	more	accurate	in	their	calculations,	and	more	likely
to	reach	the	right	answer,	than	children	who	completed	the	problem	in	their
heads.	It	seems	that	enacting	the	“story”	told	within	the	math	problem	helps
students	identify	the	information	important	for	its	solution:	enacting	made	them
35	percent	less	likely
	to	be	distracted	by	irrelevant	numbers	or	other	details
included	in	the	problem.
Technology—which	so	often	seems	designed	to	keep	us	sitting	still	in	our
chairs,	eyes	glued	to	our	screens—could	extend	itself	with	movement	by
incorporating	congruent	motions	into	the	way	it	operates.	And	indeed,	research
using	touch	screen	devices	shows	that	digital	educational	programs	that
encourage	users	to	make	hand	movements	that	are	congruent	with	the	mental
operation	being	taught	support	the	successful	learning
	of	those	operations.	A
program	offering	instruction	in	number	line	estimation,
	for	example—a	task	that
depends	on	understanding	numerical	magnitude	as	continuous	and	not	discrete—
achieves	better	results	when	the	movement	required	to	interact	with	the	program
--- Page 63 ---
is	a	continuous	one	(dragging	a	finger	across	the	screen)	as	opposed	to	a	discrete
one	(tapping	the	screen	once).
Another	kind	of	physical	action	capable	of	advancing	our	thinking	is	
novel
movements:	movements	that	introduce	us	to	an	abstract	concept	via	a	bodily
experience	we	haven’t	had	before.	Consider:	When	you	step	into	your	shower	at
home,	how	do	you	turn	on	the	hot	water?	To	answer	that	simple	question,	you
simulated	the	familiar,	well-practiced	action	in	
your	head;	maybe	you	even
reached	out	and	turned	an	imagined	faucet	handle.	But	how	would	you	engage	in
thinking	about	an	action	you’ve	never	physically	experienced?	That’s	the
dilemma	facing	physics	students,	who	are	expected	to	reason	about	phenomena
like	angular	velocity	and	centripetal	force	without	a	felt	sense	of	what	they’re
like.	Decades	of	research	on	physics	education
	reveal	the	discouraging	result:
most	students	never	achieve	a	firm	grasp	of	the	subject.	Some	studies	have	found
that	students’	understanding	of	physics	becomes	
less
	accurate
	after	they	have
completed	an	introductory	college	physics	course.
The	conventional,	and	widely	ineffective,	approach	to	teaching	physics	is
based	on	a	brainbound	model	of	cognition:	individuals	are	expected,	like
computers,	to	solve	problems	by	applying	a	set	of	abstract	rules.	Yet	the	fact	is
that—very	
unlike
	computers—humans	solve	problems	most	effectively	by
imagining	themselves	into	a	given	scenario,
	a	project	that	is	made	easier	if	the
human	in	question	has	had	a	previous	physical	encounter	on	which	to	base	her
mental	projections.	Providing	students	with	such	physical	encounters	was	the
purpose	behind	a	study	designed	by	Sian	Beilock,	inspired	by	the	work	with
hockey	players	we	read	about	earlier.
In	collaboration	with	Susan	Fischer,	an	associate	professor	of	physics	at
DePaul	University	in	Chicago,	Beilock	designed	a	set	of	hands-on	activities
intended	to	introduce	students	to	the	forces	they	were	studying	in	physics	class
—not	as	abstract	concepts	but	as	visceral	experiences.	One	such	activity,	for
example,	employed	a	prop:	two	bicycle	wheels	mounted	on	a	single	axle,	which
could	be	held	out	in	front	of	the	body	while	the	wheels	were	spun.	When	the
axle	was	tilted	from	horizontal	to	vertical,	the	person	holding	it	felt	firsthand
what	physicists	call	torque—the	resistive	force	that	causes	objects	to	rotate.
Beilock	and	Fischer	asked	one	group	of	undergraduates	to	hold	the	contraption
in	their	hands	and	to	experience	what	it	felt	like	to	tilt	the	axle;	a	second	group
of	students	simply	watched	while	someone	else	demonstrated	its	use.
Afterwards,	members	of	both	groups	were	tested	on	their	understanding	of	the
concept	of	torque.
Students	who’d	experienced	torque	with	their	own	bodies,	the	experimenters
found,	achieved	higher	scores	on	the	assessment.	Their	superior	understanding
--- Page 64 ---
was	especially	evident	in	their	answers	to	the	most	challenging	theoretical
questions.	What’s	more,	brain	scans	showed	that	when	they	were	asked	to	think
about	torque,	the	region	of	the	brain	that	
controls	movement	was	activated	only
in	those	who’d	had	a	direct	physical	encounter	with	the	force.	Even	while	lying
immobile	inside	an	fMRI	machine—or	while	sitting	still,	taking	an	exam—these
students	were	able	to	access	a	bodily	experience	of	motion,	access	that	gave
them	a	deeper	and	more	accurate	understanding	of	the	concept.
An	implication	that	leaps	out	from	this	research:	When	demonstrations	are
incorporated	into	science	class,	students	should	not	be	relegated	to	the	role	of
observer.	Only	those	who	physically	participate	will	gain	the	deeper,	from-the-
inside	understanding	that	comes	from	physical	action.	As	education	professor
Dor	Abrahamson	puts	it,	“Learning	is	moving
	in	new	ways.”
	
Y
ET	ANOTHER	TYPE
	of	motion	with	the	capacity	to	improve	the	way	we	think	is
self-referential	movements:
	movements	in	which	we	bring	ourselves—in
particular,	our	bodies—into	the	intellectual	enterprise.	Though	it	may	seem
“unscientific”	to	place	oneself	at	the	center	of	the	action,	scientists	themselves
frequently	use	their	bodies	as	instruments	of	exploration,	imagining	themselves
as	the	object	of	their	investigation.	In	so	doing,	they	cultivate	a	kind	of	“empathy
with	entities
	they	are	struggling	to	understand,”	notes	Elinor	Ochs,	an
anthropologist	who	has	studied	theoretical	physicists	at	work	in	the	laboratory.
The	world’s	most	famous	physicist,	Albert	Einstein,	reportedly	imagined	himself
riding	on	a	beam	of	light
	while	developing	his	theory	of	relativity.	“No	scientist
thinks
	in	equations,”	Einstein	once	claimed.	Rather,	he	remarked,	the	elements
of	his	own	thought	were	“visual”	and	even	“muscular”
	in	nature.
Other	scientists	have	described	the	imagined	acts	of	embodiment	that	helped
them	make	their	discoveries.	Geneticist	Barbara	McClintock,	whose	work	on	the
chromosomes	of	corn	plants	earned	her	a	Nobel	Prize,	recalled	how	it	felt	for	her
to	examine	the	chromosomes	through	a	microscope:	“When	I	was	really	working
with	them
	I	wasn’t	outside,	I	was	down	there.	I	was	part	of	the	system.	I	was
right	down	there	with	them,	and	everything	got	big.	I	even	was	able	to	see	the
internal	parts	of	the	chromosomes—actually	everything	was	there.	It	surprised
me	because	I	actually	felt	as	if	I	were	right	down	there	and	these	were	my
friends.”	Virologist	Jonas	Salk,	inventor	of	the	polio	vaccine,	is	another	scientist
who	brought	his	body	into	his	research.	He	once	described	how	he	went	about
his	work	in	this	way:	“I	would	picture	myself
	as	a	virus,	
or	a	cancer	cell,	for
example,	and	try	to	sense	what	it	would	be	like	to	be	either.	I	would	also	imagine
myself	as	the	immune	system,	and	I	would	try	to	reconstruct	what	I	would	do	as
an	immune	system	engaged	in	combating	a	virus	or	cancer	cell.	When	I	had
--- Page 65 ---
played	through	a	series	of	such	scenarios	on	a	particular	problem	and	had
acquired	new	insights,	I	would	design	laboratory	experiments	accordingly.”
While	students	are	often	encouraged	to	adopt	a	detached,	objective
perspective	on	science,	research	shows	that	they	can	benefit	from	engaging	the
“embodied	imagination”
—just	as	scientists	do.	Thinking	and	learning	with	our
bodies	takes	advantage	of	humans’	fundamentally	egocentric	mindset.	We’ve
evolved	to	understand	events	and	ideas	in	terms	of	
how	they	relate	to	us,
	not
from	some	neutral	or	impartial	perspective.	Research	has	found	that	the	act	of
self-reference—connecting	new	knowledge	to	our	own	identity	or	experience—
functions	as	a	kind	of	“integrative	glue,”
	imparting	a	stickiness	that	the	same
information	lacks	when	it	is	encountered	as	separate	and	unrelated	to	the	self.
Adopting	a	first-person	perspective	doesn’t	mean	we	become	limited	by	it;
indeed,	using	the	movements	of	our	own	bodies	to	explore	a	given	phenomenon
seems	to	promote	the	ability	to	alternate
	between	viewing	it	from	an	internal
perspective	and	from	an	external	one,	an	oscillation	that	produces	a	deeper	level
of	understanding.
Rachel	Scherr,	an	assistant	professor	of	physics	at	the	University	of
Washington,	has	devised	an	educational	role-playing	program	called	“Energy
Theater.”
	One	attribute	of	energy	that	students	find	difficult	to	grasp,	Scherr
notes,	is	that	energy	is	always	
conserved
—it	doesn’t	get	“used	up,”	but	instead	is
converted	to	a	different	form,	as	when	the	energy	in	the	coiled	spring	of	a	pinball
plunger	is	converted	into	the	energy	of	the	pinball’s	motion.	Students	may	read
about	the	conservation	of	energy	in	a	textbook	without	truly	grasping	its
implications;	when,	as	part	of	Energy	Theater,	they	
embody
	energy,	they	begin
to	understand	such	implications	in	a	visceral	way.	“Students	who	use	movement
to	‘become’	energy	can	fall	back	on	the	feeling	of	permanence	and	continuity
conveyed	by	their	own	bodies,”	says	Scherr.	“
They
	don’t	get	‘used	up,’	and	so
they’re	better	able	to	understand	that	energy	doesn’t,	either.”	Scherr’s	research
shows	that	students	who	have	taken	part	in	Energy	Theater	develop	a	more
nuanced	understanding	of	energy	dynamics.
Another	opportunity	to	recruit	self-referential	movement	in	the	ser
vice	of
learning	arises	when	students	are	endeavoring	to	understand	the	nature	of
complex,	multistep,	interactive	processes—such	as	that	bane	of	biology	class,
mitosis	and	meiosis.	The	many	phases	and	processes	entailed	in	the	study	of	how
cells	divide	and	reproduce	can	easily	overwhelm	students’	mental	bandwidth,
leading	to	superficial	comprehension	at	best	and	utter	confusion	at	worst.	Having
watched	many	of	his	undergraduates	struggle	to	understand	these	centrally
important	concepts,	Joseph	Chinnici,	an	associate	professor	of	biology	at
Virginia	Commonwealth	University,	had	an	idea:	Why	not	ask	students	to
--- Page 66 ---
“become”	human	chromosomes
—to	understand	cell	division	and	reproduction
from	the	inside,	as	it	were,	by	acting	out	these	processes	with	their	own	bodies?
After	fine-tuning	his	approach	over	several	years,	Chinnici	published	an
account	of	his	method	in	the	journal	
The	American	Biology	Teacher.
	He	begins
by	distributing	baseball	caps	and	t-shirts,	each	of	which	has	been	marked	with	a
letter	representing	a	gene:	uppercase	letters	for	dominant	genes,	lowercase	letters
denoting	recessive	genes.	Once	they	have	donned	these	items	of	clothing,
students	are	guided	through	a	kind	of	carefully	choreographed	waltz.	In
prophase,	some	of	the	“human	chromosomes”	pair	up	by	linking	arms.	In
metaphase,	those	chromosomes	who	have	remained	unpaired	move	to	an	area
designated	as	the	“spindle.”	On	to	anaphase,	during	which	the	paired-up	students
split	apart	and	move	to	opposite	poles	of	the	spindle.	Finally,	they	act	out
telophase,	in	which	the	spindle	dissolves	and	the	chromosomes	unwind.	Amid
some	awkward	laughter	and	some	momentarily	furrowed	brows,	students	find
their	way	through	this	odd	dance—seeing,	and	feeling,	for	themselves	how	the
many	moving	parts	interact.
Chinnici’s	study	found	that	students	who	had	engaged	in	role-playing	mitosis
and	meiosis	achieved	a	more	accurate	understanding	of	the	concept—a	result
mirrored	in	other,	similar	studies.	Researchers	have	examined	the	effects	of
having	students	embody	the	solar	system’s	planets
	as	they	engage	in	direct	and
retrograde	motion;	of	having	students	embody	carbon	molecules
	as	they	undergo
the	enzymatic	reactions	of	the	Krebs	cycle;	and	of	having	students	embody
amino	acids
	undergoing	polymerization	as	they	are	synthesized	into	proteins.	In
each	of	these	scenarios,	students	learned	more	and	performed	better	when	they
were	offered	the	opportunity	to	embody	these	entities	rather	than	simply	reading
or	hearing	about	them.
“Being	it”
—embodying	a	conceptual	object—is	a	very	different	experience
from	“watching	it,”	or	viewing	a	conceptual	object	as	“remote	and	separate	from
oneself,”	notes	Carmen	Petrick	Smith	of	the	University	of	Vermont,	who	has
studied	the	effects	of	physically	embodying	mathematical	concepts.	Groups	of
students	might	form	a	triangle
	with	their	outstretched	arms,	for	example,	and
then	experiment	with	moving	closer	to	and	farther	away	from	one	another;	in
this	way	they	come	to	understand	that	the	
size
	of	a	triangle	can	vary	without
changing	the	degree	of	the	angles	at	its	corners.	Smith	notes	that	such	“body-
based	activities”
	have	been	shown	to	deepen	students’	understanding	and
strengthen	their	memory	of	mathematical	concepts.	Mathematics	teachers	have
long	incorporated	manipulatives	into	their	instruction—counting	rods	and	cubes,
for	example.	The	research	of	Smith	and	others	suggests	that	students	learn	even
more	when	the	“manipulatives”	they	employ	are	their	own	bodies.
--- Page 67 ---
	
O
NE	FINAL	CATEGORY
	of	thought-enhancing	movements	encompasses	those	that
enact	an	analogy,	whether	explicit	or	implicit.	The	language	we	use	is	full	of
metaphors	that	borrow	from	our	experience	as	embodied	creatures;	
metaphorical
movements
	reverse-engineer	this	process,	putting	the	body	through	the	motions
as	a	way	of	prodding	the	mind	into	the	state	the	metaphor	describes.	“Moving
the	body
	can	alter	the	mind	by	unconsciously	putting	ideas	in	our	head	before	we
are	able	to	consciously	contemplate	them	on	our	own,”	as	Sian	Beilock	has
written.	“Getting	a	person	to	move	lowers	his	threshold	for	experiencing
thoughts	that	share	something	in	common	with	the	movement.”
To	take	one	example:	by	moving	our	bodies,	we	activate	a	deeply	ingrained
and	mostly	unconscious	metaphor	connecting	dynamic	
motion
	with	dynamic
thinking.
	Call	to	mind	the	words	we	use	when	we	can’t	seem	to	muster	an
original	idea—we’re	“stuck,”	“in	a	rut”—and	those	we	reach	for	when	we	feel
visited	by	the	muse.	Then	we’re	“on	a	roll,”	our	thoughts	are	“flowing.”
Research	has	demonstrated	that	people	can	be	placed	in	a	creative	state	of	mind
by	physically	acting	out	creativity-related	figures	of	speech—like	“thinking
outside	the	box.”
	Psychologist	Evan	Polman	of	the	University	of	Wisconsin–
Madison	designed	an	experiment	in	which	participants	were	asked	to	complete	a
creative	thinking	task.	Some	students	carried	out	the	assignment	while	sitting
inside	a	five-foot-square	
cardboard	box;	others	completed	the	task	while	sitting
next	to	the	box.	The	participants	who	did	their	thinking	literally	“outside	the
box”	came	up	with	a	list	of	creative	solutions	that	was,	on	average,	20	percent
longer	than	the	list	produced	by	those	who	brainstormed	inside	the	box.
Polman	and	his	colleagues	also	tested	the	generative	effect	of	enacting	another
metaphor:	the	use	of	the	phrase	“on	one	hand
	.
 
.
 
.	on	the	other	hand”	to	convey
the	consideration	of	multiple	possibilities.	This	time,	participants	were	asked	to
come	up	with	novel	uses	for	a	new	campus	building	complex;	half	of	them	were
asked	to	hold	one	hand	outstretched	as	they	engaged	in	brainstorming,	while	the
others	were	instructed	to	alternate	holding	out	one	hand	and	then	the	other.	The
study	subjects	who	(unwittingly)	acted	out	the	metaphor	“on	the	one	hand	.
 
.
 
.	on
the	other	hand”	generated	nearly	50	percent	more	potential	uses	for	the	building,
and	independent	judges	rated	their	ideas	as	more	varied	and	more	creative.
Such	experiments	suggest	we	can	activate	a	particular	cognitive	process	by
embodying	the	metaphor	that	has	come	to	be	associated	with	it.	Simply	moving
the	body	through	space	is	itself	a	loose	kind	of	metaphor
	for	creativity—for	new
angles	and	unexpected	vistas,	for	fluid	thinking	and	dynamic	change.	The
activation	of	this	metaphor	may	help	account	for	the	finding	that	people	are
more	creative	during	and	after	walking	than	when	they	are	sitting	still.
--- Page 68 ---
Daniel	Schwartz,	dean	of	the	Stanford	Graduate	School	of	Education,	often
urges	his	doctoral	students	to	walk	with	him	as	they	brainstorm	about	their
dissertations,	rather	than	remaining	seated	in	his	office.	In	2014	one	of	these
students,	Marily	Oppezzo	(now	an	instructor	in	medicine	at	the	Stanford
Prevention	Research	Center)	decided	to	investigate	empirically	the	effects	of
walking
	on	creativity.	In	a	series	of	experiments,	Schwartz	and	Oppezzo
administered	several	different	tests	of	original	thinking	to	groups	of	Stanford
undergraduates,	Stanford	employees,	and	students	from	a	nearby	community
college.	Some	students	were	asked	to	complete	the	tasks	while	taking	a	stroll
through	campus	or	while	walking	on	a	treadmill;	others	took	the	test	while
seated	in	a	classroom.
For	the	first	test,	participants	were	asked	to	generate	unexpected	uses	for
ordinary	objects,	such	as	a	brick	or	a	paper	clip.	On	average,	students	came	up
with	four	to	six	more	uses	for	the	items	if	they	were	walking	rather	than	sitting
down.	Another	test	presented	participants	with	an	
evocative	image,	such	as	“a
light	bulb	blowing	out,”	and	asked	them	to	come	up	with	an	analogous	image
(like,	for	example,	“a	nuclear	reactor	melting	down”).	Ninety-five	percent	of
students	who	walked	were	able	to	do	so,	compared	to	only	50	percent	of	those
who	remained	immobile.	“Walking	opens	up	the	free	flow	of	ideas,”	the	authors
conclude.	Studies	by	other	researchers	have	even	suggested	that	following	a
meandering,	free-form	route
—as	opposed	to	a	fixed	and	rigid	one—may	further
enhance	creative	thought	processes.
Although	contemporary	culture	prescribes	sitting	still	while	thinking,	a	stroll
through	the	history	of	literature	and	philosophy	finds	ample	evidence	of	a
counter-message.	Remember	Friedrich	Nietzsche,	from	earlier	in	our	journey.
“Only	thoughts	which	come
	from	walking	have	any	value,”	he	maintained.
Søren	Kierkegaard	felt	similarly.	“I	have	walked	myself
	into	my	best	thoughts,”
remarked	the	Danish	philosopher.	Walking	is	“gymnastics	for	the	mind,”
observed	the	American	writer	Ralph	Waldo	Emerson.	“I	am	unable	to	reflect
when	I	am	not	walking;	the	moment	I	stop,	I	think	no	more,	and	as	soon	as	I	am
again	in	motion,	my	head	resumes	its	workings,”	averred	the	Swiss-born
philosopher	Jean-Jacques	Rousseau.	The	French	philosopher	and	essayist	Michel
de	Montaigne	lamented	that	his	thoughts	often	came	to	him	when	he	was	on	the
move,	at	moments	when	“I	have	nothing
	to	jot	them	down	on”;	this	was	wont	to
happen	“especially	on	my	horse,	the	seat	of	my	widest	musings.”
These	great	thinkers	were	clearly	on	to	something.	We	ought	to	be	finding
ways	to	integrate	movement	into	all	our	daily	activities,	to	tap	into	the	mobile
intelligence	of	“the	mind	at	three	miles	per	hour,”
	as	the	contemporary	writer
Rebecca	Solnit	has	called	the	mental	state	induced	by	walking.	This	could	mean
--- Page 69 ---
walking	on	a	treadmill	as	we	type	at	our	computers,	walking	as	we	talk	on	the
phone,	walking	as	we	conduct	work	meetings—even	walking	as	we	attend	class.
Thinking	while	walking	would	seem	to	be	a	natural	fit	for	the	world	of
academe.	A	few	years	ago,	philosophy	professor	Douglas	Anderson	of	the
University	of	North	Texas	got	to	wondering	why	he	and	his	students	stayed	put
in	a	lecture	hall	while	the	texts	they	studied	so	often	extolled	the	merits	of
movement.	He	began	teaching	one	of	his	courses,	“Philosophy	of	Self-
Cultivation,”	while	on	the	move:	professor	and	students	walk	about	the	campus
as	they	discuss	the	week’s	assigned	reading.	Anderson	says	he	has	noticed	a
difference	in	his	students	as	soon	as	they	leave	the	
room	where	the	class	initially
assembles:	their	voices	and	expressions	become	more	animated,	they	have	more
to	say,	their	minds	seem	to	work	at	a	faster	clip.
Included	on	Anderson’s	syllabus	is,	of	course,	“Walking,”	the	essay	by
philosopher	and	naturalist	Henry	David	Thoreau	first	delivered	at	the	Concord
Lyceum	in	1851.	“I	think	that	I	cannot	preserve
	my	health	and	spirits,	unless	I
spend	four	hours	a	day	at	least—and	it	is	commonly	more	than	that—sauntering
through	the	woods	and	over	the	hills	and	fields,”	he	declared.	That	same	year,
Thoreau	expanded	on	the	theme	in	his	journal.	“How	vain	it	is
	to	sit	down	to
write	when	you	have	not	stood	up	to	live!”	he	exclaimed.	“Methinks	that	the
moment	my	legs	begin	to	move,	my	thoughts	begin	to	flow.”
--- Page 70 ---
3
Thinking	with	Gesture
G
ABRIEL	HERCULE
	bounded	onto	the	stage
	of	Startupbootcamp’s	2018	Demo
Day	wearing	a	slim	gray	suit,	white	shirt,	and	red	tie.	Before	he	said	a	word,	his
confidence	announced	itself	in	his	smooth	stride	and	fluid	gestures.
“Two	years	ago	I	was	hit	by	a	van	because	the	driver’s	eyes	weren’t	on	the
road,”	he	began.	Hercule	widened	his	eyes	and	held	out	his	hands,	palms	up,	as
if	to	say,	
Can	you	believe	it?
	“Fortunately,	I	made	it	out	with	only	minor
scratches,	but	this	left	me	with	a	very	real	sense	that	something	needed	to	be
done	about	automotive	safety—especially	in	the	commercial	vehicle	sector,
where	drivers	face	
huge
	time	pressures.”	He	spread	his	arms	wide	to	emphasize
the	word	“huge.”
“One	of	the	key	lessons	we	learned”—the	fingers	of	his	right	hand	formed	a
precise	pincer	gesture—“in	the	commercial	automotive	sector	is	that	the	fleet
manager	is	responsible	for	ensuring	that	
every
	
delivery
”—the	words	were
punctuated	by	two	jabs	at	the	air—“is	made	at	the	right	place	at	the	right	time,	a
task	that’s	much	easier	said	than	done.”
Fleet	managers,	Hercule	continued,	are	nervous:	nervous	about	their	drivers
getting	lost,	nervous	about	road	accidents,	nervous	about	packages	arriving	late.
“This	is	why	fleet	managers	wish	they	could	be	
in
	the	vehicle	with	their
drivers”—he	made	a	downward	tucking	motion,	emphasizing	the	word
“in”—“to	teach	them	better	habits.	And	now	they	can.”	Hercule	paused	for
dramatic	effect.
“I’d	like	to	introduce	the	Atlas	One,	the	very	first	head-up	display	that	sends
driving	information	directly	to	the	driver	through	a	projected	ho
logram,	with
three	key	features	to	enhance	driving	behavior.	All	this,	while	keeping	the
driver’s	eyes	on	the	road.”	Hercule’s	hands	were	in	constant	motion	as	he	got	to
the	heart	of	his	pitch:	they	framed	his	gaze	like	a	camera’s	viewfinder,	then
--- Page 71 ---
motioned	toward	himself	as	if	information	was	flowing	into	his	field	of	vision,
then	pointed	from	his	eyes	toward	the	imagined	road	before	him.
In	fact,	what	was	before	him	was	an	audience	of	several	hundred	potential
customers,	partners,	and	investors,	listening	carefully	to	every	word.	What	these
attendees	likely	didn’t	realize	is	that	they	were	being	influenced	at	least	as	much
by	Hercule’s	gestures	as	by	his	speech.	Researchers	who	study	embodied
cognition	are	drawing	new	attention	to	the	fact	that	people	formulate	and	convey
their	thoughts	not	only	with	words	but	also	with	the	motions	of	the	hands
	and	the
rest	of	the	body.	Gestures	don’t	merely	echo	or	amplify	spoken	language;	they
carry	out	cognitive	and	communicative	functions	that	language	can’t	touch.
Where	language	is	discrete	and	linear—one	word	following	another—gesture	is
impressionistic	and	holistic,
	conveying	an	immediate	sense	of	how	things	look
and	feel	and	move.
The	special	strengths	of	gesture	are	especially	valuable	in	the	effort	to
persuade
	or	enlist	others.	Such	movements	visually	place	the	gesturer	at	the
center	of	the	action,
	situating	him	at	the	locus	of	agency	and	control.	When	he
talks,	his	words	may	describe	or	extol	or	explain—but	when	he	gestures,	he	
acts
on	the	world	(if	only	symbolically).	At	the	same	time,	the	gesturer’s	motions
render	an	abstract	idea	in	human-scale,	embodied	terms,
	an	act	of	translation	that
makes	it	easier	for	onlookers	to	mentally	simulate	the	gesturer’s	point	of	view
for	themselves.	Perhaps	most	important,	gesture	generates	the	sense	that	an	as
yet	immaterial	enterprise	is	a	palpable	reality
	in	the	present	moment.	Using
gesture	in	this	way	can	confer	an	enormous	advantage	in	the	start-up	world,	one
group	of	researchers	notes,	since	“entrepreneurs	are	operating
	on	the	boundary
of	what	is	real	and	what	is	yet	to	happen.”	That’s	true	for	many	of	us,	whether
we’re	offering	projections	for	the	next	quarter,	presenting	a	proposal	for	a
project,	or	explaining	why	a	change	we’d	like	to	make	would	be	well	advised.
Gesture	brings	an	uncertain	future	into	the	observable	present,	imbues	it	with	a
realness	that	we	can	almost	touch.
Jean	Clarke,	a	professor	of	entrepreneurship	and	organization	at	Emlyon
Business	School	in	France,	has	spent	years	watching	entrepreneurs	
like	Gabriel
Hercule	make	their	case	at	demo	days,	incubators,	and	investment	forums	across
Europe.	In	a	study	published	in	2019,	she	and	her	colleagues	reported	that
company	founders	who	deployed	“the	skilled	use	of	gesture”
	in	their	pitches
were	12	percent	more	likely	to	attract	funding	for	their	new	ventures.	Such	adept
use	of	movement	includes	the	presentation	of	“symbolic	gestures”—movements
that	capture	the	overall	meaning	of	the	speaker’s	message—along	with	what	are
called	“beat	gestures”:	hand	motions	that	serve	to	punctuate	a	particular	point.
When	Hercule	repeatedly	pointed	to	his	eyes	and	then	to	the	view	before	him,	he
--- Page 72 ---
was	making	a	symbolic	gesture	(
eyes	on	the	road
);	when	he	formed	his	fingers
into	a	pincer,	or	jabbed	at	the	air	with	his	fist,	he	was	emphasizing	his
contentions	with	beat	gestures.	Skilled	gesturers	don’t	leave	this	important
element	of	their	delivery	to	chance,	Clarke	notes;	they	practice	the	movements
they	intend	to	make	just	as	they	rehearse	the	words	they	plan	to	say.
Adding	persuasive	force	to	a	presentation	is	just	one	role	gesture	can	play	in
shaping	the	thinking	we	do,	as	both	gesture	makers	and	gesture	observers.
Research	demonstrates	that	gesture	can	enhance	our	memory	by	reinforcing	the
spoken	word	with	visual	and	motor	cues.	It	can	free	up	our	mental	resources	by
“offloading”	information	onto	our	hands.	And	it	can	help	us	understand	and
express	abstract	ideas—especially	those,	such	as	spatial	or	relational	concepts,
that	are	inadequately	expressed	by	words	alone.	Moving	our	hands	helps	our
heads	to	think	more	intelligently,	and	yet	gesture	is	often	scorned	as	hapless
“hand	waving,”	or	disparaged	as	showy	or	gauche.
This	is	an	attitude	that	Frederic	Mishkin,	an	economist	at	Columbia	Business
School,	knows	well.	Whether	he’s	standing	in	front	of	a	lecture	hall	or	engaged
in	a	casual	conversation,	Mishkin’s	hands	are	continually	in	motion,	an	emphatic
complement	to	his	speech.	“I	talk	with	my	hands,”
	he	says.	“I	always	have.”
Early	in	his	career,	however,	one	of	his	mentors	became	exasperated	by	his
constant	gesticulating.	Seeking	to	break	his	protégé	of	the	habit,	he	declared	a
rule	for	when	Mishkin	visited	his	office.	“He	made	me	sit	on	my	hands	as	I
talked	with	him,”	Mishkin	recalls	ruefully.
Such	disdain	for	gesture	is	a	cultural	constraint	at	odds	with	the	way	humans
naturally	communicate.	Indeed,	linguists	theorize	that	gesture	was	humankind’s
earliest	language,
	flourishing	long	before	the	first	word	
was	spoken.	Even	now,
gesture	provides	an	alternate	channel	of	communication	every	bit	as	significant
as	the	verbal	one.	Gestures	exert	a	powerful	impact
	on	how	we	understand	and
remember	our	interactions	with	others,	but	its	influence	operates	largely	below
our	awareness.	We	may	choose	our	own	words	carefully,	and	listen	closely	to
what	others	say,	yet	still	fail	to	notice	a	substantial	proportion	of	the
communication	that	is	actually	occurring.	A	profusion	of	“extra-verbal	meaning”
is	continually	being	offered	and	received.
At	times,	gesture	works	with	language	to	more	richly	specify
	the	speaker’s
meaning—to	clarify	or	emphasize	what	is	being	said.	On	other	occasions,
gesture	supplies	meaning	that	is	not	found	anywhere
	in	the	speaker’s	words.	And
at	still	other	moments,	gesture	asserts	meaning	that	contradicts	or	departs
entirely
	from	the	speaker’s	verbal	self-expression.	Gesture	conveys	things	we
don’t	say;	as	we’ll	discover,	gesture	even	conveys	things	we	
can’t
	say—because
we	don’t	yet	have	the	words.
--- Page 73 ---
All	of	us,	then,	are	effectively	bilingual:	we	speak	one	or	more	languages,	but
we	are	also	fully	fluent	in	gesture.	Over	the	course	of	our	species’s	evolutionary
history,	gesture	was	not	superseded	or	replaced	by	spoken	language—rather,	it
maintained	its	place	as	talk’s	ever	present	partner,	one	that	is	actually	a	step	or
two	
ahead
	of	speech.	Christian	Heath,	a	professor	of	work	and	organization	at
King’s	College	London,	uses	the	close	analysis	of	videotaped	conversations	to
examine	the	dynamic	interplay	between	physical	movement	and	verbal
expression.	One	doctor-patient	dialogue
	recorded	by	Heath	demonstrates	in	fine-
grained	detail	how	people	often	gesture	first	and	speak	second.
In	Heath’s	video,	the	doctor	on	camera	is	saying	of	a	particular	class	of
medicines	he	is	prescribing	that	“they	help,	sort	of,	you	know,	to	dampen	down
inflammation”—but	by	the	time	he	says	“you	know,”	he	has	already	completed
three	downstrokes	of	his	hand.	For	her	part,	the	patient	makes	reference	to	the
stress	of	her	financial	troubles	and	how	she	goes	“round	and	round	in	circles”
trying	to	catch	up	with	her	bills—but	before	she	utters	these	words,	her	hands
have	already	started	moving	in	a	circular	pattern.	In	each	exchange,	gesture
provides	a	preview	of	the	concept	that	will	be	conveyed	in	words—and	in	both
cases,	the	listener	shows	that	he	or	she	understands	the	sentiment	(by	nodding
and	murmuring)	at	the	moment	when	he	or	she	perceives	the	gesture,	
before
	the
spoken	part	of	the	sentiment	is	uttered.	From	watching	Heath’s	tapes,	it’s	easy	to
conclude	
that	most	of	our	conversations	are	carried	on	with	our	hands,	the	words
we	speak	a	mere	afterthought.
Research	shows	that	we	all	engage	in	such	“gestural	foreshadowing,”
	in	which
our	hands	anticipate	what	we’re	about	to	say.	When	we	realize	we’ve	said
something	in	error
	and	we	pause	to	go	back	to	correct	it,	for	example,	we	stop
gesturing	a	couple	of	hundred	milliseconds	before	we	stop	speaking.	Such
sequences	suggest	the	startling	notion	that	our	hands	“know”	what	we’re	going
to	say	before	our	conscious	minds	do,	and	in	fact	this	is	often	the	case.	Gesture
can	mentally	prime	a	word
	so	that	the	right	term	comes	to	our	lips.	When	people
are	prevented	from	gesturing,	they	talk	less	fluently;
	their	speech	becomes
halting	because	their	hands	are	no	longer	able	to	supply	them	with	the	next
word,	and	the	next.	Not	being	able	to	gesture	has	other	deleterious	effects:
without	gesture	to	help	our	mental	processes	along,	we	remember	less	useful
information,
	we	solve	problems	less	well,
	and	we	are	less	able	to	explain
	our
thinking.	Far	from	tagging	along	as	speech’s	clumsy	companion,	gesture
represents	the	leading	edge	of	our	thought.
	
G
ESTURE	WAS	HUMANITY’S
	first	language—and	every	human	infant	recapitulates
this	evolutionary	history,	becoming	fluent	in	gesture	in	advance	of	acquiring
--- Page 74 ---
even	the	rudiments	of	speech.	Well	before	babies	can	talk,
	they	are	waving,
beckoning,	holding	up	their	arms	in	a	wordless	signal:	
Pick	me	up.
	Pointing	is
one	of	children’s	first	gestures,
	usually	initiated	around	nine	months	of	age;
between	ten	and	fourteen	months,	a	more	nuanced	capacity	for	gesture	begins	to
develop	as	fine-motor	finger	control	improves.	During	this	time,	spoken
language	lags	well	behind	what	toddlers	are	able	to	express	by	moving	their
hands.	Children	can	typically	understand	and	act	on	a	request	to	point	to	their
nose,
	for	example,	a	full	six	months	before	they	are	able	to	form	the	spoken
word	“nose.”	And,	research	suggests,	they	use	their	gestures	to	elicit	from	their
caretakers
	the	very	words	they	need	to	hear	as	they	learn	about	the	world.	A
child	will	point	to	an	unfamiliar	object,	for	example,	and	an	adult	will	often
obligingly	supply	the	name	of	that	thing.	When	a	parent	“translates”	her	child’s
gesture	into	a	word	in	this	way,	that	word	is	particularly	likely	to	enter	the
child’s	spoken	vocabulary	within	a	few	months.	Amazingly	enough,	as	one
researcher	puts	it,	“Young	children	use	their	hands	to	tell	their	mothers	what	to
say.”
These	early	experiences	with	gesture	lay	the	foundation
	for	spoken	language.
Gesture	constitutes	a	first	attempt	at	the	trick	of	making	one	thing	(a	movement
of	the	body,	the	sound	of	a	word)	stand	for	another	(a	physical	object,	a	social
act).	Connecting	a	wish—say,	to	get	down	from	a	high	chair—with	the	spoken
word	“down”	is	a	sophisticated	mental	move;	performing	a	downward	motion	of
the	hand	can	function	as	an	important	intermediate	step.	Indeed,	researchers
have	documented	a	link
	between	a	child’s	rate	of	gesturing	at	fourteen	months
and	the	size	of	that	same	child’s	vocabulary	at	four	and	a	half	years	of	age.
Children	learn	to	make	these	movements	from	the	gesturing	figures	around
them:	adults.	Studies	show	that	children	whose	parents	gesture	a	lot	proceed	to
gesture	frequently	themselves,	and	eventually	to	acquire	expansive	spoken-word
vocabularies.
Child	development	experts	have	long	emphasized	the	importance	of	
talking
	to
children;	an	often	cited	1995	study	carried	out	by	psychologists	Betty	Hart	and
Todd	Risley	estimated	a	30-million	“word	gap”
	in	the	number	of	words	heard
spoken	aloud	by	affluent	and	poor	children	by	the	time	they	start	school.	Since
the	publication	of	the	Hart-Risley	study,	other	research	has	confirmed
	that
higher-income	parents	tend	to	talk	more
	than	lower-income	parents,	that	they
employ	a	greater	diversity	of	word	types,
	that	they	compose	more	complex	and
more	varied	sentences
—and	that	these	differences	are	predictive
	of	child
vocabulary.	Now	researchers	are	generating	evidence	that	how	parents	
gesture
with	their	children	matters	as	well—and	that	socioeconomic	differences	in	how
--- Page 75 ---
often	parents	use	their	hands	when	talking	to	children	may	be	producing	what
we	could	call	a	“gesture	gap.”
High-income	parents	gesture	more
	than	low-income	parents,	research	finds.
And	it’s	not	just	the	
quantity
	of	gesture	that	differs	but	also	the	
quality:
	more
affluent	parents	provide	a	greater	variety	of	types	of	gesture,	representing	more
categories	of	meaning—physical	objects,	abstract	concepts,	social	signals.
Parents	and	children	from	poorer	backgrounds,	meanwhile,	tend	to	use	a
narrower	range	of	gestures	when	they	interact	with	each	other.	Following	the
example	set	by	their	parents,	high-income	kids	gesture	more	than	their	low-
income	counterparts.	In	one	study,	fourteen-month-old	children	from	high-
income,	well-educated	families	used	gesture	to	convey	an	average	of	twenty-
four	different	meanings	during	a	ninety-minute	observation	session,	while
children	from	
lower-income	families	conveyed	only	thirteen	meanings.	Four
years	later,	when	it	was	time	to	start	school,	children	from	the	richer	families
scored	an	average	of	117	on	a	measure	of	vocabulary	comprehension,	compared
to	93	for	children	from	the	poorer	families.
Differences	in	the	way	parents	gesture	may	thus	be	a	little-recognized	driver
of	unequal	educational	outcomes.	Less	exposure	to	gesture	leads	to	smaller
vocabularies;	small	differences	in	vocabulary	size	can	then	grow	into	large	ones
over	time,	with	some	pupils	arriving	at	kindergarten	with	a	mental	word	bank
that	is	several	times	as	large	as	that	possessed	by	their	less	fortunate	peers.	And
vocabulary	size	at	the	start	of	schooling	is,	in	turn,	a	strong	predictor
	of	how
well	children	perform	academically	in	kindergarten	and	throughout	the	rest	of
their	school	years.
The	good	news:	research	shows	that	offering	simple	instructions	to	parents
leads	them	to	gesture	more	often;	in	turn,	their	children	also	gesture	more.	Any
parent	can	adopt	the	strategies	suggested	by	these	intervention	programs:	Engage
in	frequent	pointing
	with	young	children,	and	encourage	the	kids	themselves	to
point.	Incorporate	this	same	gesture	into	the	reading	of	picture	books;
	point	to
particular	words	or	illustrations,	and	ask	children	to	point	to	what	they	see.
Come	up	with	simple	gestures
	to	pair	with	real-life	referents—a	clawing	motion
for	cat,	a	wiggling	index	finger	for	a	caterpillar—and	be	sure	to	say	the	word
aloud	as	the	gesture	is	demonstrated.	Perhaps	the	most	important	fact	to	keep	in
mind,	says	Harvard	education	professor	Meredith	Rowe,	is	that	a	child’s
language	development	is	malleable,	and	that	parents	play	an	important	role	in
shaping	that	development.	In	a	2019	study,	Rowe	delivered	this	message
	to	a
group	of	socioeconomically	diverse	parents	and	caregivers,	along	with	reminders
to	gesture	more.	At	the	conclusion	of	the	intervention,	she	found	that	adults
who’d	received	the	programming	were	engaging	in	pointing	thirteen	times	more
--- Page 76 ---
often,	on	average,	than	those	who	had	not	undergone	the	gesture	training;	the
children	in	their	lives	were	pointing	significantly	more	too.
As	children	grow	older,	gesture	continues	to	act	as	an	advance	party,	scouting
out	mental	territory	well	ahead	of	where	their	words	are.	Rather	astonishingly,
researchers	have	found	that	children’s	“newest	and	most	advanced	ideas”
	about
how	to	understand	a	concept	or	solve	a	problem	often	show	up	first	in	their
gestures.	Take,	for	example,	a	six-year-old	girl	faced	with	a	classic
“conservation”	task.	(Such	tasks	were	first	employed
	
by	the	pioneering
psychologist	Jean	Piaget	to	investigate	the	course	of	childhood	cognitive
development.)	The	girl	is	shown
	a	tall,	skinny	glass	full	of	water,	the	contents	of
which	are	then	poured	into	a	short,	wide	glass.	Asked	whether	the	amount	of
water	remains	the	same,	the	girl	answers	no—but	at	the	same	time,	her	hands	are
making	a	cupping	motion,	indicating	that	she’s	beginning	to	understand	that	the
wider	shape	of	the	second	glass	accounts	for	the	way	the	same	amount	of	water
fills	it	at	a	lower	level	than	the	first	glass.
This	episode	is	drawn	from	a	voluminous	video	archive	compiled	by	Susan
Goldin-Meadow,	a	professor	of	psychology	at	the	University	of	Chicago.
Goldin-Meadow	has	collected	thousands	of	such	video	vignettes,	recordings	of
individuals	as	they	use	words	and	gestures	to	explain	how	they	solve	problems.
Across	these	many	scenes,	she	has	identified	an	intriguing	pattern:	When	speech
and	gesture	are	both	correct	and	congruent,	it’s	a	given	that	the	speaker	has
mastered	the	material.	When	speech	and	gestures	match	but	both	are	wrong,	we
can	assume	that	the	speaker	is	still	far	from	“getting	it.”	But	when	there’s	a
mismatch
	between	speech	and	gesture—when	a	person	says	one	thing	but	does
something	else	with	her	hands—then	that	individual	can	be	said	to	be	in	a
“transitional	state,”	moving	from	the	incorrect	notion	she’s	expressing	in	words
to	the	correct	one	she	is	expressing	in	gesture.
In	videos	recorded	by	Goldin-Meadow	of	children	carrying	out	conservation
tasks,	new	understandings	emerged	first	in	gesture	some	40	percent	of	the	time.
Such	mismatches	appear	to	be	a	common	occurrence	across	development:	when
ten-year-olds	solve	math	problems,
	one	study	reported,	their	gestures	represent
strategies	different	from	those	found	in	their	speech	about	30	percent	of	the	time.
Another	study	found	that	for	fifteen-year-olds	working	on	a	problem-solving
task,
	the	rate	of	speech-gesture	mismatch	was	32	percent.
Furthermore,	Goldin-Meadow	has	found,	learners	who	produce	such	speech-
gesture	mismatches	are	especially	receptive	to	instruction
—ready	to	absorb	and
apply	the	correct	knowledge,	should	a	parent	or	teacher	supply	it.	Even	adults
signal	their	readiness	to	learn	through	mismatches	between	what	they’re	saying
and	how	their	hands	are	moving.	In	one	experiment,	for	example,	a	group	of
--- Page 77 ---
college	students
	was	asked	to	learn	about	a	set	of	“stereoisomers”—chemical
compounds	that	feature	the	same	number	of	atoms	but	that	differ	from	one
another	in	the	way	
the	atoms	are	spatially	arranged.	The	extent	to	which	the
undergraduates	made	gesture-speech	mismatches	while	learning	“predicted	their
ability	to	profit	from	instruction,”	writes	Goldin-Meadow,	who	was	lead	author
of	the	study.	“Namely,	the	more	they	expressed	correct	conceptual	information
in	gesture	that	they	did	not	verbalize	in	speech,	the	more	they	were	subsequently
able	to	learn.”	When	our	words	and	our	movements	diverge,	it’s	our	gestures
that	signal	what	happens	next.
	
W
HY	WOULD	OUR
	“most	advanced	ideas”	appear	in	our	gestures	before	surfacing
in	our	speech?	Researchers	speculate	that	gesture	helps	give	shape	to	an
incipient	notion	still	forming	in	our	minds.	At	a	moment	when	we	cannot	quite
put	words	to	a	concept	we’re	struggling	to	comprehend,	we	can	still	move	our
hands	in	a	way	that	captures	some	aspect
	of	our	emerging	understanding.	We
may	then	be	able	to	use	the	experience	of	making	and	seeing	our	own	gesture	to
help	us	locate	the	appropriate	language.	It’s	possible,	too,	that	we	feel	freer	to	try
out	new	ideas	in	movement	before	committing	to	them	in	speech;	as	Susan
Goldin-Meadow	puts	it,	“Gesture	encourages	experimentation.”
The	role	played	by	gesture	in	consolidating	our	initially	inchoate	thoughts	is
revealed	by	the	changes	our	hand	motions	undergo	as	we	begin	to	master	new
material.	At	first	we	gesture	profusely,	and	rather	indiscriminately,	as	we	attempt
to	wrap	our	heads	around	an	unfamiliar	idea.	We	gesture	more	when	we	are
actively	trying	to	apprehend
	or	reason	about	a	concept	than	when	we	are
describing	a	concept	we	already	understand.	Gesturing	also	increases	as	a
function	of	difficulty
:	the	more	challenging	the	problem,	and	the	more	options
that	exist	for	solving	it,	the	more	we	gesture	in	response.	Meanwhile,	we	engage
in	what	one	researcher	calls	“muddled	talk”
—speech	that	is	a	jumble	of
incompletely	articulated	notions.	Our	speech	and	our	gesture	are	not	yet
coordinated	or	congruent;	so	cognitively	demanding	is	the	task	of	assimilating	a
new	idea	that	we	divide	the	work
	between	our	head	and	our	hands,	each	going	its
own	way	for	now.
The	process	may	be	messy,	but	it	allows	us	to	circle	ever	closer	to	the
attainment	of	complex	knowledge
	that	would	otherwise	remain	out	of	reach.
While	moving	our	hands	around,	we	may	find	that	our	gestures	summon	insights
of	which	we	had	previously	been	unaware;	psychologist	Barbara	Tversky	has
likened	gesturing	to	a	“virtual	diagram”
	we	draw	in	
the	air,	one	we	can	use	to
stabilize	and	advance	our	emerging	understanding.	As	our	comprehension
deepens,	our	language	becomes	more	precise
	and	our	movements	become	more
--- Page 78 ---
defined.	Gestures	are	less	frequent,
	and	more	coordinated	in	meaning	and	timing
with	the	words	we	say.	Our	hand	motions	are	now	more	oriented	toward
communicating	with	others	and	less	about	scaffolding	our	own	thinking.
Without	gesture’s	initial	assist,	however,	this	happy	state	might	never	have	been
reached.	Research	shows	that	people	who	are	asked	to	write	on	complex	topics,
instead	of	being	allowed	to	talk	and	gesture	about	them,	end	up	reasoning	less
astutely	and	drawing	fewer	inferences.
This	same	sequence	unfolds	not	only	for	novices	learning	a	subject	for	the
first	time,	but	also	for	experts	venturing	into	uncharted	territory.
	Gesture	is
especially	useful	in	supporting	the	provisional	understandings	shared	by	team
members	who	together	are	working	their	way	toward	new	discoveries.	This	was
evident	in	a	study	conducted	by	researchers	at	the	University	of	California,	San
Diego.	Amaya	Becvar	and	two	colleagues	analyzed	hours	of	videotape	recorded
at	the	lab	meetings	of	a	biochemistry	research	group
	on	the	UCSD	campus.	The
scientists	in	this	lab	were	studying	the	dynamics	of	blood	clotting,	with	a
particular	focus	on	an	enzyme	called	thrombin.	Depending	on	which	protein
attaches	to	thrombin’s	“active	site,”	blood	clots	are	either	formed	or	broken
down.	Determining	how	and	why	thrombin	binds	to	one	protein	or	another	could
guide	the	design	of	drugs	to	treat	heart	attacks	and	strokes—conditions	that	are
caused	by	aberrant	blood	clots.	The	lab’s	scientists	had	a	hunch	that	a	key	role
was	played	by	thrombomodulin,	a	protein	that	is	a	“binding	partner”	of
thrombin.
At	one	of	the	lab’s	weekly	meetings,	a	graduate	student	presented	new
research	on	thrombomodulin	to	two	other	graduate	students	and	a	professor,	the
group’s	research	adviser.	Responding	to	the	new	findings,	the	professor	used	her
left	hand	to	represent	a	thrombin	molecule,	curling	her	fingers	into	a	claw	and
pointing	to	her	palm.	“That’s	the	active	site,”	she	explained.	“Our	new	theory	is
that	thrombomodulin	does	something	like	this”—she	curled	each	of	her	spread
fingers	more	tightly.	Or,	she	added,	perhaps	it	has	an	effect	“like	this”—and	she
drew	her	fingers	tightly	together.	Throughout	the	rest	of	the	meeting,	Becvar
notes,	the	professor	and	the	graduate	students	continually	reproduced	the
“thrombin	hand”	gesture:	pointing	to	it,	talking	at	it,	shifting	the	position	of	their
fingers	to	represent	various	potential	configurations.	The	scientists’	creation	of
new	knowledge	was	actively	supported	by	the	symbolic	movements	of	their
hands,	Becvar	concludes—a	fact	acknowledged	by	the	title	of	her	article,
“Hands	As	Molecules.”
Gestures	are	especially	useful	in	the	effort	to	understand	concepts	that	words
will	always	fail	to	capture	fully—concepts	that	are	visual	and	image-rich,	that
pertain	to	the	relation	between	objects	or	ideas,	or	that	concern	entities	beyond
--- Page 79 ---
direct	perception	(those	things	tiny	as	an	atom	or	vast	as	the	solar	system).
Gestures	are	also	particularly	well	suited	to	conveying	
spatial
	concepts.
Professional	geologists,	for	example,	employ	a	range	of	specialized	gestures
	to
think	and	communicate	about	the	way	terrestrial	layers	bend,	fold,	and	shift	in
space.	When	they	refer	to	“subduction”—the	sideways	and	downward
movement	of	a	plate	of	the	earth’s	crust	beneath	another	plate—they	slide	one
hand	across	and	under	the	other.	When	they	invoke	“angular	unconformity”—
rock	strata	that	lie	flat	on	top	of	other	strata	that	are	“beveled,”	or	uneven—they
hold	one	hand	steady	above	the	other	hand	which	tilts	side	to	side.	Though	these
experts	surely	have	the	words	to	express	their	meaning,	still	they	rely	on	their
hands	to	do	much	of	the	work.
Students	learning	about	geology	for	the	first	time	can	also	benefit	from	using
gesture.
	Kinnari	Atit,	an	assistant	professor	of	education	at	the	University	of
California,	Riverside,	asked	two	groups	of	college	students	to	explain	how	they
would	use	Play-Doh
	to	create	three-dimensional	models	of	geological	features.
The	members	of	one	group	were	permitted	to	use	their	hands	to	gesture;	those	in
the	second	group	were	asked	to	employ	only	words.	Before	and	after	the
exercise,	both	groups	were	tested	on	their	ability	to	engage	in	what	experts	call
“penetrative	thinking.”	This	is	the	capacity	to	visualize	and	reason	about	the
interior	of	a	three-dimensional	object	from	what	can	be	seen	on	its	surface—a
critical	skill	in	geology,	and	one	with	which	many	students	struggle.	Study
participants	who	gestured	got	significantly	higher	scores	the	second	time	they
were	tested	on	a	measure	of	penetrative	thinking,	while	participants	who	only
explained	verbally	showed	no	improvement.
Such	results	suggest	that	the	act	of	gesturing	doesn’t	just	help	communicate
spatial	concepts	to	others;	it	also	helps	the	gesturer	herself	understand	the
concepts	more	fully.	Indeed,	without	gesture	as	an	aid,	students	may	fail	to
understand	spatial	ideas	at	all.	“Strike	and	dip”	is	a	basic	geo
logical	concept	that
describes	a	rock	layer’s	rotation	from	north	(strike)	and	a	rock	layer’s	rotation
from	horizontal	(dip).	After	reading	a	textbook-style	introduction	to	the	concept,
“many	college	students
	made	dramatic	errors	in	recording	an	outcrop’s	strike
and	dip	on	a	campus	map,”	noted	a	team	of	researchers	from	Penn	State.	Better
performance	on	this	task,
	they	found,	was	linked	to	greater	use	of	gesture	by	the
students.
For	learners	endeavoring	to	grasp	spatial	concepts,	“language	can	actually	get
in	the	way,”
	says	Michele	Cooke,	a	professor	of	geoscience	at	the	University	of
Massachusetts	Amherst.	Cooke,	who	is	hearing-impaired,	has	spent	years
leading	outreach	programs	that	engage	deaf	students	in	the	study	of	geologic
fault	systems.	She	has	noticed	that	these	students	are	especially	quick	to	master
--- Page 80 ---
geological	concepts	and	theories,	a	deftness	she	attributes	to	the	skills	of
observation	and	spatial	cognition	they	have	developed	as	users	of	American	Sign
Language	(ASL).	People	who	are	fluent	in	sign	language,	as	Cooke	is,	have	been
found	to	have	an	enhanced	ability	to	process
	visual	and	spatial	information.	Such
superior	performance	is	exhibited	by	hearing	people
	who	know	sign	language,	as
well	as	by	the	hearing	impaired—suggesting	that	it	is	the	repeated	use	of	a
structured	system	of	meaning-bearing	gestures	that	helps	improve	spatial
thinking.
Cooke	often	employs	a	modified	form	of	sign	language	with	her	(hearing)
students	at	UMass.	By	using	her	hands,	Cooke	finds,	she	can	accurately	capture
the	three-dimensional	nature	of	the	phenomena	she’s	explaining.	She	can
efficiently	direct	her	students’	attention	to	particular	features	she	wants	to
highlight.	And	she	can	divide	the	river	of	information	she’s	presenting	into	two
smaller	streams,	one	verbal	and	one	visual,	thereby	reducing	her	students’
cognitive	load—often	heavy	when	novices	are	learning	new	ideas	and
vocabulary	terms	at	the	same	time.	Cooke	asks	the	undergraduates	enrolled	in
her	courses	to	imitate	her	“ASL-based	gestures”	as	they	are	introduced	to	new
geological	concepts,	and	encourages	her	students	to	use	the	hand	motions	when
talking	with	one	another	in	discussion	groups.	In	Cooke’s	class,	the	single-
minded	focus	on	written	and	spoken	language	that	characterizes	so	much
university	teaching	and	learning	has	been	nudged	aside,	making	
room	for	the
intuitive	genius	of	gesture.
	
W
E	CAN	DO
	the	same,	elevating	gesture	above	its	current	status	as	a	dismissed	or
disparaged	adjunct	to	speech.	A	good	place	to	start:	making	more	gestures
ourselves.	Research	shows	that	moving	our	hands	advances	our	understanding	of
abstract	or	complex	concepts,	reduces	our	cognitive	load,	and	improves	our
memory.	Making	gestures	also	helps	us	get	our	message	across	to	others	with
more	persuasive	force.	Studies	demonstrate	that	hearing	speech	and	seeing
gesture	at	the	same	time	evoke	a	stronger	reaction
	from	the	brains	of	those
listening	and	watching	than	does	speech	or	movement	on	its	own.	Gesture	works
to	amplify	the	impact	of	speech:	the	sight	of	a	speaker	making	gestures
effectively	captures	listeners’	attention
	and	directs	it	to	the	words	being	uttered.
(The	sight	of	someone	making	motions	that	are	
not
	gestures—moving	while
carrying	out	a	functional	act,	such	as	stirring	a	cup	of	coffee	with	a	spoon—does
not	have	the	same	attention-grabbing	effect.)	One	of	the	brain	regions	roused	to
attention
	by	the	sight	of	gesture	is	the	auditory	cortex,	the	part	of	the	brain
responsible	for	processing	oral	language.	“Hand	gestures	appear	to	alert
	the
auditory	cortex	that	meaningful	communication	is	occurring,”	says	Spencer
--- Page 81 ---
Kelly,	a	professor	of	psychology	and	neuroscience	at	Colgate	University	in	New
York.
When	we	make	gestures	as	we	explain	a	concept	or	tell	a	story,	others	better
understand
	what	we’re	saying;	our	hand	movements	clarify,	specify,	and
elaborate	on	our	speech	in	ways	that	aid	our	audience’s	comprehension.	People
are	also	more	likely	to	remember	what	we’ve	said	when	we	deliver	gestures
along	with	our	words.	In	one	study,	subjects	who	had	watched	a	videotaped
speech	were	33	percent	more	likely
	to	recall	a	point	from	the	talk	if	it	was
accompanied	by	a	gesture.	This	effect,	detected	immediately	after	the	subjects
viewed	the	recording,	grew	even	more	pronounced	with	the	passage	of	time:
thirty	minutes	after	watching	the	speech,	subjects	were	more	than	50	percent
more	likely	to	remember	the	gesture-accompanied	points.
It’s	just	these	benefits	of	observing	gesture	that	should	lead	us	to	take	a
second	step:	seeking	out	educational	resources,	for	ourselves	and	others,	in
which	the	instructor	makes	proficient	use	of	physical	movement.	A	number	of
studies	have	demonstrated	that	instructional	videos	that	include	gesture	produce
significantly	more	learning
	for	the	people	who	watch	them:	viewers	direct	their
gaze	more	efficiently,
	pay	more	attention
	to	essential	information,	and	more
readily	transfer
	what	they	have	learned	to	new	situations.	Videos	that	incorporate
gesture	seem	to	be	especially	helpful
	for	those	who	begin	with	relatively	little
knowledge	of	
the	concept	being	covered;	for	all	learners,	the	beneficial	effect	of
gesture	appears	to	be	even	stronger
	for	video	instruction	than	for	live,	in-person
instruction.
Yet	the	most	popular	and	widely	viewed	instructional	videos	available	online
largely	fail	to	leverage	the	power	of	gesture,	according	to	a	team	of
psychologists	from	UCLA	and	California	State	University,	Los	Angeles.	The
researchers	examined	the	top	one	hundred	videos
	on	YouTube	devoted	to
explaining	the	concept	of	standard	deviation,	an	important	topic	in	the	study	of
statistics.	In	68	percent	of	these	recordings,	they	report,	the	instructor’s	hands
were	not	even	visible.	In	the	remaining	videos,	instructors	mostly	used	their
hands	to	point	or	to	make	emphatic	“beat”	gestures.	They	employed	symbolic
gestures—the	type	of	gesture	that	is	especially	helpful	in	conveying	abstract
concepts—in	fewer	than	10	percent	of	the	videos	reviewed.
The	takeaway:	When	selecting	instructional	videos	for	ourselves	or	for	our
children	or	our	students,	we	should	look	for	those	in	which	the	teacher’s	hands
are	visible	and	active.	And	if	we	ourselves	are	called	upon	to	teach	online—or
even	just	to	communicate	via	Zoom	or	another	video-conferencing	platform—
we	should	make	sure	that	others	can	see	our	moving	hands.	Research	suggests
that	making	these	motions	will	improve	our	own	performance:	people	who
--- Page 82 ---
gesture	as	they	teach	on	video,
	it’s	been	found,	speak	more	fluently	and
articulately,	make	fewer	mistakes,	and	present	information	in	a	more	logical	and
intelligible	fashion.
Enacting	gestures	has	another,	more	indirect	benefit:	when	others	(children,
students,	co-workers,	employees)	see	us	gesturing,	they	tend	to	make	more	hand
motions
	themselves.	But	we	need	not	wait	for	them	to	follow	our	example;	we
can	explicitly	encourage	them	to	gesture.	A	simple	request
	to	“move	your	hands
as	you	explain	that”	may	be	all	it	takes.	For	children	in	elementary	school,	for
example,	encouraging	them	to	gesture
	as	they	work	on	math	problems	leads
them	to	discover	new	problem-solving	strategies—expressed	first	in	their	hand
movements—and	to	learn	more	successfully	the	mathematical	concept	under
study.
Another	experiment,	this	one	conducted	with	college	students,	found	that
those	who	were	encouraged	to	gesture	while	solving	spatial	problems
—such	as
rotating	a	mental	object	or	visualizing	the	folding	of	a	piece	of	paper—solved
more	of	the	problems	correctly	than	students	who	were	prohibited	from
gesturing,	or	even	students	who	were	allowed	(but	not	
encouraged)	to	move	their
hands.	The	gesturing	students’	improved	capacity	for	spatial	thinking	persisted
into	the	solving	of	a	second	round	of	spatial	problems	during	which	they	were
not	permitted	to	gesture.	The	spatial	skills	supported	by	their	initial	gestures	had
become	“internalized,”	the	researchers	suggest,	and	the	internalized	effects	of
gesturing	on	the	students’	thinking	carried	over	to	a	new	and	different	set	of
spatial	problems.	Even	adults,	when	asked	to	gesture	more,
	respond	by
increasing	their	rate	of	gesture	production	(and	consequently	speak	more
fluently);	when	teachers	are	told
	about	the	importance	of	gesturing	to	student
learning,	and	encouraged	to	make	more	gestures	during	instruction,	their
students	make	greater	learning	gains	as	a	result.
Encouraging	others	to	gesture	may	have	surprisingly	powerful	effects—like
helping	to	close	achievement	gaps.	The	disparity	in	spatial-thinking	skills
between	males	and	females	is	the	largest	known	cognitive	gender	difference.
	A
study	led	by	psychologists	at	the	University	of	Chicago	found	that	five-year-old
boys	were	already	better
	than	girls	the	same	age	at	solving	spatial-thinking
problems	that	involved	mentally	fitting	shapes	together	to	make	a	whole.	Upon
closer	analysis,	however,	this	disparity	was	revealed	to	be	not	a	
gender
difference	so	much	as	a	difference	in	the	propensity	to	
gesture:
	the	more
children	gestured	while	executing	the	task,	the	better	their	performance—and
boys	tended	to	gesture	far	more	than	girls.	While	27	percent	of	boys	gestured	on
all	eight	problems,	for	example,	only	3	percent	of	girls	did;	23	percent	of	girls
did	not	gesture	at	all,	compared	to	only	6	percent	of	boys.
--- Page 83 ---
The	study’s	authors	suggest	that	this	discrepancy	may	emerge	from
differences	in	boys’	and	girls’	experience:	boys	are	more	likely	to	play	with
spatially	oriented	toys	and	video	games,	they	note,	and	may	become	more
comfortable	making	spatial	gestures	as	a	result.	Another	study,	this	one
conducted	with	four-year-olds,	reported	that	children	who	were	encouraged	to
gesture
	got	better	at	rotating	mental	objects,	another	task	that	draws	heavily	on
spatial-thinking	skills.	Girls	in	this	experiment	were	especially	likely	to	benefit
from	being	prompted	to	gesture.
Another,	more	subtle	approach	to	promoting	gesture	involves	creating
occasions
	for	its	use—setting	up	scenarios	in	which	people	are	likely	to	move
their	hands.	One	such	circumstance	arises	when	people	are	asked	to	improvise:
that	is,	to	come	up	with	an	explanation	or	a	narrative	
on	the	spot,	in	front	of	an
audience.	Improvisation	is	cognitively	taxing,	and	in	the	face	of	its	demands
	we
tend	to	gesture	more.
Wolff-Michael	Roth	is	a	cognitive	scientist	at	the	University	of	Victoria	in
Canada.	His	research	on	the	role	of	gesture	in	the	development	of	scientific
literacy	has	led	him	to	change	the	way	he	conducts	his	courses	as	a	professor.
Rather	than	presenting	lectures	in	which	he	does	most	of	the	talking,	Roth	finds
as	many	opportunities	as	he	can	to	ask	individual	students	to	describe	and
explain	the	topics	being	covered	in	that	day’s	class.	Lacking	a	fully	developed
understanding,	or	even	the	relevant	technical	vocabulary,	his	students	lean
heavily	on	gesture	to	convey	their	budding	knowledge—and	this	is	just	what
their	professor	wants	to	see.	“It	is	from	the	attempt
	of	expressing	themselves	that
understanding	evolves,	rather	than	the	other	way	around,”	he	maintains.
Roth	is	also	a	practitioner	of	another	kind	of	occasion	creation:	he	has
observed,	and	research	has	confirmed,
	that	people	are	more	likely	to	gesture
when	they	have	something	to	gesture	
at.
	Providing	what	Roth	calls	“visual
artifacts”
—charts,	diagrams,	maps,	models,	photographs—induces	speakers	to
gesture	more,	thus	generating	all	the	benefits	for	understanding	that	such	hand
motions	confer.	With	his	colleagues	in	the	University	of	Victoria	physics
department,	he	has	developed	a	set	of	visual	depictions	and	concrete	models	that
the	physics	professors	now	use	to	encourage	gesture	production	in	class.	When
standing	next	to	such	objects,	students	can	simply	point	to	parts	or	processes	that
they	can’t	yet	fully	describe	or	explain,	allowing	them	to	engage	in	“more
mature	physics	talk”
	than	would	otherwise	be	possible	at	this	early	stage	of	their
studies.	The	use	of	gesture	supplies	a	temporary	scaffold	that	supports	these
undergraduates’	still	wobbly	understanding	of	the	subject	as	they	fix	their
knowledge	more	firmly	in	place.
--- Page 84 ---
One	more	way	to	leverage	the	power	of	gesture:	we	can	pay	closer	attention	to
the	manner	in	which	others	move	their	hands.	As	we’ve	discovered,	people’s
newest	and	most	advanced	ideas	often	show	up	first	in	their	gestures;	moreover,
individuals	signal	their	readiness	to	learn	when	their	gestures	begin	to	diverge
from	their	speech.	In	our	single-minded	focus	on	spoken	language,	however,	we
may	miss	the	clues
	conveyed	in	this	other	mode.	Research	finds	that	even
experienced	teachers	pick	up	on	less	than	a	third
	of	the	information	contained	in
students’	hand	move
ments.	But	studies	also	demonstrate	that	we	can	train
ourselves	to	attend	more	closely	to	gesture’s	corporeal	code.
In	a	study	carried	out	by	Susan	Goldin-Meadow	and	colleagues	at	the
University	of	Chicago,	a	group	of	adults	was	recruited	to	watch	video	recordings
of	children	solving	conservation	problems,	like	the	water-pouring	task	we
encountered	earlier.	They	were	then	offered	some	basic	information	about
gesture:	that	gestures	often	convey	important	information	not	found	in	speech,
and	that	they	could	attend	not	only	to	what	people	say	with	their	words	but	also
to	what	they	“say”	with	their	hands.	It	was	suggested	that	they	could	pay
particular	attention	to	the	
shape
	of	a	hand	gesture,	to	the	
motion
	of	a	hand
gesture,	and	to	the	
placement
	of	a	hand	gesture.	After	receiving	these	simple
instructions,	study	subjects	watched	the	videos	once	more.	Before	the	brief
gesture	training,	the	observing	adults	identified	only	around	30	to	40	percent	of
instances	when	children	displayed	emerging	knowledge	in	their	gestures;	after
receiving	the	training,	their	hit	rate	shot	up	to	about	70	percent.
With	a	little	effort,	it’s	possible	to	glean	the	information	gesture	holds,	and
once	we	do	so,	we	have	a	host	of	new	options.	We	can	supply	the	insight	the
gesturer	is	reaching	for—an	insight	for	which,	research	suggests,	she	is	already
mentally	primed;	we	can	“translate”	that	individual’s	gesture	into	words	(“It
looks	like	you’re	suggesting	that	.
 
.
 
.”);	and	we	can	“second”	her	gesture
	by
reproducing	it	ourselves,	thereby	reaffirming	the	promising	strategy	she	has
pointed	to	with	her	hands.
	
I
T’S	CLEAR	THAT
	
spontaneous
	gestures	can	support	intelligent	thinking.	There’s
also	a	place	for	what	we	might	call	
designed
	gestures
:	that	is,	motions	that	are
carefully	formulated	in	advance	to	convey	a	particular	notion.	Geologist	Michele
Cooke’s	gestures,	inspired	by	sign	language,	fall	into	this	category;	she	very
deliberately	uses	hand	movements	to	help	students	understand	spatial	concepts
that	are	difficult	to	communicate	in	words.
Designed	gestures	offer	another	benefit	as	well:	they	are	especially	effective
at	reinforcing	our	memory.	That’s	because	gesturing	while	speaking	involves
sinking	multiple	mental	“hooks”
	into	the	material	to	be	remembered—hooks	that
--- Page 85 ---
enable	us	to	reel	in	that	piece	of	information	when	it	is	needed	later	on.	There	is
the	auditory	hook:	we	hear	ourselves	saying	the	words	aloud.	There	is	the	visual
hook:	we	see	ourselves	making	
the	relevant	gesture.	And	there	is	the
“proprioceptive”	hook;	this	comes	from	
feeling
	our	hands	make	the	gesture.
(Proprioception	is	the	sense	that	allows	us	to	know	where	our	body	parts	are
positioned	in	space.)	Surprisingly,	this	proprioceptive	cue	may	be	the	most
powerful	of	the	three:	research	shows	that	making	gestures	enhances	our	ability
to	think	even	when	our	gesturing	hands	are	hidden	from	our	view.
Kerry	Ann	Dickson,	an	associate	professor	of	anatomy	and	cell	biology	at
Victoria	University	in	Australia,	makes	use	of	all	three	of	these	hooks	when	she
teaches.	Instead	of	memorizing	dry	lists	of	body	parts	and	systems,	her	students
practice
	pretending	to	cry	(the	gesture	that	corresponds	to	the	lacrimal	gland/tear
production),	placing	their	hands	behind	their	ears	(cochlea/hearing),	and	swaying
their	bodies	(vestibular	system/balance).	They	feign	the	act	of	chewing
(mandibular	muscles/mastication),	as	well	as	spitting	(salivary	glands/saliva
production).	They	act	as	if	they	were	inserting	a	contact	lens,	as	if	they	were
picking	their	nose,	and	as	if	they	were	engaging	in	“tongue-kissing”	(motions
that	represent	the	mucous	membranes	of	the	eye,	nose,	and	mouth,	respectively).
Dickson	reports	that	students’	test	scores	in	anatomy	are	42	percent	higher	when
they	are	taught	with	gestures	than	when	taught	the	terms	on	their	own.
The	acquisition	of	vocabulary	is	also	central	to	learning	a	foreign	language—
and	here,	too,	designed	gestures	can	act	as	an	aid	to	memory,
	says	cognitive
psychologist	and	linguist	Manuela	Macedonia.	Today,	Macedonia	researches
second-language	acquisition	as	a	senior	scientist	at	Johannes	Kepler	University
in	Austria.	But	earlier	in	her	career	she	was	a	language	instructor,	teaching
Italian	to	German-speaking	college	students.	Back	then,	Macedonia	found
herself	increasingly	frustrated	with	the	conventional	format	of	foreign-language
courses:	a	lot	of	sitting,	listening,	and	writing.	That’s	not	how	anyone	learns
their	native	language,	she	notes.	Young	children	encounter	new	words	in	a	rich
sensorimotor	context:	as	they	hear	the	word	“apple,”	they	see	and	touch	the
shiny	red	fruit;	they	may	even	bring	it	to	their	mouth,	tasting	its	sweet	flesh	and
smelling	its	crisp	scent.	All	of	these	many	hooks	for	memory	are	missing	from
the	second-language	classroom.
Macedonia	sought	to	recover	at	least	one:	physical	movement.	She	began
pairing	each	vocabulary	word	with	a	corresponding	gesture;	after	demonstrating
the	gesture	for	her	students,	she	would	ask	them	to	
perform	the	motion
themselves	while	speaking	the	word	aloud.	Her	students	learned	new	words
more	easily	this	way,	she	found,	and	retained	them	more	successfully	over	time.
Macedonia	eventually	became	a	student	again	herself,	writing	her	PhD	thesis	on
--- Page 86 ---
the	use	of	gestures	to	enhance	verbal	memory
	during	foreign-language	encoding.
In	the	years	since,	she	has	continued	to	contribute	to	a	growing	body	of	evidence
showing	that	enacting	a	gesture	while	learning	a	word	helps	cement	that	word	in
memory—perhaps	by	stimulating	a	more	extensive	network	of	areas	in	the	brain.
In	a	study	published	in	2020,	for	example,	Macedonia	and	a	group	of	six
coauthors	compared	study	participants	who	had	paired	new	foreign-language
words	with	gestures	to	those	who	had	paired	the	learning	of	new	words	with
images	of	those	words.	The	researchers	found	evidence	that	the	motor	cortex
—
the	area	of	the	brain	that	controls	bodily	movement—was	activated	in	the
gesturing	group	when	they	reencountered	the	vocabulary	words	they	had
learned;	in	the	picture-viewing	group,	the	motor	cortex	remained	dormant.	The
“sensorimotor	enrichment”	generated	by	gesturing,	Macedonia	and	her
coauthors	suggest,	helps	to	make	the	associated	word	more	memorable.
Macedonia	has	also	begun	experimenting	with	a	form	of	extended	technology
that	seems	a	natural	fit	with	her	previous	work:	an	online	language-learning
platform	that	features	a	virtual	agent,	or	“avatar,”	providing	instruction	in
vocabulary.	The	avatar	on	the	screen	behaves	just	as	Macedonia	did	as	a	teacher:
it	demonstrates	a	gesture,	which	the	user	imitates	as	he	or	she	repeats	the	novel
word.	Evaluations	of	the	platform	show	that	users	who	follow	the	avatar	in
making	a	gesture	achieve	more	lasting	learning
	than	those	who	simply	hear	the
word.	Gesturing	students	also	learn	more	than	those	who	observe	the	gesture
	but
don’t	enact	it	themselves.	Studies	by	other	researchers	have	found	that	math
students
	solve	problems	more	quickly,	and	generalize	their	new	knowledge	more
effectively,	after	they	have	been	taught	by	an	avatar	that	gestures	than	by	one
that	does	not.	Online	instructional	resources—including	commercial	language-
learning	platforms	like	Duolingo	and	Rosetta	Stone—might	be	made	much	more
effective	by	adding	an	animated	agent	who	induces	users	to	engage	in	gesture.
In	addition	to	reinforcing	memory,	designed	gestures	can	lighten	our	mental
load.	Gesturing	offloads	our	cognitive	burden
	in	much	the	
same	way	as	making	a
list	or	drawing	a	diagram	on	a	piece	of	paper—except	that	we	always	have	our
hands	with	us,	ready	to	assume	some	of	the	weight.	(Indeed,	studies	show	that
when	people	are	given	challenging	problems	to	solve	but	are	prohibited	from
using	pencil	and	paper,	they	gesture	more	to	compensate.)
	A	familiar	example	of
such	offloading	is	the	way	young	children	count	on	their	fingers	when	working
out	a	math	problem.	Their	fingers	“hold”	an	intermediate	sum	so	that	their	minds
are	free	to	think	about	the	mathematical	operation	they	must	execute	(addition,
subtraction)	to	reach	the	final	answer.	More	complex	or	conceptual	gestures
serve	a	similar	purpose	for	older	children	and	adults.	Our	hands	offer	our	heads
overflow	capacity,	such	that	we	can	manage	a	greater	volume	of	information
--- Page 87 ---
overall,	and	can	subject	that	information	to	a	greater	number	of	acts	of
manipulation	and	transformation.
In	pursuit	of	that	additional	capacity,	some	teachers	purposely	show	their
students	how	to	shift	information	onto	their	hands.	Washington	State	math
teacher	Brendan	Jeffreys	turned	to	gesture	as	a	way	of	easing	the	mental	load
carried	by	his	students,	many	of	whom	come	from	low-income	households,
speak	English	as	a	second	language,	or	both.	“Academic	language
—vocabulary
terms	like	‘congruent’	and	‘equivalent’	and	‘quotient’—is	not	something	my
students	hear	in	their	homes,	by	and	large,”	says	Jeffreys,	who	works	for	the
Auburn	School	District	in	Auburn,	a	small	city	south	of	Seattle.	“I	could	see	that
my	kids	were	stumbling	over	those	words	even	as	they	were	trying	to	keep	track
of	the	numbers	and	perform	the	mathematical	operations.”	So	Jeffreys	devised	a
set	of	simple	hand	gestures	to	accompany,	or	even	temporarily	replace,	the
unfamiliar	terms	that	taxed	his	students’	ability	to	carry	out	mental	math.
To	signify	that	an	angle	is	acute,	Jeffreys	taught	them,	“make	Pac-Man	with
your	arms.”	To	signify	that	it	is	obtuse,	“spread	out	your	arms	like	you’re	going
to	hug	someone.”	And	to	signify	a	right	angle,	“flex	an	arm	like	you’re	showing
off	your	muscle.”	For	addition,	bring	two	hands	together;	for	division,	make	a
karate	chop;	to	find	the	area	of	a	shape,	“motion	as	if	you’re	using	your	hand	as
a	knife	to	butter	bread.”
Jeffreys’s	students	enthusiastically	adopted	the	gestures,	and	they	now	employ
them	while	talking	in	class,	while	doing	homework,	and	even	while	taking	tests,
he	reports.	As	they	become	more	adept	at	executing	the	mathematical	operations
themselves,	the	students	are	often	able	to	reincorporate	the	academic	language
that	had	confused	them	initially—a	
benefit	of	the	mental	spaciousness	made
possible	by	the	load-lightening	effects	of	gesture.	Jeffreys’s	approach	has	proved
so	successful	in	helping	his	students	learn	math	that	he	has	been	asked	to	extend
it	to	all	twenty-two	schools	in	his	district.	He	is	now	at	work	on	developing	a	set
of	gestures	to	support	students	in	reading	and	writing:	motions	that	indicate
terms	like	“character,”	“setting,”	“summary,”	and	“main	point.”
As	Brendan	Jeffreys’s	students	have	discovered,	our	hands	are	impressively
flexible	tools.	They	can	represent	so	many	things:	an	entrepreneur’s	vision	for
his	product;	an	infant’s	step	toward	spoken	language;	a	teacher’s	clue	that	a
student	is	ready	to	learn.	Hands	can	be	a	prompt,	a	window,	a	way	station—but
what	they	ought	never	have	to	be	is	still.
--- Page 88 ---
PART	II
THINKING	WITH	OUR
SURROUNDINGS
--- Page 89 ---
4
Thinking	with	Natural	Spaces
A
S	THE	SUMMER	OF
	1945	came	to	an	end,	the	artist	Jackson	Pollock
	was
approaching	a	breaking	point.	New	York	City,	where	he	lived	in	a	downtown
apartment,	felt	increasingly	frenetic	and	chaotic.	His	ever-present	struggles	with
drinking	and	depression	seemed	to	be	worsening.	His	wife,	the	painter	Lee
Krasner,	worried	about	his	mental	health.
In	August,	Pollock	and	Krasner	went	to	visit	friends	on	the	East	End	of	Long
Island,	then	a	quiet	home	to	farmers	and	fishermen,	as	well	as	a	few	artists	and
writers.	Pollock	felt	both	soothed	and	stimulated	by	the	place:	the	light,	the
green,	the	cool	breezes	blowing	in	from	Long	Island	Sound.	After	returning	from
the	trip,	Pollock	sat	for	three	days,	thinking,	on	a	couch	in	the	Eighth	Street
apartment.	When	he	rose	to	his	feet	he	had	a	plan:	he	and	Lee	would	move	to	the
East	End.
In	short	order,	Pollock	and	Krasner	relocated	to	a	ramshackle	farmhouse	near
the	sleepy	hamlet	of	Springs,	Long	Island.	Pollock	spent	hours	on	the	house’s
back	porch,	gazing	out	at	the	trees	and	at	the	marshland	stretching	down	to
Bonac	Creek.	The	move	to	Springs	would	inaugurate	a	years-long	period	of
relative	peace	for	the	volatile	painter.	“It	was	a	healing	place,”
	says	Audrey
Flack,	a	fellow	artist	who	spent	time	with	the	couple	on	Long	Island.	“And	they
were	in	great	need	of	being	healed.”
Nature	changed	Pollock’s	thinking—gently	tempering	his	raging	intensity—
and	it	also	changed	his	art.	In	New	York,	Pollock	worked	at	an	easel,	painting
intricate,	involved	designs.	In	Springs,	where	he	worked	in	a	converted	barn	full
of	light	and	views	of	nature,	he	began	spreading	
his	canvases	on	the	floor	and
pouring	or	flinging	paint	from	above.	Art	critics	view	this	period	of	Pollock’s
life	as	the	high	point	of	his	career,	the	years	when	he	produced	“drip	painting”
masterpieces	like	
Shimmering	Substance
	(1946)	and	
Autumn	Rhythm
	(1950).
The	fulcrum	for	this	turn	of	fortune	was	the	time	Pollock	spent	musing	in	his
--- Page 90 ---
New	York	apartment;	the	artist	said	it	was	then	that	he	realized
	he	would	always
be	homeless	when	inside.	Out	of	doors,	he	found	his	home.
	
A
RTISTS	LIKE
	Jackson	Pollock	are	not	the	only	people	whose	mental	activity	is
shaped	by	their	surroundings;	all	of	us	think	differently	depending	on	where	we
are.	The	field	of	cognitive	science	commonly	compares	the	human	brain	to	a
computer,	but	the	influence	of	place	reveals	a	major	limitation	of	this	analogy:
while	a	laptop	works	the	same	way	whether	it’s	being	used	at	the	office	or	while
we’re	sitting	in	a	park,	the	brain	is	deeply	affected	by	the	setting	in	which	it
operates.	And	nature	provides	particularly	rich	and	fertile	surroundings	with
which	to	think.	That’s	because	our	brains	and	bodies	evolved	to	thrive	in	the
outdoors;	our	ancient	forebears	practiced	a	lifestyle	that	would	look,	to	us,	like
“a	camping	trip	that	lasts	a	lifetime,”
	as	a	pair	of	ecologists	has	put	it.
Over	hundreds	of	thousands	of	years	of	dwelling	outside,	the	human	organism
became	precisely	calibrated	to	the	characteristics	of	its	verdant	environment,	so
that	even	today,	our	senses	and	our	cognition	are	able	to	easily	and	efficiently
process	the	particular	features	present	in	natural	settings.	Our	minds	are	tuned	to
the	frequencies	of	the	organic	world.	No	such	evolutionary	adjustment	has
prepared	us	for	the	much	more	recent	emergence	of	the	world	in	which	we	now
spend	almost	all	our	time:	the	built	environment,	with	its	sharp	lines	and
unforgiving	textures	and	relentless	motion.	We’ve	set	up	camp	amid	the	high-
rises	and	highways	of	our	modern	milieu,	but	our	minds	are	not	at	ease	in	this
habitat.	The	mismatch	between	the	stimuli	we	evolved	to	process	and	the	sights
and	sounds	that	regularly	confront	our	senses	has	the	effect	of	depleting	our
limited	mental	resources.	We	are	left	frazzled,	fatigued,	and	prone	to	distraction,
simply	as	a	function	of	the	hours	we	spend	in	a	setting	for	which	we	are
biologically	ill-equipped.
Just	how	much	of	our	lives	unfolds	inside	buildings	and	vehicles	is	revealed
by	scientists’	time	use	studies:	only	about	7	percent	of	our	time
	is	spent
outdoors.	That’s	much,	much	less	than	for	our	nature-dwell
ing	ancestors,	of
course,	but	it’s	meager	even	when	compared
	to	that	of	Americans	twenty	years
ago.	More	than	60	percent	of	American	adults	report	spending	five	hours	or	less
outside	in	nature	each	week.	Children,	too,	engage	in	outdoor	recreation	far	less
frequently	than	earlier	generations;	only	26	percent	of	mothers
	report	that	their
kids	play	outside	every	day.	Such	trends	are	likely	to	continue:	more	than	half	of
Earth’s	humans	now	live	in	cities,
	and	by	2050	that	figure	is	predicted	to	reach
almost	70	percent.
Yet	despite	these	massive	shifts	in	culture,	our	
biology
	remains	identical	to
that	of	our	progenitors.	Even	now,	our	brains	and	bodies	respond	to	nature	in
--- Page 91 ---
ways	that	reveal	the	deep	imprint	of	our	evolution	in	the	outdoors.	In	fact,	we
can	draw	a	direct	line	from	the	kind	of	landscapes	we	enjoy	today	to	the	settings
in	which	our	species	evolved.	One	place	to	begin	drawing	that	line	is	with	the
crowds	of	people	who	throng	to	a	half-mile-wide	strip	of	land	in	the	middle	of
Manhattan	Island.	Forty-two	million	people	visit
	New	York’s	Central	Park	each
year—ambling	across	its	wide	Sheep	Meadow,	browsing	its	fragrant	gardens,
circling	its	shimmering	reservoir.	Why	are	so	many	drawn	to	these	840	acres?	Its
creator	knew	the	reason.	“Natural	scenery,”
	wrote	landscape	architect	Frederick
Law	Olmsted,	“employs	the	mind	without	fatigue	and	yet	enlivens	it;	and	thus,
through	the	influence	of	the	mind	over	the	body,	gives	the	effect	of	refreshing
rest	and	reinvigoration	to	the	whole	system.”
Residents	and	tourists	alike	love	Central	Park’s	rolling	hills,	copses	of	trees,
and	dappled	bodies	of	water.	But	though	the	park’s	features	look	natural,	they
were	in	fact	almost	entirely	man-made.	When	Olmsted	started	his	work
	in	1858,
the	piece	of	land	with	which	he	had	to	contend	was	an	unpromising	expanse	of
swamps	and	rocky	outcroppings,	available	for	parkland	only	because	real	estate
developers	could	not	build	on	it.	Over	the	course	of	the	next	fifteen	years,	more
than	three	thousand	laborers	moved	some	10	million	cartloads	of	rocks	and	dirt,
and	planted	an	estimated	5	million	trees	and	shrubs,	in	service	to	Olmsted’s
vision.	That	vision	was	drawn	from	the	visits	Olmsted	made
	to	legendary	estates
in	England,	such	as	Birkenhead	Park	and	Trentham	Gardens,	which	had
themselves	been	contrived	by	landscape	architects	in	the	late	eighteenth	and
early	nineteenth	centuries.
The	preferences	around	which	Olmsted	was	shaping	Central	Park	were	older
still—ancient,	in	fact,	reaching	back	to	humanity’s	early	days	
on	the	African
savanna.	The	particular	environment	in	which	our	species	evolved	left	us	with	a
set	of	predilections	that	persist	to	this	day.	For	it’s	not	just	
any
	kind	of	nature
that	appeals	to	us.	Much	of	what	is	natural	is	unpleasant	or	even	threatening:
predators,	storms,	deserts,	swamps.	In	order	to	survive,	humans	evolved	strong,
and	shared,	preferences	for	certain	kinds	of	natural	spaces
—spaces	that	look	safe
and	resource-rich.	We	like	wide	grassy	expanses,	dotted	by	loose	clumps	of	trees
with	spreading	branches,	and	including	a	nearby	source	of	water.	We	like	the
capacity	to	see	long	distances	in	many	directions	from	a	protected	perch,	aspects
that	geographer	Jay	Appleton	memorably	named	“prospect”	and	“refuge.”
	And
we	like	a	bit	of	mystery
—a	beckoning	promise	of	more	to	be	revealed	around
the	bend.
The	world’s	greatest	landscape	designers	intuited	these	preferences
	and
incorporated	them	into	their	work.	Starting	in	the	mid-eighteenth	century,
Lancelot	Brown—better	known	by	his	nickname,	“Capability”—transformed
--- Page 92 ---
more	than	250	English	estates,	moving	hills	and	planting	trees	in	order	to
achieve	his	vision	of	an	idealized	countryside.	Brown	was	succeeded	by	another
British	landscape	architect,	Humphry	Repton,	who	drew	“before”	and	“after”
sketches	for	prospective	clients;	the	“after”	pictures	promised	shady	clusters	of
trees	giving	way	to	views	of	open	meadows	and	glimmering	ponds.
Repton’s	and	Brown’s	designs	inspired	Frederick	Law	Olmsted,	along	with
many	others,	but	they	were	no	mere	fashion.	The	preferences	they	elevate
transcend	time,	culture,	and	nationality.	They	are	shared	by	people	all	over	the
world—from	Australia	to	Argentina,	from	Nigeria	to	Korea—including	people
who	must	go	to	great	lengths	to	emulate	the	archetype.	Landowners	in	the	bone-
dry	southwest	United	States	irrigate	their	properties	to	evoke	the	lush,	grassy
savanna.	Gardeners	in	Japan	prune	their	trees	so	that	the	boughs	resemble	the
spreading	branches	of	the	trees	of	East	Africa.	Such	choices	reflect	the	brain’s
very	particular	evolved	history—the	“ghosts	of	environments	past,”
	in	the	phrase
of	biologist	Gordon	Orians.
What	we	imagine	to	be	aesthetic	preferences	are	really	survival	instincts
honed	over	millennia,	instincts	that	helped	us	find	promising	places	to	forage
and	to	rest.	When,	today,	we	turn	to	nature	when	we’re	stressed	or	burned	out—
when	we	take	a	walk	through	the	woods	or	gaze	out	at	the	ocean’s	rolling	waves
—we	are	engaging	in	what	one	researcher	
calls	“environmental	self-regulation,”
a	process	of	psychological	renewal	that	our	brains	cannot	accomplish	on	their
own.
	
I
T’S	NOT	SIMPLY
	that	we	
prefer
	such	settings.	They	actually	help	us	to	think	better
—in	part	by	relieving	our	stress	and	reestablishing	our	mental	equilibrium.
Drivers	who	travel
	along	tree-lined	roads,	for	example,	recover	more	quickly
from	stressful	experiences,	and	handle	emerging	stresses	with	more	calm,	than
do	people	who	drive	along	roads	crowded	with	billboards,	buildings,	and
parking	lots.	Laboratory	studies
	of	people	who	are	given	a	challenging	math	test
or	are	subjected	to	sharp	questioning	by	a	panel	of	judges	report	that	subsequent
contact	with	nature	calms	their	nervous	system,	returning	them	to	a	state	of
psychological	balance	in	the	wake	of	such	trying	experiences.	The	more	stressed
individuals	are,	the	more	benefit	they	derive
	from	exposure	to	nature.
The	sights	and	sounds	of	nature	help	us	rebound	from	stress;	they	can	also
help	us	out	of	a	mental	rut.	“Rumination”	is	psychologists’	term	for	the	way	we
may	fruitlessly	visit	and	revisit	the	same	negative	thoughts.	On	our	own,	we	can
find	it	difficult	to	pull	ourselves	out	of	this	cycle—but	exposure	to	nature	can
extend	our	ability	to	adopt	more	productive	thought	patterns.	Gregory	Bratman,
an	assistant	professor	at	the	University	of	Washington,	asked	study	participants
--- Page 93 ---
to	undergo	a	brain	scan	and	to	complete	a	measure	of	ruminative	thinking	before
taking	a	ninety-minute	walk	outside.
	Half	the	participants	strolled	through	a
quiet,	leafy	natural	area;	the	other	half	walked	alongside	a	busy	roadway.	Upon
returning	to	the	lab,	all	the	participants	took	the	ruminative	thinking	measure	and
had	their	brains	scanned	for	a	second	time.
People	who’d	spent	the	previous	hour	and	a	half	in	nature	had	become	less
preoccupied	by	the	negative	aspects	of	their	lives;	in	addition,	an	area	of	the
brain	associated	with	rumination,	the	subgenual	prefrontal	cortex,	was	less	active
than	before	the	nature	walk.	The	people	who	had	walked	alongside	a	busy
roadway	gained	no	such	relief.	Rumination	is	especially	common	in	those	who
are	depressed,	and	research	has	shown	that	a	walk	in	nature	lifts	the	mood
	of
people	diagnosed	with	depression.	It	also	improves	their	memory.	The	obsessive
cycling	through	negative	thoughts	that	many	depressed	people	experience
consumes	a	significant	portion	of	their	mental	resources,	adversely	affecting
their	ability	to	recall	important	information—a	deficit	that	time	in	nature	helps
ameliorate.
Yet	another	way	that	nature	helps	us	think	better	is	by	enhancing	our	ability	to
maintain	our	focus
	on	the	task	in	front	of	us.	People	who	have	recently	spent
time	amid	outdoor	greenery
	catch	more	errors	on	a	proofreading	assignment,	for
example,	and	provide	quicker	and	more	accurate	answers	on	a	fast-paced
cognitive	test,	than	do	people	who	have	just	finished	a	walk	in	an	urban	setting.
Working	memory—our	ability	to	hold	in	mind	information	relevant	to	the
problem	we’re	currently	solving—also	benefits	from	time	spent
	in	a	natural
setting.	In	a	study	led	by	Marc	Berman,	a	psychologist	at	the	University	of
Chicago,	participants	who	walked	through	an	arboretum	for	just	under	an	hour
scored	20	percent	higher	on	a	test	of	working	memory	compared	to	those	who
spent	the	same	amount	of	time	navigating	busy	city	streets.
Time	spent	in	nature	can	even	relieve	the	symptoms	of	attention
deficit/hyperactivity	disorder	(ADHD).	A	pair	of	researchers	at	the	University	of
Illinois,	Andrea	Faber	Taylor	and	Ming	Kuo,	were	intrigued	by	reports	from
parents	that	their	ADHD-affected	children	seemed	to	function	better	after
exposure	to	nature.	Putting	this	possibility	to	an	empirical	test,	they	had	children
aged	seven	to	twelve	take	a	supervised	walk	in	a	park,	in	a	residential
neighborhood,	or	in	a	busy	area	of	downtown	Chicago.	Following	the	walks,	the
youngsters	who’d	spent	time	in	the	park	were	better	able	to	focus
	than	the
children	in	the	other	two	groups—so	much	so,	in	fact,	that	on	a	test	of	their
ability	to	concentrate,	they	scored	like	typical	kids	without	ADHD.	Indeed,
Taylor	and	Kuo	point	out,	a	twenty-minute	walk	in	a	park	improved	children’s
concentration	and	impulse	control	as	much	as	a	dose	of	an	ADHD	drug	like
--- Page 94 ---
Ritalin.	“
 
‘Doses	of	nature’
	might	serve	as	a	safe,	inexpensive,	widely	accessible
new	tool	in	the	tool	kit	for	managing	ADHD	symptoms,”	the	researchers
concluded.
All	these	salutary	effects	on	our	mental	function	can	be	understood	as	a
process	of	
restoration:
	time	spent	outdoors	gives	us	back	what	the	built
environment	so	relentlessly	drains	away.	More	than	a	century	ago,	psychologist
William	James	drew	a	distinction	that	bears	closely	on	our	understanding	of
nature’s	restorative	powers.	There	are	two	kinds	of	attention,	wrote	James	in	his
1890	book	
The	Principles	of	Psychology:
	“voluntary”	and	“passive.”
	Voluntary
attention	takes	effort;	we	must	continually	direct	and	redirect	our	focus	as	we
encounter	an	onslaught	of	stimuli	or	concentrate	hard	on	a	task.	Navigating	an
urban	environment—with	its	hard	surfaces,	sudden	movements,	and	loud,	sharp
noises—
requires	voluntary	attention.	Passive	attention,	by	contrast,	is	effortless:
diffuse	and	unfocused,	it	floats	from	object	to	object,	topic	to	topic.	This	is	the
kind	of	attention	evoked	by	nature,	with	its	murmuring	sounds	and	fluid
motions;	psychologists	working	in	the	tradition	of	James	call	this	state	of	mind
“soft	fascination.”
The	respite	from	insistent	cognitive	demands	that	nature	provides	gives	our
supply	of	mental	resources	an	opportunity	to	renew	and	regenerate.	As	we’ve
seen,	these	resources	are	finite	and	are	soon	exhausted—not	only	by	the	clamor
of	urban	living,	but	also	by	the	stringent	requirements	of	academic	and
professional	work.	Just	as	our	brains	did	not	evolve	to	react	with	equanimity	to
speeding	cars	and	wailing	sirens,	neither	did	they	evolve	to	read,	or	to	perform
advanced	math,	or	to	carry	out	any	of	the	highly	abstract	and	complex	tasks	we
ask	of	ourselves	every	day.	Though	we	manage	to	meet	these	demands,	our	near-
universal	struggles	with	attention	and	focus	(not	to	mention	motivation	and
engagement)	suggest	that	we	ought	to	pay	more	heed	to	the	
supply
	side	of	our
attentional	economy—that	is,	not	simply	drawing	down	our	mental	resources	but
also	ensuring	their	regular	replenishment.
We	can	do	so	by	simply	going	outside.	We	don’t	need	to	wait	for	perfect
weather,	or	to	find	our	way	to	some	unspoiled	wilderness;	any	form	of	nature,
under	any	conditions,	will	do.	There	is,	however,	an	optimal	attitudinal	stance
we	can	adopt:	what	researchers	call	“open	monitoring,”
	or	a	curious,	accepting,
nonjudgmental	response	to	all	we	encounter.	Dor	Abrahamson,	a	professor	of
education	at	the	University	of	California,	Berkeley,	suggests	borrowing	the
technique	of	“soft	gazing”
	from	the	traditional	Chinese	practice	of	meditative
movement	known	as	tai	chi.	When	soft	gazing	was	introduced	at	a	workshop	he
organized	on	bringing	mindfulness	to	education,	Abrahamson	reports	that	one
participant	immediately	noticed	how	it	departed	from	his	usual	mode.	“There	is
--- Page 95 ---
hard	looking-at,”	the	participant	pointed	out,	“and	there	is	the	soft	receiving	of
images.”	The	orientation	we	adopt	when	in	nature	is	ideally	one	of	such	informal
mindfulness.	(For	those	intending	to	establish	a	more	formal	practice	of
meditation,	research	shows	that	doing	so	
in	nature
	makes	the	habit	easier	to
implement	and	maintain.)
When	we	seek	psychological	restoration	outdoors,	it’s	best	to	leave	our
devices	behind;	research	has	found	that	using	a	smartphone	while	outside
“substantially	counteracts
	the	attention	enhancement	effects”	of	being	in	
nature.
One	exception	might	be	the	use	of	an	app	like	ReTUNE
—an	example	of
extended	technology	developed	by	University	of	Chicago	psychologist	Marc
Berman	and	doctoral	student	Kathryn	Schertz.	(The	name	is	an	acronym	that
stands	for	Restoring	Through	Urban	Nature	Experience.)	ReTUNE	is	like	a
conventional	GPS	system,	but	programmed	with	a	different	set	of	values:	instead
of	providing	its	users	with	the	speediest	route,	it	offers	them	the	path	with	the
greatest	number	of	trees,	the	largest	proportion	of	flowers,	the	highest	frequency
of	birdsong.
Say	a	visitor	to	Chicago	wants	to	walk
	from	the	university’s	campus,	in	the
city’s	Hyde	Park	neighborhood,	to	Promontory	Point,	a	peninsula	that	juts	out
into	Lake	Michigan.	If	she	consulted	Waze,	the	popular	mapping	app	owned	by
Google,	its	recommended	route	would	take	a	brisk	twenty-eight	minutes:	three
blocks	north	on	South	Blackstone	Avenue,	then	a	right	on	East	56th	Street	and	a
left	onto	South	Shore	Drive.	It’s	the	most	direct	way	to	make	the	journey,	but	the
experience	would	be	one	of	glass	and	brick,	concrete	sidewalks	and	asphalt
roads,	honking	cars	and	hurried	commuters.
The	same	coordinates,	entered	into	ReTUNE,	would	produce	a	markedly
different	suggested	route:	a	stroll	that	begins	in	the	Midway	Plaisance,	an	urban
oasis	of	green;	then	a	ramble	through	Jackson	Park,	with	its	lush	gardens	and
sparkling	lagoons;	emerging,	finally,	onto	a	path	that	runs	alongside	the	shores
of	Lake	Michigan,	winding	its	way	to	Promontory	Point.	The	trip	would	take	a
comparatively	less	efficient	thirty-four	minutes	to	complete,	but	our	visitor
would	likely	arrive	at	her	destination	clearer-headed	and	more	relaxed.
There	are	values	embedded	in	the	technology	we	use,	and	as	we	scroll	and	tap
we	often	unthinkingly	adopt	these	priorities	as	our	own.	By	extending
technology	with	the	thought-enhancing	properties	of	nature,	ReTUNE
encourages	us	to	question	the	elevation	of	efficiency	above	all	other	values,
including	our	own	mental	well-being.	ReTUNE	makes	its	own	commitment
clear:	it’s	not	the	speed	of	the	journey,	it’s	what	you	see	along	the	way.
	
--- Page 96 ---
T
HE	RETUNE	APP
	assigns	each	potential	route	a	“Restoration	Score,”
	based	on	the
presence	of	auditory	and	visual	features	that	connote	“naturalness.”	Its	co-
inventor,	Marc	Berman,	is	one	of	a	number	of	researchers	working	to	answer	the
question:	What	makes	nature	natural?	This	inves
tigation	may	seem	befuddlingly
circular—but	if	science	could	determine,	at	a	granular	level,	precisely	which
features	of	nature	work	their	effects	on	our	bodies	and	brains,	such	information
could	be	used	to	inform	the	design	of	buildings	and	landscapes	that	actively
enhance	their	users’	mood,	cognition,	and	health.	Through	close	analysis	of
natural	and	man-made	scenes,	Berman	and	others	have	begun	to	compile	a	kind
of	taxonomy	of	naturalness.
Natural	landscapes,	they	have	found,	feature	less	variation	in	hue	than	urban
settings	(that	is,	their	colors	range	from	green	to	yellow	to	brown	to	more	green)
and	more	“color	saturation,”	or	pure,	undiluted	color.	Natural	environs	also
present	the	eye	with	fewer	straight	lines,	and	more	curving	shapes,	than	do	urban
ones.	Finally,	unlike	man-made	designs,	in	which	edges	tend	to	be	spaced	apart
(think	of	a	row	of	windows	on	the	face	of	an	office	building),	in	natural	vistas,
edges	tend	to	cluster	densely	together	(picture	the	overlapping	edges	of	a	tree’s
many	leaves).	Applying	these	characteristics	as	a	filter,	Berman	and	his	team
have	designed	a	computer	model	that	can	predict	with	81	percent	accuracy
whether	a	given	image	depicts	a	scene	that	actual	human	beings	have	rated	as
highly	natural.	Other	researchers	have	identified	additional	features	that
distinguish	natural	tableaux	from	their	artificial	counterparts:	natural	settings
incorporate	dynamic	and	diffuse	light;	gentle,	often	rhythmic	movement;	and
muted	sounds	that	repeat	with	variations,	such	as	ocean	waves	or	birdsong.
It’s	not	the	case	that	nature	is	simpler	or	more	elementary	than	man-made
environments.	Indeed,	natural	scenes	tend	to	contain	
more
	visual	information
than	do	built	ones—and	this	abundance	of	visual	stimulation	is	a	condition	we
humans	crave.	Roughly	a	third
	of	the	neurons	in	the	brain’s	cortex	are	dedicated
to	visual	processing;	it	takes	considerable	visual	novelty	to	satisfy	our	eyes’
voracious	appetite.	But	balanced	against	this	desire	to	
explore
	is	a	desire	to
understand;
	we	seek	a	sense	of	order	as	well	as	an	impression	of	variety.	Nature
meets	both	these	needs,	while	artificial	settings	often	err	on	one	side	or	the	other.
Built	environs	may	be	monotonous	and	under-stimulating:	picture	the	unvarying
glass	and	metal	façades	of	many	modern	buildings,	and	the	uniform	rows	of
beige	cubicles	that	fill	many	offices.	Or	they	may	be	overwhelming	and	over-
stimulating,	a	barrage	of	light	and	sound	and	motion:	call	to	mind	New	York’s
Times	Square	or	Tokyo’s	Shibuya	Crossing.
Nature	is	complex,	it’s	true,	but	its	complexity	is	of	a	kind	that	our	brains	are
readily	able	to	process.	When	we’re	surrounded	by	nature,	we	experience	a	high
--- Page 97 ---
degree	of	“perceptual	fluency,”
	notes	Yannick	Joye,	a	senior	researcher	at	the
ISM	University	of	Management	and	Economics	in	Lithuania.	Basking	in	such
ease	gives	our	brains	a	rest,	Joye	explains,	and	also	makes	us	feel	good;
	we	react
with	positive	emotion	when	information	from	our	environment	can	be	absorbed
with	little	effort.
The	perceptual	fluency	we	experience	in	regard	to	nature	emerges	from	the
way	the	various	elements	of	a	natural	vista	interact	with	one	another.	Natural
scenes	are	more	
coherent,
	lacking	the	jarring	disjunctions	common	in	man-made
settings	(a	rococo	building	next	to	a	garish	billboard	beside	a	severe	modern
sculpture).	Natural	scenes	also	offer	more	
redundant
	information.
	The	shape	and
color	of	a	leaf	or	a	hillside	repeat	again	and	again,	a	fact	that	facilitates	the
brain’s	habit	of	making	predictions.	When	in	nature,	we	have	a	good	sense	from
what	we	just	looked	at	of	what	we	will	take	in	with	the	glance	that	follows—
unlike	in	an	urban	setting,	where	we	never	know	what	we’ll	come	upon	next.
“Natural	environments	are	characterized
	by	a	deep	degree	of	perceptual
predictability	and	redundancy,	whereas	urban	scenes	tend	to	consist	of
perceptually	divergent	objects,”	Joye	notes.	“These	divergences	compete	for	our
visual	attention	and	make	urban	scenes	substantially	less	easy	to	grasp	and
process.”
Fractals
	are	one	form	of	redundancy	that	has	attracted	particular	attention
from	scientists.	A	fractal	pattern	is	one	in	which	the	same	motif	is	repeated	at
differing	scales.	Picture	the	frond	of	a	fern,	for	example:	each	segment,	from	the
largest	at	the	base	of	the	plant	to	the	tiniest	at	its	tip,	is	essentially	the	same
shape.	Such	“self-similar”	organization	is	found	not	only	in	plants	but	also	in
clouds	and	flames,	sand	dunes	and	mountain	ranges,	ocean	waves	and	rock
formations,	the	contours	of	coastlines	and	the	gaps	in	tree	canopies.	All	these
phenomena	are	structured	as	forms	built	of	smaller	forms	built	of	still	smaller
forms,	an	order	underlying	nature’s	apparently	casual	disarray.
Fractal	patterns	are	much	more	common	in	nature	than	in	man-made
environments.	Moreover,	nature’s	fractals	are	of	a	distinctive	kind.
Mathematicians	rank	fractal	patterns	according	to	their	complexity	on	a	scale
from	0	to	3;	fractals	found	in	nature	tend	to	fall	in	a	middle	range,	with	a	value
of	between	1.3	and	1.5.	Research	shows	that,	when	presented	with	
computer-
generated	fractal	patterns,	people	prefer	mid-range	fractals
	to	those	that	are	more
or	less	complex.	Studies	have	also	demonstrated	that	looking	at	these	patterns
has	a	soothing	effect
	on	the	human	nervous	system;	measures	of	skin
conductance	reveal	a	dip	in	physiological	arousal	when	subjects	are	shown	mid-
range	fractals.	Likewise,	people	whose	brain	activity	is	being	recorded
	with	EEG
equipment	enter	a	state	that	researchers	call	“wakefully	relaxed”—
--- Page 98 ---
simultaneously	alert	and	at	ease—when	viewing	fractals	like	those	found	in
nature.
There	is	even	evidence	that	our	ability	to	think	clearly	and	solve	problems	is
enhanced	by	encounters	with	these	nature-like	fractals.	Study	participants	asked
to	carry	out	information-search,	map-reading,	and	location-judgment	tasks
within	computerized	“fractal	landscapes”
	did	so	most	efficiently	and	effectively
when	the	complexity	of	the	fractals	fell	within	the	middle	range.	Another
experiment,	led	by	Yannick	Joye,	required	subjects	to	complete	challenging
puzzles
	during	and	after	exposure	to	fractal	patterns	of	varying	complexity.	They
solved	the	puzzles	most	quickly,	easily,	and	accurately	when	the	fractals	they
saw	had	a	structure	similar	to	those	found	in	nature.	It	seems	that	our	brains	are
optimized	to	process	the	fractal	characteristics	of	natural	scenes;	hundreds	of
thousands	of	years	of	evolution	have	“tuned”	our	perceptual	faculties
	to	the	way
visual	information	is	structured	in	natural	environments.	We	may	not	take
conscious	note	of	fractal	patterns,	but	at	a	level	deeper	than	awareness,	these
patterns	reverberate.
Research	on	the	effects	of	fractals	on	the	human	psyche	was	pioneered	by
Richard	Taylor,	a	professor	of	physics,	psychology,	and	art	at	the	University	of
Oregon.	As	his	title	suggests,	Taylor	has	a	dizzyingly	broad	range	of	interests.	A
number	of	years	ago,	he	was	studying	the	fractal	patterns	present	in	the	flow	of
electricity	when	the	forms	he	saw	reminded	him	of	something:	Jackson
Pollock’s	paintings.	Pursuing	this	unexpected	connection,	Taylor	analyzed	a
group	of	Pollock’s	later	works	and	determined	that	they	too	exhibited	a	fractal
pattern,
	with	a	value	in	the	mid-range	of	1.3	to	1.5.	Astonishingly,	Pollock’s	drip
paintings—the	ones	he	made	after	moving	from	New	York	City	to	Springs,
Long	Island—turn	out	to	bear	the	visual	signature	of	nature.	Like	Capability
Brown	and	Humphry	Repton,	the	landscape	architects	who	unconsciously	re-
created	the	characteristic	features	of	the	East	African	savanna,	Pollock	seems	to
have	tapped	into	humanity’s	ancient	affinity	for	the	natural	world.
Take,	for	example,	a	drip	painting	Pollock	completed	in	1948,	known	only	as
Number	14.
	Rendered	in	stark	black,	white,	and	gray,	the	artwork	bears	no
immediate	resemblance	to	the	verdant	vegetation	that	surrounded	the	home	he
shared	with	Lee	Krasner	in	Springs.	A	longer	look	at	the	painting,	however,
draws	the	viewer	deeper	into	its	swoops	and	whorls,	its	intricate	nest	of	thinning
and	thickening	lines.	Says	Richard	Taylor	admiringly,	“If	someone	asked,
	‘Can	I
have	nature	put	onto	a	piece	of	canvas?,’	the	best	example	there	has	ever	been	of
that	is	1948’s	
Number	14.
”
	
--- Page 99 ---
T
IME	SPENT	IN	NATURE
	relieves	stress,	restores	mental	equilibrium,	and	enhances
the	ability	to	focus	and	sustain	attention.	We	spend	most	of	our	time	indoors,
however—so	might	we	find	ways	to	make	inside	more	like	outside?
Environmental	psychologist	Roger	Ulrich	has	asked	this	question,	and	answered
it	in	the	affirmative,	regarding	a	particular	kind	of	built	setting:	hospitals	and
other	health	care	facilities.	Our	ancient	biological	wiring	allows	us	to	“exploit
nature	like	a	drug,”
	says	Ulrich,	now	a	professor	of	architecture	at	Chalmers
University	in	Sweden,	and	he	means	this	almost	literally.	Several	decades	ago,
he	demonstrated	that	exposure	to	nature	relieved	pain	and	promoted	healing
	in
patients	recovering	from	surgery.
Ulrich’s	study,	carried	out	at	a	hospital	in	suburban	Philadelphia,	found	that
patients	who	occupied	rooms	with	a	view	of	trees	required	fewer	painkillers,
experienced	fewer	complications,	and	had	shorter	hospital	stays	than	patients
whose	rooms	looked	out	on	a	brick	wall.	Nurses	also	recorded	many	fewer
negative	notes	about	patients’	state	of	mind—“upset	and	crying,”	“needs	much
encouragement”—for	those	individuals	who	had	a	view	of	greenery.	(Ulrich
recounts	that	the	inspiration	for	the	study	emerged	from	his	own	long-ago
experience:	“As	a	teenager,
	I	had	some	serious	illnesses	that	forced	me	to	spend
time	at	home	in	bed,”	he	says.	“My	window	was	my	compass	of	stability.	Every
day,	I	watched	the	trees	in	the	wind.	There	was	something	endlessly	calming
about	it.”)
Further	research	by	Ulrich	and	other	scientists	has	confirmed	that	exposure	to
natural	elements
	helps	diminish	patients’	pain	and	hasten	their	recovery.	This
work	helped	inspire	a	revolution	in	the	design	of	health	care	facilities,	leading	to
the	renovation	and	construction	of	buildings	that	provide	patients	and	staff	with
natural	light	and	views	of	greenery.	It	
also	led	to	a	raft	of	research	that	has
sought	to	identify	more	precisely	the	effects	of	the	out-of-doors	on	our	bodies.
This	work	has	established	that	nature	is	indeed	a	highly	reliable	and	effective
“drug,”	bioengineered	by	evolution	over	thousands	of	years.	It	appears	to	affect
us	all	in	the	same	fashion:	within	twenty	to	sixty	seconds	of	exposure	to	nature,
our	heart	rate	slows,	our	blood	pressure	drops,
	our	breathing	becomes	more
regular,	and	our	brain	activity	becomes	more	relaxed.
	Even	our	eye	movements
change
:	We	gaze	longer	at	natural	scenes	than	at	built	ones,	shifting	our	focus
less	frequently.	We	blink	less	often	when	viewing	nature	than	when	looking	at
urban	settings,	indicating	that	nature	imposes	a	less	burdensome	cognitive	load.
We	remember	details	of	natural	scenes
	more	accurately,	and	brain	scans	show
that	a	larger	portion	of	the	visual	cortex	is	activated	when	we	look	at	nature,
along	with	a	larger	number	of	the	brain’s	pleasure	receptors.
--- Page 100 ---
Of	course,	it’s	not	only	hospital	patients	who	can	benefit	from	regular	doses	of
this	“drug.”	Our	homes,	schools,	and	workplaces	could	all	become	more
cognitively	congenial	spaces	if	they	were	to	incorporate	elements	of	what	is
known	as	
biophilic	design.
	In	a	book	published	in	1984,	the	Harvard	University
biologist	E.	O.	Wilson	advanced	what	he	called	the	“biophilia	hypothesis”
:	the
notion	that	humans	have	an	“innate	tendency	to	focus	on	life	and	lifelike
processes,”	an	“urge	to	affiliate	with	other	forms	of	life.”	This	urge	is	powerful,
Wilson	argued,	and	our	thinking	(as	well	as	our	health	and	well-being)	suffers
when	it	is	suppressed,	as	it	must	be	when	we	spend	most	of	our	time	surrounded
by	inorganic	forms	and	materials.	Fortunately,	he	adds,	an	alternative	path	has
already	been	mapped	out	for	us:	nature	itself	provides	a	comprehensive	guide	to
the	conditions	in	which	our	minds	and	bodies	work	best.
For	example:	We	know	that	our	brains	thrive	on	the	coherent	organization	and
redundant	information	embedded	in	plant	life—so	why	not	bring	the	green	stuff
inside?	That’s	what	the	managers	of	Second	Home,	a	network	of	co-working
spaces	in	Europe,	have	done.	More	than	a	thousand	plants	fill	the	Second	Home
headquarters	in	London;	when	the	space	opened	in	2014,	E.	O.	Wilson	was
brought	in	to	speak	to	the	Second	Home	staff.	“Everything	we	do	at	Second
Home
	is	inspired	by	nature	and	biophilia,”	says	Rohan	Silva,	one	of	Second
Home’s	cofounders.	Silva	adds	that	the	Second	Home	office	in	Lisbon,	Portugal,
was	modeled	on	a	greenhouse	and	is	home	to	even	more	vegetation—more	than
two	
thousand	plants,	representing	one	hundred	different	varieties,	including
tillandsias,	philodendrons,	and	monsteras.	Research	indicates	that	the	presence
of	indoor	plants
	does	in	fact	improve	employees’	attention	and	memory	and
increases	their	productivity	levels;	for	students,	too,	a	“green	wall”
	in	the
classroom,	sprouting	living	plants,	has	been	shown	to	enhance	their	ability	to
focus.
Greenery	is	only	one	part	of	nature’s	bounty,	of	course,	and	practitioners	of
biophilic	design	have	begun	to	incorporate	other	organic	elements	into	new
construction—of	schools,	office	buildings,	factories,	and	even	skyscrapers.	The
fifty-five-story	Bank	of	America	Tower,
	completed	in	2009,	sits	at	the	corner	of
Bryant	Park	in	midtown	Manhattan;	when	people	arriving	at	the	entrance	reach
for	a	door	handle,	what	they	feel	is	not	steel	or	plastic	but	wood.	“We	wanted	the
first	thing
	visitors	touched	to	have	a	grain,	an	imprint	of	nature,”	says	Bill
Browning,	an	environmental	strategist	who	helped	design	the	space.	Inside	the
lobby,	the	natural	theme	continues:	the	ceilings	are	covered	in	bamboo,	and	the
walls	are	constructed	of	stone	in	which	the	fossils	of	tiny	shells	and	sea	creatures
are	visible.	Even	the	shape	of	the	tower	was	inspired	by	nature;	it	emulates	the
fractal	form	of	a	quartz	crystal.
--- Page 101 ---
Biophilic	design	is	an	emerging	discipline,	but	a	handful	of	studies	have
begun	to	suggest	that	working	and	learning	in	buildings	inspired	by	nature	can
grant	some	of	the	same	benefits	for	cognition	as	actually	being	outdoors.	In	a
study	published	in	2018,	for	example,	a	group	of	researchers	from	Harvard’s	T.
H.	Chan	School	of	Public	Health	asked	participants	to	spend	time	in	an	indoor
environment
	featuring	biophilic	elements	(potted	plants,	a	bamboo-wood	floor,
windows	with	a	view	of	greenery	and	a	river)	as	well	as	an	indoor	environment
lacking	such	elements	(a	windowless,	carpeted,	fluorescent-lit	space).
Participants	were	outfitted	with	wearable	sensors	that	monitored	their	blood
pressure	and	their	skin	conductance;	tests	of	mood	and	cognitive	function	were
administered	following	each	visit.	After	just	five	minutes	in	the	biophilic
surroundings,	the	subjects’	positive	emotions	increased,	their	blood	pressure	and
skin	conductance	dropped,	and	their	short-term	memory	improved	by	14	percent
over	the	level	recorded	following	a	visit	to	the	non-biophilic	environment.
It	may	not	come	as	a	surprise	that	the	people	in	this	study	felt	better	in	the
space	with	windows:	Who	doesn’t	prefer	a	glimpse	of	sun	and	sky	to	
the	sickly
glow	of	fluorescent	panels?	Yet	for	decades,	planners	and	builders	believed	that
thinking	happens	best	under	even,	unchanging	light,	shielded	from	the
undesirable	distractions	and	eye-straining	glare	ostensibly	introduced	by
windows.	These	beliefs	still	shape	the	spaces	in	which	we	learn	and	work	today
—spaces	that	were	often	deliberately	engineered	to	eliminate	the	natural
variations	in	sunlight	that	we	experience	when	outside.	Such	subtle	shifts	in
illumination,	we	now	know,	help	keep	us	alert
	and	help	regulate	our	biological
clocks.	Indeed,	research	shows	that	people	who	experience	natural	light	during
the	day	sleep	better,	feel	more	energetic,	and	are	more	physically	active;	one
study	found	that	employees	exposed	to	daylight	through	windows	in	their	offices
sleep	an	average	of	forty-six	minutes	more
	per	night	than	workers	who	labor	in
windowless	spaces.	The	technology	giant	Google	has	determined
	that	employees
who	have	desks	positioned	near	windows	report	being	more	creative	and
productive	than	do	workers	located	farther	away	from	sources	of	natural	light.
The	company	has	issued	guidelines	for	how	much	daylight	“Googlers”	should	be
getting	at	work,	and	has	asked	some	employees	to	wear	light	sensors	around
their	necks	to	determine	whether	their	workplace	makes	the	grade.
In	addition	to	brainbound	notions	about	the	ideal	conditions	for	thinking,	the
buildings	many	of	us	occupy	today	were	shaped	by	the	energy	crisis	of	the
1970s,
	when	windows	were	commonly	blocked	or	removed	in	the	name	of
energy	conservation.	Today	some	educational	and	business	leaders	are
recognizing	the	folly	of	depriving	students	and	workers	of	natural	light.	At	the
H.	B.	Plant	High	School	in	Tampa,	Florida,	for	example,	the	large	windows	that
--- Page 102 ---
were	closed	off	in	the	1970s	were	recently	restored,	letting	daylight	shine	in	for
the	first	time	in	some	four	decades.	When	new	schools	and	office	buildings	are
constructed,	some	architects	are	now	thinking	in	terms	of	balancing	occupants’
need	for	natural	light	with	the	obligation	to	reduce	costs	and	conserve	energy.	At
PS	62	in	Staten	Island,	New	York—also	known	as	the	Kathleen	Grimm	School
of	Leadership	and	Sustainability—the	school	building	generates	as	much	energy
as	it	consumes,	thanks	to	solar	panels,	a	wind	turbine,	and	heating	and	cooling
systems	powered	by	underground	geothermal	wells.	Completed	in	2015,	the
structure	achieves	“daylight	autonomy”	as	much	as	90	percent	of	the	time:	that
is,	its	classrooms	and	hallways	are	illuminated	almost	entirely	by	the	sun.	In
addition	to	saving	funds	and	
protecting	the	environment,	says	principal	Lisa
Sarnicola,	the	thoughtful	design	of	the	school	building	enlivens	the	students’
education.	“It	changes	the	whole	mood
	of	the	building,”	she	says.	“It	makes	the
children	happy.”
There	is	even	evidence	that	views	of	nature	are	associated	with	improved
academic	performance.	John	Spengler,	a	professor	at	the	Chan	School	of	Public
Health	at	Harvard,	employed	an	ingenious	method	of	gauging	the	“greenness”
	of
school	grounds:	with	satellite	images,	taken	by	a	NASA	spacecraft	from	four
hundred	miles	above	the	earth.	Spengler	and	his	colleagues	analyzed	aerial
photographs	of	public	schools	in	Massachusetts,	determining	the	amount	of
vegetation	present	on	their	grounds,	and	compared	these	measurements	with
scores	on	the	MCAS,	the	statewide	assessment	of	academic	skill,	earned	by
students	in	grades	three	through	ten.	Controlling	for	race,	gender,	family	income,
and	English	as	a	second	language,	among	other	factors,	the	results	“showed	that
a	higher	surrounding	greenness	contributes	to	a	better	English	and	mathematics
academic	performance	in	students	of	all	grades,”	the	researchers	reported.
Another,	more	direct	test	of	the	effect	of	natural	surroundings	was	carried	out
by	William	Sullivan,	a	professor	of	landscape	architecture	at	the	University	of
Illinois,	and	his	colleague	Dongying	Li.	High	school	students	were	randomly
assigned	to	a	room
	with	a	view	of	greenery,	a	room	with	a	view	of	a	building	or
parking	lot,	or	a	windowless	room.	The	researchers	taxed	the	mental	resources	of
the	participants	with	a	series	of	challenging	activities,	including	completing	a
proofreading	exercise,	giving	a	speech,	and	solving	a	set	of	mental	math
problems.	Then	Sullivan	and	Li	administered	a	test	of	attention	to	each
participant,	gave	them	a	ten-minute	break,	and	administered	the	attention	test	a
second	time—all	within	each	participant’s	assigned	room.	The	high	school
students	who	were	able	to	gaze	out	the	window	at	greenery	during	their	break
scored	13	percent	higher	on	the	second	administration	of	the	attention	test;	the
--- Page 103 ---
students	who	looked	out	on	built	surroundings,	or	at	windowless	walls,	did	not
improve	at	all.
The	benefits	of	a	room	with	a	natural	view	hold	for	office	workers	as	well	as
students.	A	study	carried	out	for	the	California	Energy	Commission	examined
the	effects	of	window	access
	on	the	performance	of	two	groups	of	people
employed	by	the	Sacramento	Municipal	Utility	District.	Workers	in	the	district’s
call	center	were	found	to	process	calls	6	to	12	per
cent	faster	when	they	had	the
best	possible	view	(a	nearby	window	looking	onto	a	green	vista)	versus	having
no	view.	And	workers	in	the	district’s	main	office	were	found	to	score	10	to	25
percent	higher	on	tests	of	mental	function	and	memory	recall	when	they	had	the
best	possible	view	versus	having	no	view.
Even	a	brief	glance	out	the	window	can	make	a	difference	in	our	mental
capacity.	Researchers	from	the	University	of	Melbourne	in	Australia	found	that	a
forty-second	“micro-break”
	spent	looking	out	at	a	roof	covered	with	flowering
meadow	plants	led	study	participants	to	perform	better	on	a	cognitive	test	than
did	an	equally	short	break	spent	looking	at	a	bare	concrete	expanse.	Participants
who	gazed	at	the	green	roof	were	more	alert,	made	fewer	errors,	and	were	more
in	control	of	their	attention.	We	can	seek	out	such	“microrestorative
opportunities”
	throughout	the	day,	replenishing	our	mental	resources	with	each
glance	out	the	window.
	
M
ICRORESTORATIVE	EXPERIENCES
	have	their	place	in	busy	workdays	and	school
schedules.	But	longer	stretches	spent	in	nature,	when	we	can	arrange	them,	may
change	how	we	think	in	deeper	and	more	subtle	ways,	altering	how	we
experience	time	and	how	we	think	about	the	future.	“Oh,	these	vast	calm
measureless	mountain	days,”	exclaimed	naturalist	and	author	John	Muir	about
the	time	he	spent	hiking	the	Sierras	in	the	American	West.	In	May	1903	Muir
guided	Theodore	Roosevelt,	then	president	of	the	United	States,	on	a	three-day
camping	trip	through	California’s	Yosemite	Valley.	“The	first	night	we	camped
in	a	grove	of	giant	sequoias,”	Roosevelt	later	recalled.	“It	was	clear	weather,	and
we	lay	in	the	open,	the	enormous	cinnamon-colored	trunks	rising	about	us	like
the	columns	of	a	vaster	and	more	beautiful	cathedral	than	was	ever	conceived	by
any	human	architect.”
As	the	two	men	toured	the	glories	of	Yosemite,	Muir	warned	the	president
that	the	country’s	bountiful	natural	beauty	was	in	danger	of	being	despoiled	if	it
was	not	preserved	by	official	decree.	Muir’s	urgent	message	was	received.	Over
the	next	few	years,	Roosevelt	more	than	tripled	the	square	miles	reserved	for
natural	forests,	doubled	the	number	of	national	parks,	and	established	seventeen
national	monuments,	including	the	Grand	Canyon.	Speaking	to	an	audience	in
--- Page 104 ---
Sacramento	soon	after	he	parted	from	Muir,	Roosevelt	explained	why	the
sequoias	under	which	he	had	reclined	should	be	protected	from	lumbering:	“I
hope	for	
the	preservation
	of	the	groves	of	giant	trees	simply	because	it	would	be
a	shame	to	our	civilization	to	let	them	disappear,”	he	remarked.	“They	are
monuments	in	themselves.”	These	and	other	“natural	resources,”	he	continued,
should	be	“handed	on	unimpaired	to	your	posterity.	We	are	not	building	this
country	of	ours	for	a	day.	It	is	to	last	through	the	ages.”
The	capacity	to	delay	immediate	gratification
	in	favor	of	longer-term	interests
—what	Roosevelt	called	“posterity”—is	one	that	is	strengthened	by	spending
time	in	nature,	research	has	found.	Meredith	Berry,	a	psychologist	at	the
University	of	Florida,	showed	images	of	nature	(mountains,	forests)	and	of	urban
settings	(buildings,	roads)	to	study	participants,	who	were	then	asked	questions
that	measured	their	tendency	to	engage	in	“future	discounting”—that	is,	to	prefer
a	smaller	payoff	right	now	over	a	larger	reward	later.	People	who’d	been
exposed	to	pictures	of	nature	were	more	likely	to	postpone	gratification,
responding	with	less	impulsivity	and	more	self-control	than	people	who	had
looked	at	pictures	of	cities.
Arianne	van	der	Wal,	a	psychologist	at	Leiden	University	in	the	Netherlands,
asked	participants	in	her	study	to	walk	through	a	green,	leafy	area	of
Amsterdam,	or	through	a	busy,	built-up	part	of	the	city.	Afterwards,	she
reported,	the	people	who’d	just	experienced	nature	were	10	to	16	percent	more
likely	to	restrain	their	impulse
	to	satisfy	their	immediate	desires.	Similar	results
have	been	found	with	children:	kids	aged	eight	to	eleven	were	more	capable	of
delaying	gratification
	after	watching	a	video	of	nature	than	after	viewing	a	video
about	cities.	When	we	see	or	experience	an	urban	setting,	we	are	primed	to	feel
competitive,	to	believe	we	need	to	grab	what’s	available.	Nature,	by	contrast,
inspires	a	feeling	of	abundance,	a	reassuring	sense	of	permanence.
The	orientation	toward	the	future	that	is	evoked	by	nature	may	also	be	related
to	the	way	it	changes	our	sense	of	time.	In	another	of	Berry’s	studies,
participants	were	asked	to	estimate	how	many	seconds
	or	minutes	had	passed	in
a	given	period;	people	who	had	just	viewed	scenes	of	nature,	she	found,
perceived	time	as	passing	more	slowly.	Likewise,	research	has	demonstrated	that
people	who	take	a	walk	in	a	natural	setting	overestimate	how	long
	the	walk
lasted,	while	people	who	have	walked	in	an	urban	setting	accurately	estimate	the
amount	of	time	that	elapsed.	Our	perception	of	time	is	malleable,	subject	to	the
influence	of	situational	cues;	
by	reducing	our	arousal	and	increasing	our
attentional	capacity,	exposure	to	nature	grants	us	a	more	expansive	sense	of
time,	and	a	more	generous	attitude	toward	the	future.
--- Page 105 ---
Nature	may	also	lead	us	to	think	more	
creatively.
	Children’s	play	is	more
imaginative
	when	they	are	outdoors	than	when	they	are	inside,	research	has
shown;	natural	play	spaces	are	less	structured	and	more	varied,	and	the	props
children	may	come	across	(leaves,	pebbles,	pinecones)	have	no	purpose
predetermined	by	teachers	or	parents.	For	adults	as	well,	spending	time	in	nature
can	promote	innovative	thinking.	Scientists	theorize	that	the	“soft	fascination”
evoked	by	natural	scenes	engages	what’s	known	as	the	brain’s	“default	mode
network.”	When	this	network	is	activated,	we	enter	a	loose	associative	state	in
which	we’re	not	focused	on	any	one	particular	task	but	are	receptive	to
unexpected	connections	and	insights.	In	nature,	few	decisions	and	choices	are
demanded	of	us,	granting	our	minds	the	freedom	to	follow	our	thoughts
wherever	they	lead.	At	the	same	time,	nature	is	pleasantly	diverting,	in	a	fashion
that	lifts	our	mood	without	occupying	all	our	mental	powers;	such	positive
emotion	in	turn	leads	us	to	think	more	expansively	and	open-mindedly.
	In	the
space	that	is	thus	made	available,	currently	active	thoughts	can	mingle	with	the
deep	stores	of	memories,	emotions,	and	ideas	already	present	in	the	brain,
generating	inspired	collisions.
Nature’s	contributions	to	creative	thought	can	be	felt	on	a	lunchtime	stroll
through	the	park.	But	there	may	be	something	especially	fruitful	about	an
extended	foray	into	wilder	terrain.	David	Strayer	calls	it	the	“three	day	effect.”
Strayer,	a	psychologist	at	the	University	of	Utah,	had	long	observed	that	his
most	original	ideas	came	to	him	on	his	overnight	trips	into	Utah’s	rugged
outback.	For	a	study	published	in	2012,	he	administered	a	measure	of	creative
thinking
	to	groups	of	hikers	in	Alaska,	Colorado,	Maine,	and	Washington	state;
some	completed	the	measure	before	setting	off	on	their	expedition,	while	others
did	so	after	they	had	spent	three	days	in	the	wilderness.	The	results	confirmed
his	own	experience:	the	backpackers’	responses	were	50	percent	more	creative
following	extended	exposure	to	nature.	Strayer,	who	also	studies	the	distracting
effects	of	digital	media,	believes	that	an	enforced	separation	from	phones	and
computers	played	no	small	part	in	the	hikers’	increased	ability	to	think
creatively.	Our	electronics	are	deliberately	engineered	to	grab	our	
attention	and
not	let	it	go;	our	devices	work	against	the	diffuse	mental	processes	that	generate
creativity,	and	escaping	into	nature	is	one	of	the	only	ways	we	can	leave	them
behind.
There’s	another	way	in	which	the	digital	respite	we	get	in	nature	could
enhance	our	creativity.	The	time	we	spend	scrutinizing	our	small	screens	leads
us	to	
think
	small,	even	as	it	enlarges	and	aggrandizes	our	sense	of	self.	Nature’s
vastness—the	unfathomable	scale	of	the	ocean,	of	the	mountains,	of	the	night
sky—has	the	opposite	effect.	It	makes	us	feel	tiny,
	even	as	it	opens	wide	our
--- Page 106 ---
sense	of	the	possible.	It	does	all	this	through	an	emotion	that	we	confront	most
commonly	in	nature:	awe.	Dacher	Keltner,	a	professor	of	psychology	at	the
University	of	California,	Berkeley,	has	led	much	of	the	recent	research	on	awe;
he	calls	it	an	emotion	“in	the	upper	reaches	of	pleasure
	and	on	the	boundary	of
fear.”
One	of	the	pleasurably	fearsome	things	about	awe	is	the	radically	new
perspective	it	introduces.	Our	everyday	experience	does	not	prepare	us	to
assimilate	the	gaping	hugeness	of	the	Grand	Canyon	or	the	crashing	grandeur	of
Niagara	Falls.	We	have	no	response	at	the	ready;	our	usual	frames	of	reference
don’t	fit,	and	we	must	work	to	accommodate
	the	new	information	that	is
streaming	in	from	the	environment.	Consider	the	physical	behavior	that
accompanies	awe
:	we	stop,	we	pause,	we	stare	with	eyes	wide	and	features
slack,	as	if	to	let	in	more	of	the	scene	that	has	so	astonished	us.	The	experience
of	awe,	Keltner	and	other	researchers	have	found,	prompts	a	predictable	series	of
psychological	changes.	We	become	less	reliant	on	preconceived	notions	and
stereotypes.	We	become	more	curious	and	open-minded.
	And	we	become	more
willing	to	revise	and	update
	our	mental	“schemas”:	the	templates	we	use	to
understand	ourselves	and	the	world.	The	experience	of	awe	has	been	called	“a
reset	button”
	for	the	human	brain.	But	we	can’t	generate	a	feeling	of	awe,	and	its
associated	processes,	all	on	our	own;	we	have	to	venture	out	into	the	world,	and
find	something	bigger	than	ourselves,	in	order	to	experience	this	kind	of	internal
change.
Scientists	who	study	awe	have	also	found	that	it	alters	the	way	we	regard
other	people.	Brain	scans	of	people	who	are	experiencing	awe	find	that	the
region	of	the	brain	that	contributes	to	our	sense	of	occupying	and	orienting
ourselves	in	space	becomes	less	active.	This	diminished	activity	would	seem	to
underlie	the	feeling	we	have	when	awestruck	that	the	boundaries	between
ourselves	and	others	have	become	more	permeable,	
that	we	are	part	of	a	larger,
connected	whole.	In	behavioral	terms,	people	act	more	prosocially
	and	more
altruistically
	following	an	experience	of	awe.	They	share	and	cooperate	more	in
games	after	having	watched	a	video	of	sublime	scenes	of	nature;	after	having
gazed	up	at	a	grove	of	old-growth	trees,	an	experiment	found,	people	were	more
likely	to	bend	down	and	help	pick	up	pens	that	a	stranger	(actually	a	confederate
of	the	researcher)	had	dropped	on	the	ground.
The	“functional”	account	of	awe
—biologists’	and	psychologists’	attempt	at
explaining	
why
	we	feel	this	emotion—proposes	that	it	spurs	humans	to	put	aside
their	individual	interests
	in	the	service	of	a	collective	project.	Members	of	the
species	who	were	inclined	to	feel	awe,	the	story	goes,	were	better	able	to	band
together	to	accomplish	essential	tasks.	By	extending	ordinary	thinking	with	awe
--- Page 107 ---
at	nature’s	immensity,	humankind	may	have	ensured	its	own	survival—a
reminder	to	us,	perhaps,	to	look	away	from	our	small	screens	long	enough	to
confront	the	dangers	that	threaten	our	kind	and	our	planet	today.
	
T
HE	OCCASIONS	FOR
	awe	available	to	our	forebears	are	the	same	ones	that	move
us	now:	mountains,	oceans,	trees,	sky.	But	there	is	one	all-encompassing
encounter	with	the	natural	world	that,	to	date,	has	been	experienced	by	only	a
handful	of	our	contemporaries:	the	view	of	Earth	from	outer	space,	as	glimpsed
by	astronauts.	So	emotionally	overwhelming	is	this	sight—and	so	consistent	are
the	psychological	consequences	for	the	few	who	have	seen	it—that	scientists
have	given	it	a	name:	“the	overview	effect.”
	“If	somebody’d	said	before	the
flight,
	‘Are	you	going	to	get	carried	away	looking	at	the	earth	from	the	moon?’	I
would	have	said,	‘No,	no	way,’
 
”	recalled	Alan	Shepard,	an	American	astronaut
who	walked	on	the	moon	in	1971.	“But	yet	when	I	first	looked	back	at	the	earth,
standing	on	the	moon,	I	cried.”
This	emotional	reaction	to	the	sight	of	Earth—to	its	beauty,	to	its	fragility—is
one	persistent	motif	noted	by	David	Yaden,	a	research	fellow	at	Johns	Hopkins
University	who	has	studied	astronauts’	accounts	of	their	flights.	A	second
recurring	theme	is	the	dissolution	of	the	boundaries	and	barriers	that	divide	those
of	us	here	on	the	ground.	From	up	in	outer	space,	recounted	astronaut	Rusty
Schweickart,	“you	identify	with	Houston
	and	then	you	identify	with	Los	Angeles
and	Phoenix	and	New	Orleans	.
 
.
 
.	and	that	whole	process	of	what	it	is	you
identify	with	begins	to	
shift	when	you	go	around	the	Earth	.
 
.
 
.	You	look	down
and	see	the	surface	of	that	globe	you’ve	lived	on	all	this	time,	and	you	know	all
those	people	down	there	and	they	are	like	you,	they	
are
	you	.
 
.
 
.	You	recognize
that	you’re	a	piece	of	this	total	life.”	Astronaut	Edgar	Mitchell	recalled	an
“explosion	of	awareness”
	upon	seeing	Earth	from	space,	an	experience	that	gave
him	an	“overwhelming	sense	of	oneness
	and	connectedness.”
Paradoxically,	the	intense	feelings	of	connection	felt	by	space	travelers	are
often	pierced	by	equally	powerful	feelings	of	dislocation	and	alienation.	When
they’re	not	marveling	at	the	sight	of	Earth	on	the	horizon,	astronauts	must
contend	with	what	many	describe	as	a	stultifying	environment,	tightly	confined,
filled	with	highly	technical	instruments	but	with	none	of	the	features	that	ease	or
delight	the	human	mind.	The	result	may	be	boredom,	ennui,	anxiety,	even
aggression	toward	other	crew	members.	How	to	preserve	the	psychological	well-
being
	of	astronauts	has	emerged	as	a	compelling	question	as	the	prospect	of
long-term	space	travel	draws	closer.	One	possible	answer	has	already	shown
some	promise:	have	them	grow	green	things.
--- Page 108 ---
When	NASA	astronaut	Michael	Foale	arrived	at	the	joint	American-Russian
space	station	Mir	in	1997,	one	of	the	tasks	he	was	assigned	was	tending	to	the
station’s	greenhouse.	He	carried	out	a	variety	of	experiments	intended	to
investigate	how	plants	grow	in	space;	if	astronauts	are	to	spend	months	and	even
years	onboard,	they	will	need	to	have	a	supply	of	fresh	food.	And	indeed,	Foale
did	succeed	in	growing,	and	tasting,	what	the	astronauts	called	“space	broccoli.”
That	required	figuring	out	how	to	use	light	to	guide	the	broccoli	seedlings	in	the
right	direction;	without	gravity,	they	didn’t	know	to	grow	“up.”	Without	bees	to
pollinate	the	mizuna	(a	salad	green),	Foale	himself	had	to	do	the	job,	gently
transferring	pollen	from	one	plant	to	another	with	a	toothpick.
Foale	took	such	care	with	his	plants	that	the	team	on	the	ground	at	NASA
nicknamed	him	“Farmer	Foale.”
	But	the	space	garden	was	of	more	than
utilitarian	value.	“I	loved	the	greenhouse	experiment,”
	said	Foale	at	a	press
conference	after	returning	from	Mir.	Maintaining	a	greenhouse	on	a	long-range
space	flight,	such	as	a	trip	to	Mars,	“would	be	essential,”	Foale	added,	“because
there	would	be	so	little	to	do	in	that	long	period	in	between	planets,	and	growing
and	tending	plants	is	certainly	a	very	soothing	thing	to	do.”	Of	the	plants	under
his	care,	he	said,	“I	enjoyed	
looking	at	them	every	morning	for	about	ten,	fifteen
minutes.	It	was	a	moment	of	quiet	time.”
Psychologists	who	study	the	psyches	of	astronauts—many	of	whom	already
spend	months	at	a	time	on	space	stations	orbiting	Earth—use	a	telling	word	for
the	malaise	that	many	experience:	such	individuals,	they	say,	are	“homesick.”
It’s	possible	to	perceive	an	unsettling	similarity	between	these	space	travelers,
starved	for	the	Earth	they	can	see	only	through	a	window,	and	ourselves—sealed
in	our	capsules	of	home	and	car	and	office,	separated	from	the	verdant
vegetation,	fresh	air,	and	ever-shifting	sunlight	that	is	our	natural	habitat.	When
we’re	outdoors,	“we	feel	‘at	home’
	because	we	remain,	in	part,	the	children	of
our	ancestral	past,”	the	architect	Harry	Francis	Mallgrave	has	written.	That	past
lives	on	in	the	way	we	think	when	we	open	the	door	and	go	outside.
--- Page 109 ---
5
Thinking	with	Built	Spaces
J
ONAS	SALK	WAS	STUCK.
	For	years	the	young	medical	researcher	had	been
working	sixteen	hours	a	day,	seven	days	a	week,	in	a	small	basement	laboratory
in	Pittsburgh,	trying	to	develop	a	vaccine	for	polio.	In	the	spring	of	1954,
exhausted	and	out	of	ideas,	Salk	realized	he	had	to	take	leave	of	the	lab
	to
refresh	his	mind.	He	found	the	solitude	and	tranquility	he	sought	at	the	Basilica
of	Saint	Francis	of	Assisi,	a	thirteenth-century	monastery	in	central	Italy.
For	several	weeks	Salk	read	and	thought	and	walked	amid	the	monastery’s
whitewashed	colonnades	and	arches,	its	quiet	courtyards,	its	chapel	filled	with
light	pouring	in	from	tall	windows.	During	this	time	he	experienced	an
intellectual	breakthrough—one	he	attributed	to	the	buildings	themselves.	“The
spirituality	of	the	architecture
	there	was	so	inspiring	that	I	was	able	to	do
intuitive	thinking	far	beyond	any	I	had	done	in	the	past,”	Salk	would	later	write.
“Under	the	influence	of	that	historic	place	I	intuitively	designed	the	research	that
I	felt	would	result	in	a	vaccine	for	polio.	I	returned	to	my	laboratory	in
Pittsburgh	to	validate	my	concepts	and	found	that	they	were	correct.”
But	this	is	not	the	end	of	the	story.	Less	than	ten	years	after	his	visit	to	Assisi,
Salk	had	the	opportunity	to	build	an	intellectual	community
	from	the	ground	up
—to	create	a	space	where	scientists	like	him	would	do	their	thinking.	Together
with	his	architect,	Louis	Kahn,	he	set	out	to	design	the	ideal	place	for	reflection
and	discovery.	They	modeled	the	new	institute	on	a	monastery.	In	his
discussions	with	Kahn,	Salk	specifically	invoked	the	basilica	at	Assisi;	the
architect	knew	it	well,	having	visited	it	
and	sketched	it	years	earlier.	Kahn
imbued	his	design	with	references	to	the	monastery	both	subtle	and	overt.
The	resulting	complex	of	buildings—the	Salk	Institute	in	La	Jolla,	California,
completed	in	1965—has	been	recognized	as	a	masterpiece	of	modern
architecture.	Its	structures	are	monumental,	even	austere.	But	they	are	also
carefully	designed	to	fit	the	needs	of	the	people	who	work	inside	them.	Natural
--- Page 110 ---
light	is	everywhere,	even	on	the	floors	located	belowground,	thanks	to	sunken
courtyards	and	light	wells.	The	laboratories	feature	wide	swaths	of	unobstructed
space;	through	an	ingenious	construction	technique,	Kahn	managed	to	create
entire	floors	free	of	interior	columns.	Mechanical	elements	like	ducts	and	piping
are	located	on	alternating	floors,	so	that	repairs	and	updates	can	be	made	without
disturbing	the	scientists	as	they	work.	Set	apart	from	the	labs	are	the	scientists’
studies,	each	of	which	offers	a	view	of	the	Pacific	Ocean.	The	researchers	who
work	there,	including	a	number	of	Nobel	Prize	winners,	report	that	it	is	an
optimal	place	to	think.
	Salk	professed	himself	pleased	with	the	result:	“I	would
say	the	building
	is	as	close	to	perfection	as	anything	possible.”
For	centuries,	architects	like	Louis	Kahn	have	thought	about	how	to	create
spaces	that	evoke	particular	states	of	mind.	There	is	an	even	longer	tradition	of
folk	architecture
	embedded	in	the	structures	ordinary	people	have	created	for
themselves,	tweaking	and	tuning	inherited	forms.	Now	the	emerging	field	of
“neuroarchitecture”
	has	begun	to	examine	empirically	how	the	brain	responds	to
buildings	and	their	interiors,	and	to	theorize	about	how	these	reactions	might	be
shaped	by	our	evolutionary	history	and	by	the	biological	facts	of	our	bodies.
Given	all	this	thought	and	care,	it’s	puzzling	and	dispiriting	that	many	of	us
learn	and	work	and	live	in	spaces	that	don’t	help	us	think	effectively.	One	reason
for	this:	our	culture	does	not	hold	the	built	environment	in	especially	high
regard;	many	individuals	and	institutions	seem	of	the	view	that	it	doesn’t	much
matter,	that	we	should	be	able	to	engage	in	productive	mental	labor	no	matter
what	the	setting.	Second,	thoughtful	design	takes	time	and	money,	and	there	is
always	the	pressure	to	build	quickly	and	cut	costs.	A	third	reason,	it	must	be
said,	is	architects	and	designers	themselves,	and	the	tyranny	of	their	bold	ideas.
As	we’ll	see	in	this	chapter,	their	edgy	experiments	and	avant-garde	adventures
have	often	created	difficulties	for	the	people	who	must	live	inside	them	every
day.
Even	Louis	Kahn	could	fall	into	this	trap.	A	few	years	before	he	designed	the
Salk	Institute,	he	received	a	commission	to	build	the	Richards	Medical	Research
Laboratories	at	the	University	of	Pennsylvania.	Kahn’s	design	was	hailed	as	a
triumph	by	architectural	critics;	it	even	earned	him	an	exhibit	at	the	Museum	of
Modern	Art.	But	from	the	perspective	of	the	people	who	worked	in	the	building,
it	was	a	disaster
:	cramped,	dark,	confusing	to	navigate—hardly	the	sort	of	place
to	evoke	a	eureka	moment	of	discovery.	Kahn	corrected	course	with	his	next
project,	placing	the	needs	of	the	buildings’	occupants	at	the	heart	of	the	plan	for
the	Salk	Institute.
During	this	busy	time	in	Kahn’s	professional	life,	an	equally	robust
intellectual	project	was	unfolding	halfway	across	the	country,	in	Oskaloosa,
--- Page 111 ---
Kansas.	Psychologist	Roger	Barker	had	set	out
	to	discover	why	people	behave	as
they	do	by	recording	their	activities	in	minute	detail	as	they	went	about	their
everyday	lives.	With	his	colleague	Herbert	Wright,	he	set	up	the	Midwest
Psychological	Field	Station	in	Oskaloosa	(population	750),	and	began	following
a	group	of	children	from	the	instant	they	woke	up	in	the	morning	to	the	moment
they	were	put	to	bed	at	night.
From	their	exhaustive	observations,	a	distinct	pattern	emerged.	As	one	scholar
notes,	“Barker	and	his	colleagues
	found	that	there	was	a	great	deal	of	order,
consistency,	and	predictability	in	the	children’s	behavior.”	But	this	order	was	not
a	product	of	the	children’s	personalities,	nor	their	intelligence,	nor	any	other
internal	quality.	Rather,	the	factor	that	overwhelmingly	determined	the	way	the
children	acted	was	the	
place
	in	which	they	were	observed.	As	Barker	himself
reported,	“The	characteristics	of	the	behavior
	of	a	child	often	changed
dramatically	when	he	moved	from	one	region	to	another,	e.g.	from	classroom,	to
hall,	to	playground,	from	drugstore	to	street,	from	baseball	game	to	shower
room.”
Barker’s	“Midwest	Study,”	which	ultimately	extended	over	a	quarter-century,
generated	reams	of	evidence	that	the	spaces	in	which	we	spend	our	time
powerfully	shape	the	way	we	think	and	act.	It	is	
not
	the	case	that	we	can	muster
the	ability	to	perform	optimally	no	matter	the	setting—a	truth	that	architects
have	long	acknowledged,	even	as	our	larger	society	has	dismissed	it.	Christopher
Alexander,	author	of	the	classic	book	
A	Pattern	Language
	and	an	architect	who
celebrates	the	hard-earned	wisdom	embedded	in	folk	architecture,	laments	“the
arrogance	of	the	belief
	that	the	individual	is	self-sufficient,	and	not	dependent	in
any	
essential	way	on	his	surroundings.”	To	the	contrary,	Alexander	writes,	“a
person	is	so	far	formed	by	his	surroundings,	that	his	state	of	harmony	depends
entirely	on	his	harmony	with	his	surroundings.”	He	adds:	“Some	kinds	of
physical	and	social	circumstances	help	a	person	come	to	life.	Others	make	it
very	difficult.”
Today,	we	too	often	learn	and	work	in	spaces	that	are	far	from	being	in
harmony	with	our	human	nature,	that	in	fact	make	intelligent	and	effective
thinking	“very	difficult.”	Yet	the	built	environment—when	we	know	how	to
arrange	it—can	produce	just	the	opposite	effect:	it	can	sharpen	our	focus;	it	can
sustain	our	motivation;	it	can	enhance	our	creativity	and	enrich	our	experience	of
daily	life.	A	tour	through	recent	research	in	psychology	and	neuroscience,	and
through	the	varied	kinds	of	places	that	humans	have	long	created,	can	show	us
how	to	turn	space	into	an	extension	of	our	minds.
	
--- Page 112 ---
A
PART	FROM	OFFERING
	shelter	from	the	elements,	the	most	critical	function	of	a
built	interior	is	simply	to	give	us	a	quiet	place	to	think.	Such	protected	space	is
necessary	because	thinking—at	least	of	the	kind	the	modern	world	expects	of	us
—doesn’t	come	naturally	to	the	human	animal.	Throughout	the	long	history	of
our	species,	we	did	our	cogitating	out	in	the	open,	in	the	moment,	often	on	the
run,	relying	on	instinct	and	memory	far	more	than	considered	reflection	or
careful	analysis.	It	was	only	when	we	found	ourselves	compelled	to	concentrate
in	a	sustained	way	on	abstract	concepts	that	we	needed	to	sequester	ourselves	in
order	to	think.	To	attend	for	hours	at	a	time	to	words,	numbers,	and	other
symbolic	content	is	a	tall	order	for	our	brains.	Maintaining	this	intensely	narrow
focus	is	a	highly	unnatural	activity,	and	our	minds	require	external	structure	in
order	to	pull	it	off.
Historically,	society’s	demand	for	increasingly	abstract	thought	combined
with	the	growing	density	of	human	habitation	to	create	a	need	for	such	structure:
that	is,	for	walls.	Walls	became	necessary	as	a	way	of	relieving	the	mental	strain
that	comes	along	with	closely	packed	populations	of	unfamiliar	others.	For	most
of	human	history,	after	all,	people	lived	with	their	family	members	in	one-room
dwellings.	Everyone	they	knew	lived	not	far	from	their	front	door,	and	it	was
useful	to	keep	track	of	others’	comings	and	goings.	Even	medieval	kings	and
queens	lived	in	
a	single	large	hall,	filled	with	their	chosen	attendants	and
counselors.	But	with	the	emergence	of	cities	and	their	crowds	of	unacquainted
people,	urban	residents	began	to	seek	out	spaces	in	which	to	read,	think,	and
write—alone.
“The	wall	was	designed
	to	protect	us	from	the	cognitive	load	of	having	to
keep	track	of	the	activities	of	strangers,”	observes	Colin	Ellard,	an
environmental	psychologist	and	neuroscientist	at	the	University	of	Waterloo	in
Canada.	“This	became	increasingly	important	as	we	moved	from	tiny	agrarian
settlements	to	larger	villages	and,	eventually,	to	cities—where	it	was	too
difficult	to	keep	track	of	who	was	doing	what	to	whom.”	The	privacy	afforded
by	walls	represented	a	truly	revolutionary	extension	of	the	mind,	maintains	John
Locke,	professor	of	linguistics	at	Lehman	College	of	the	City	University	of	New
York.	“Our	distant	ancestors
	could	see	each	other	at	all	times,	which	kept	them
safe	but	also	imposed	a	huge	cognitive	cost,”	he	notes.	“When	residential	walls
were	erected,	they	eliminated	the	need	to	look	around	every	few	seconds	to	see
what	others	were	doing.”	The	result,	he	says,	was	that	“a	human	vigil,	one
beginning	with	ancestors	that	we	share	with	apes,	was	reduced	to	manageable
proportions,	freeing	up	many	hours	of	undistracted	time	per	day.”
An	early	example	of	such	walls	can	be	found	amid	the	hubbub	of	today’s
Manhattan,	tucked	away	inside	the	Metropolitan	Museum	of	Art.	There,	among
--- Page 113 ---
the	Grecian	urns	and	the	colonial-era	silver,	is	a	tiny	gem	of	a	room,	re-created
as	it	was	in	fifteenth-century	Perugia:	the	
studiolo
	of	Federico	da	Montefeltro,
Duke	of	Urbino.	Federico,	whose	title	called	on	him	to	be	variously	a	royal,	a
politician,	and	a	warrior,	lived	in	the	town	of	Gubbio	in	what	is	now	central
Italy.	The	walls	of	the	study	allowed	the	duke,	a	lover	of	literature,	architecture,
and	mathematics,	to	retreat	from	the	company	of	the	townspeople	he	ruled	into
quiet	study	and	contemplation.	And	because	his	
studiolo
	was	constructed	in
Renaissance	Italy,	these	were	no	ordinary	walls.	Craftsmen	from	Siena,
Florence,	and	Naples	created	elaborate	trompe	l’oeil	murals	made	entirely	of
inlaid	wood,	a	technique	called	
intarsia.
In	slivers	of	rosewood,	oak,	and	beech,	these	designs	depict	in	precise	detail
(and	in	linear	perspective,	a	then	newly	invented	technique)	simulated	cabinets
full	of	precious	objects—each	one	a	symbol	of	what	the	duke	most	admired	and
to	which	he	most	aspired.	A	lute	and	a	harp	showed	he	was	a	man	of	culture;	a
mace	and	a	pair	of	spurs	represented	
his	skill	in	battle;	a	bound	volume	of
Virgil’s	
Aeneid
	was	a	sign	of	his	erudition.	Incorporated	into	every	corner	of	the
space	were	mottos	and	motifs	that	represented	the	duke’s	personal,	familial,	and
regional	identity.
Federico’s	version	of	a	private	study	was	extraordinary,	but	in	the	centuries
that	followed,	as	people	continued	to	flock	from	the	countryside	to	the	cities,
such	“thinking	rooms”	served	a	need
	that	became	more	and	more	common.	The
fad	for	the	
studiolo
	spread	north	through	Europe,	as	people	of	means	added	such
rooms	to	their	homes.	Like	Federico’s	study,	these	spaces	often	featured	displays
of	meaningful	or	sacred	objects:	collections	of	books,	scientific	and	musical
instruments,	religious	relics.	And	they	carved	out	a	space	of	undisturbed	quiet—
space	that	made	deep,	fresh	thinking	possible.	For	one	of	the	sixteenth	century’s
most	original	thinkers,	Michel	de	Montaigne,	the	study	became	a	central
metaphor	for	the	freedom	of	thought	he	prized.	(Montaigne,	it	should	be	noted,
was	not	only	a	man	of	letters	but	also	mayor	of	the	city	of	Bordeaux.)	Amid	the
hustle	and	bustle	of	social	and	commercial	life,	“we	must	reserve	a	back	room,
wholly	our	own	and	entirely	free,	wherein	to	settle	our	true	liberty,	our	principal
solitude	and	retreat,”	wrote	Montaigne	in	his	essay	“Of	Solitude.”	Montaigne’s
term	for	this	room—
arrière-boutique,
	or	literally	“behind	the	shop”—speaks	to
the	close	relationship	between	busy	engagement	and	quiet	withdrawal.	In	this
room,	Montaigne	added,	“we	must	for	the	most	part	entertain	ourselves	with
ourselves.”
For	many	of	us,	that	space	has	now	largely	disappeared;	starting	in	the	middle
of	the	twentieth	century,	the	walls	that	had	gone	up	hundreds	of	years	earlier
began	to	come	down.	In	every	sort	of	building—homes,	schools,	offices—walls
--- Page 114 ---
that	had	once	been	welcomed	as	guardians	of	discrete	or	dedicated	spaces	were
now	disparaged	as	interruptions	of	a	desired	“openness.”	An	unstructured	space
of	potential	came	to	feel	preferable	to	a	closed-off	space	of	definition.	This
development	was	especially	apparent	in	the	places	where	we	work.	By	the
beginning	of	our	own	century,	some	70	to	80	percent	of	American	office
workers
	labored	in	open-plan	rooms.
Why	did	the	wall-less	workspace	triumph	over	the	private	office?	For	one
thing,	it’s	cheaper.	Open-plan	office	space	can	cost	as	much	as	50	percent	less
per	employee	than	more	traditional	office	layouts	because	of	its	smaller	footprint
and	lower	interior	construction	costs.	But	there	was	also	a	theoretical	rationale
behind	the	enthusiasm	for	open	offices
 
—a	bold	idea,	if	you	will.	The	idea	is
this:	take	down	the	walls,	throw	everybody	together	in	one	big	room,	and
communication	will	flow,	with	increased	collaboration	and	creativity	sure	to
follow.
The	notion	of	promoting	collisions	in	a	shared	space	comes	with	an	appealing
historical	and	intellectual	pedigree.	The	coffeehouse,	as	author	Steven	Johnson
has	told	us	in	his	influential	writings	on	“where	ideas	come	from,”	is	the	arena
where	the	modern	world	was	born.	These	buzzy	gathering	places,	Johnson
writes,	“fertilized	countless	Enlightenment-era	innovations;
	everything	from	the
science	of	electricity,	to	the	insurance	industry,	to	democracy	itself.”	New	ideas,
he	argues,	arise	out	of	“the	collisions	that	happen	when	different	fields	of
expertise	converge	in	some	shared	physical	or	intellectual	space.”
For	example:	during	the	years	he	lived	in	London,	from	1764	to	1775,
Benjamin	Franklin	spent	many	hours	at	a	coffeehouse
	near	St.	Paul’s	Cathedral.
In	his	book	
The	Invention	of	Air,
	Johnson	recounts	how	Franklin	mingled	there
with	a	group	of	“freethinkers”—scientists,	mathematicians,	philosophers—who
stimulated	and	inspired	one	another	through	their	wide-ranging	conversations.
“There	should	be	a	plaque
	to	commemorate	that	coffeehouse,”	Johnson	has	said.
“It	was	really	a	tremendously	generative	space.”	Today’s	leaders	and	managers
have	seized	on	this	notion:	get	people	to	“collide”	with	one	another,	the	thinking
goes,	and	magic	will	happen.	How	better	to	promote	collisions	than	to	remove
the	physical	barriers	that	would	keep	them	from	happening?
And,	in	fact,	it	
is
	the	case	that	people	who	work	near	one	another	are	more
likely	to	communicate	and	collaborate.	This	finding	was	first	demonstrated	more
than	forty	years	ago	by	Thomas	Allen,	a	professor	at	MIT	who	drew	what	has
come	to	be	known	as	the	“Allen	curve.”
	The	curve	describes	a	consistent
relationship	between	physical	distance	and	frequency	of	communication:	the	rate
of	people’s	interactions	declines	exponentially	with	the	distance	between	the
spaces	where	they	work.	This	would	mean,	for	example,	that	people	sitting	six
--- Page 115 ---
feet	apart	are	four	times	more	likely	to	talk	regularly	than	people	seated	sixty-
five	feet	apart.	Allen	found	that	fifty	meters	(about	165	feet)	was	the	cutoff	point
for	regular	information	exchange;	beyond	that	distance,	routine	communication
effectively	ceased.	People	who	are	located	close	to	one	another	are	more	likely
to	encounter	one	another,	and	it’s	these	encounters	that	spark	informal
exchanges,	interdisciplinary	ideas,	and	fruitful	collaborations.
Allen	further	observed	that	shared	spaces	through	which	every	member	of	an
organization	passes	at	least	once	a	day	are	especially	useful	encounter
promoters.	He	offered	as	an	example	MIT’s	“Infinite	Corridor,”	an	825-foot-
long	hallway	that	runs	through	several	buildings,	effectively	extending	from	one
side	of	the	campus	to	the	other.	(That’s	longer	than	two	football	fields,	although
MIT	students	are	less	apt	to	be	interested	in	football	than	in	.
 
.
 
.	other	things.
Undergraduates	at	the	university	celebrate	the	moment	each	school	year	when
the	sun	lines	up	in	just	the	right	spot	to	beam	its	rays	directly	down	the	long
hallway.	They	call	it	MIThenge.)
	More	recent	research	has	confirmed	Allen’s
original	findings;	in	the	age	of	texting,	email,	and	Slack,	the	Allen	curve	still
applies.
	Online	communication,	it	seems,	is	no	substitute	for	the	offhand
conversation,	the	casual	exchange	carried	out	in	person.
	
B
UT:	FRUITFUL	PROXIMITY
	is	one	thing;	continual	distraction	born	of	unenclosed,
unprotected	spaces	is	another.	Appealing	though	it	may	be	to	modern
sensibilities,	the	coffeehouse	was	always	a	terrible	model	for	a	place	in	which
complex,	cognitively	demanding	work	is	to	be	carried	out.	That’s	because	the
conditions	created	by	the	open-plan	workspace	are	in	direct	conflict	with	the
unalterable	realities	of	human	biology.	The	brain	evolved	to	continually	monitor
its	immediate	environment—to	be,	in	effect,	distractible,	lest	nearby	sounds	or
movements	signal	a	danger	to	be	avoided	or	an	opportunity	to	be	seized.	And
organizational	environments	are	full	of	the	kind	of	stimuli	that	distract	us	most.
First:	humans	are	especially	attuned	to	the	presence	of	
novelty,
	to	whatever
appears	new	and	different.	The	pull	of	the	novel	on	our	attention	is	an	efficient
evolved	strategy;	it	would	be	a	waste	of	our	time	and	energy	to	keep	noticing	the
many	things	around	us	that	don’t	change	from	day	to	day.	But	our	selective
attraction	to	the	fresh	and	new	becomes	a	problem	when	we	operate	in
environments	that	are	hubs	of	constant	activity	and	change.	Psychologist	Fabrice
Parmentier,	who	researches	the	effects	of	acoustic	distraction,	reports	that
unexpected	sounds	“ineluctably	break	through
	attentional	filters,”	and	end	up
distracting	those	who	hear	them—“regardless	of	the	sound’s	informational
value.”	Our	attention,	he	notes,	is	subject	to	“involuntary	capture”
	by	any	sudden
or	surprising	noise.
--- Page 116 ---
Second:	we	are	especially	attuned	to	the	sound	of	
speech,
	especially	when	the
words	are	distinct	enough	to	make	out.	Any	ambient	noise	can	
grab	our
attention,	but	intelligible	speech	is	particularly	distracting,
	because	its	semantic
meaning	is	processed
	by	our	brains	whether	or	not	we	want	to	be	listening.
What’s	more,	the	speech	we	can’t	help	overhearing	is	processed	by	the	same
brain	regions	we	employ	to	carry	out	the	kind	of	knowledge	work	done	at	the
office,	like	analyzing	data	or	writing	a	report.	Involuntarily	auditing	speech,	and
trying	to	complete	tasks	involving	words	or	other	symbols,	means	drawing	on
the	same	limited	resource,
	with	the	result	that	we	have	“less	brain”	to	devote	to
each.	In	a	2014	study	conducted	by	researchers	from	the	University	of	Gävle	in
Sweden,	participants	were	asked	to	write
	short	essays	under	five	different
acoustic	conditions.	Background	noise	in	the	five	conditions	ranged	from	0.08	to
0.71	on	a	measure	called	the	Speech	Transmission	Index—that	is,	from
completely	unintelligible	speech,	to	somewhat	intelligible	speech,	to	crystal-
clear	speech.	The	participants’	writing	fluency,	the	investigators	reported,
dropped	“drastically”	at	Speech	Transmission	Index	values	above	0.23—levels
that,	they	note,	“would	not	be	at	all	uncommon”	in	an	open-plan	office.
Third:	we	are	especially	attuned	to	the	nuances	of	
social	interactions,
	alert	to
what	people	say	to	one	another,	and	to	what	we	think	they	
will
	say.	In	an	effort
to	master	our	interpersonal	world,	we’re	constantly	making	predictions	about
what	will	unfold	in	the	social	exchanges	that	go	on	around	us.	Our	habit	of
projecting	forward	makes	it	especially	hard	for	us	to	tune	out	one-sided
conversations,
	such	as	those	we	hear	when	others	near	us	are	talking	on	the
phone.	Research	by	Lauren	Emberson,	an	assistant	professor	of	psychology	at
Princeton	University,	has	found	that	we	are	more	distracted,	and	our	cognitive
performance	more	impaired,	when	we	overhear	what	she	calls	a	“halfalogue”
than	when	we	catch	both	sides	of	an	in-person	dialogue.	When	we	hear	only	half
of	a	conversation,	it’s	more	difficult	to	predict	when	the	speaker	will	pause	or
resume	talking,	and	what	that	person	will	say	to	their	unheard-by-us
conversational	partner.	In	a	study	Emberson	published	in	2010,	participants
asked	to	complete	verbal	and	motor	tasks	started	to	make	mistakes	just	moments
after	they	began	hearing	a	halfalogue.
What	about	wearing	headphones?	That	takes	the	problem	and	puts	it	directly
into	our	ears.	Like	overheard	speech,	music	with	lyrics	competes	for	mental
resources
	with	activities	that	also	involve	language,	such	as	reading	and	writing.
Music	has	been	found	to	impair	performance	on	
tasks	that	are	difficult	or
complex,
	as	well	as	those	requiring	creativity.
	And	it’s	not	just	the	words.
Music,	with	its	insistent	beat	and	catchy	riffs,	is	engineered	to	grab	and	hold	our
attention.	Studies	suggest	that	music	with	high	intensity,	fast	tempos,
	and
--- Page 117 ---
frequent	variation
	is	more	distracting	than	more	low-key,	laid-back	music.
(Students	who	try	to	study	while	listening	to	high-intensity	music	like	hip	hop,
one	researcher	found,	are	subject	to	what	he	memorably	called	the	“attention
drainage	effect.”)
	Music	disrupts	cognition	for	young	people
	just	as	much	as	it
does	for	adults.	Perhaps	most	regrettably,	people’s	intellectual	performance
while	listening	to	music	they	prefer
	is	“significantly	poorer”	than	when	listening
to	music	they	dislike.
What’s	true	for	our	sense	of	hearing	holds	for	vision	as	well.	We	can’t	choose
not	to	see	what	enters	our	field	of	vision;	it	is	nearly	impossible	to	prevent	our
gaze	from	darting	toward	a	visual	stimulus	that	is	new	or	in	motion.	And	just	as
our	ears	prick	up	at	the	sound	of	people’s	speech,	our	eyes	are	drawn	toward	the
human	visage.	The	brain	automatically	prioritizes	the	processing	of	faces,
	even
when	we’re	trying	hard	to	focus	on	a	page	or	a	screen.	Our	attention	is	pulled
especially	powerfully	to	the	
gaze
	of	other	people;
	we	are	uncannily	sensitive	to
the	feeling	of	being	observed.	Once	we	spot	others’	eyes	on	us,	the	processing	of
eye	contact
	takes	precedence	over	whatever	else	our	brains	were	working	on.	An
awareness	of	being	looked	at	even	increases	our	physiological	arousal,
	as
revealed	by	a	spike	in	skin	conductance.	(Recall	that	when	our	nervous	system
becomes	aroused,	we	start	to	perspire	in	a	barely	perceptible	way.	This	slight
sheen	of	sweat	momentarily	turns	our	skin	into	a	better	conductor	of	electricity.)
When	we	glimpse	a	face	in	which	the	eyes	are	closed	or	directed	elsewhere,	we
register	no	change	in	skin	conductance—but	that	same	measure	shows	a	jolt
whenever	we	see	eyes	looking	our	way.
All	this	visual	monitoring	and	processing	uses	up	considerable	mental
resources,	leaving	that	much	less	brainpower	for	our	work.	We	know	this
because	of	how	much	better	we	think	when	we	
close
	our	eyes.
	Eye	closure
“helps	people	to	disengage
	from	environmental	stimulation	and	thereby
enhances	the	efficiency	of	cognitive	processing,”	one	team	of	researchers
reports.	Temporarily	relieved	of	such	stimulation,	people	experience	less
cognitive	load,
	are	better	able	to	engage	in	visualization,	and	can	more	readily
retrieve	elusive	information
	when	faced	with	one	of	those	frustrating	“tip-of-the-
tongue”	moments.	They’re	also	much	better	at	recalling	
details,	both	visual	and
auditory.
	One	study	reported	a	23	percent	increase
	in	correct	answers	when
participants	closed	their	eyes	as	they	answered	questions	about	a	film	they	had
just	watched.
Of	course,	we	can	hardly	go	about	our	work	or	our	learning	with	our	eyes
closed.	We	have	to	rely	on	elements	of	physical	space	to	save	us	from	our	own
propensity	for	distraction—to	impose	the	“sensory	reduction”
	that	supports
--- Page 118 ---
optimal	attention,	memory,	and	cognition.	“Good	fences	make	good	neighbors,”
wrote	poet	Robert	Frost;	likewise,	good	walls	make	good	collaborators.
	
W
ALLS,	AND
	the	protected	spaces	they	create,	shield	us	from	distraction.	But	they
do	more:	they	also	provide	us	with	
privacy,
	a	state	that	bears	a	surprising
relationship	to	creativity.
The	open-plan	coffeehouse	model	now	enjoying	such	popularity	is
performance	oriented,	almost	exhibitionist	in	nature;	think	of	Benjamin	Franklin
and	his	fellow	debaters	holding	forth	at	the	coffeehouse	near	St.	Paul’s.	But
putting	oneself	on	display
	consumes	mental	resources,	leaving	less	brainpower
for	the	work	itself.	(The	act	of	self-presentation	may	be	particularly	draining	for
members
	of	certain	groups.	One	recent	study,	conducted	in	a	British	government
agency	that	switched	from	enclosed	offices	to	an	open-plan	workspace,	found
that	the	heightened	imperative	to	engage	in	self-presentation	in	such	settings	fell
most	heavily	on	women,	for	whom	appearance	is	considered	especially
important.)
When	people	are	relieved	of	the	cognitive	load
	imposed	by	their	environment,
they	immediately	become	more	creative,	neuroscientist	Moshe	Bar	has	found.
Bar,	who	directs	the	Gonda	Multidisciplinary	Brain	Research	Center	at	Bar-Ilan
University	in	Israel,	reports	that	when	he	taxed	subjects’	mental	resources	as
they	completed	a	test	of	creative	thinking,	they	came	up	with	more	“statistically
common”
	(that	is,	conventional	and	commonplace)	associations.	In	his	study,
Bar	found	that	“a	high	mental	load	consistently	diminished	the	originality	and
creativity”	of	his	subjects’	responses.	His	explanation:	when	our	minds	are
otherwise	occupied,	we	resort	to	mental	shortcuts—convenient	stereotypes,
familiar	assumptions,	well-worn	grooves.	These	are	the	thoughts	that	come	most
readily	to	mind,	that	take	the	least	mental	energy	to	generate.	It	requires
abundant	cognitive	resources	to	inhibit	these	stale,	reflexive	responses	and	to
reach	beyond	them	for	ideas	that	are	fresher	and	more	original.
Privacy	supports	creativity	in	another	way:	it	offers	us	the	freedom	to
experiment	unobserved.	When	our	work	is	a	performance	put	on	for	the	benefit
of	others,	we’re	less	likely	to	try	new	approaches
	that	might	fail	or	look	messy.
Ethan	Bernstein,	an	associate	professor	at	Harvard	Business	School,	has
investigated	the	relationship	between	privacy	and	innovation	at	a	mobile	phone
factory	in	China.
	In	a	study	published	in	2012,	he	found	that	granting	the
workers	greater	privacy—concealing	their	activities	behind	a	curtain—led	them
to	become	more	innovative	and	more	productive.	They	came	up	with	faster	and
more	effective	ways	of	doing	their	work	when	the	process	of	experimentation
was	shielded	from	view.
--- Page 119 ---
A	similar	dynamic	prevails	in	white-collar	work,	says	Bernstein,	where	the
surveillance	that	employees	experience	may	be	digital	in	nature.	Professionals
are	less	likely	to	play	around	with	new	ideas	or	approaches	when	they	know	that
an	all-seeing	electronic	eye	is	tracking	their	every	keystroke.	It’s	not	simply	that
staffers	fear	their	bosses	will	think	they’re	goofing	off	or	breaking	the	rules.
Being	subject	to	oversight	at	all	times	is	a	disempowering	experience,	and
feeling	powerless	discourages	exploration	and	creativity.	Conversely,	a	number
of	studies	have	found	that	a	sense	of	privacy	leads	to	feelings	of	empowerment,
which	in	turn	lead	to	greater	creativity.
Lastly,	the	benefits	of	privacy	extend	to	our	communications	with	colleagues.
Effective	collaboration	often	requires	a	degree	of	discretion—a	retreat	from
public	scrutiny	that’s	hard	to	find	in	an	open	office.	Research	has	found	that
employees	have	fewer	and	more	superficial	work-related	conversations
	in	wall-
less	spaces,	often	because	they	are	leery	of	discussing	delicate	or	confidential
matters	in	the	open.	Ben	Waber,	whose	firm,	Humanyze,	tracks	employees’
activities	via	wearable	sensors,	found	that	after	companies	move	from	a
workplace	with	enclosed	offices	to	an	open-plan	workspace,	interactions	among
employees	actually	
decrease
	during	most	times	of	the	day.	“This	may	be	due	to
employees	putting	on	headphones	or	the	difficulty	of	engaging	in	conversation
when	dozens	of	people	are	within	earshot,”	Waber	notes.	Other	studies	have
found	that	as	workspaces	become	more	open,	trust	and	cooperativeness	among
co-workers
	declines.	The	open-plan	office	seems	to	discourage	exactly	the	kind
of	behavior
	it	was	intended	to	promote.
Such	negative	effects	are	especially	pronounced	in	offices	where	employees
have	no	assigned	workspace	at	all,	an	increasingly	common	
arrange
ment.	The
drawbacks	of	“hot-desking”	or	“hoteling,”
	as	it’s	called,	point	to	another	way	in
which	space	can	be	used	to	extend	our	minds	(but	too	often	is	not).	When	we
operate	within	a	space	over	which	we	feel	ownership—a	space	that	feels	like	it’s
ours
—a	host	of	psychological	and	even	physiological	changes	ensues.	These
effects	were	first	observed	in	studies	of	a	phenomenon	known	as	the	“home
advantage”
:	the	consistent	finding	that	athletes	tend	to	win	more	and	bigger
victories	when	they	are	playing	in	their	own	fields,	courts,	and	stadiums.	On
their	home	turf,	teams	play	more	aggressively,
	and	their	members	(both	male
and	female)	exhibit	higher	levels	of	testosterone,
	a	hormone	associated	with	the
expression	of	social	dominance.
But	the	home	advantage	is	not	limited	to	sports.	Researchers	have	identified	a
more	general	effect	as	well:	when	people	occupy	spaces	that	they	consider	their
own,	they	experience	themselves	as	more	confident	and	capable.
	They	are	more
efficient	and	productive.
	They	are	more	focused	and	less	distractible.
	And	they
--- Page 120 ---
advance	their	own	interests
	more	forcefully	and	effectively.	A	study	by
psychologists	Graham	Brown	and	Markus	Baer,	for	example,	found	that	people
who	engage	in	negotiation	within	the	bounds	of	their	own	space	claim	between
60	and	160	percent	more	value
	than	the	“visiting”	party.
Benjamin	Meagher,	an	assistant	professor	of	psychology	at	Kenyon	College	in
Ohio,	has	advanced	an	intriguing	theory	that	may	explain	these	outcomes.	The
way	we	act,	the	way	we	think,	and	even	the	way	we	perceive	the	world	around
us	differ	when	we’re	in	a	space	that’s	familiar	to	us—one	that	we	have	shaped
through	our	own	choices	and	imbued	with	our	own	memories	of	learning	and
working	there	in	the	past.	When	we’re	on	our	home	turf,	Meagher	has	found,	our
mental	and	perceptual	processes	operate	more	efficiently,
	with	less	need	for
effortful	self-control.	The	mind	works	better	because	it	doesn’t	do	all	the	work
on	its	own;	it	gets	an	assist	from	the	structure	embedded	in	its	environment,
structure	that	marshals	useful	information,	supports	effective	habits	and	routines,
and	restrains	unproductive	impulses.	In	a	familiar	space	over	which	we	feel
ownership,	he	suggests,	“our	cognition	is	distributed
	across	the	entire	setting.”
The	place	itself	helps	us	think.
With	ownership	comes	control,	and	a	sense	of	control	over	their	space—how
it	looks	and	how	it	functions—leads	people	to	perform	more	productively.	This
was	demonstrated	in	dramatic	fashion	in	an	experiment	
conducted	by
psychologists	Craig	Knight	and	Alex	Haslam.	In	the	study,	volunteers	were
given	a	set	of	tasks
	to	perform	under	one	of	four	conditions:	they	worked	in	a
lean	office	(spare,	uncluttered);	in	an	enriched	office	(decorated	with	posters	and
potted	plants);	in	an	empowered	office	(participants	could	arrange	the	room	as
they	liked);	and	in	a	disempowered	office	(the	room	was	rearranged	in	front	of
them,	without	their	cooperation	or	consent).
In	the	lean	office,	found	Knight	and	Haslam,	participants	invested	a	low	level
of	effort	in	their	assigned	work;	they	were	listless	and	lackadaisical.	In	the
disempowered	office,	subjects’	productivity	was	similarly	mediocre;	in	addition,
they	were	very,	very	unhappy.	“I	wanted	to	hit	you,”
	one	participant	confessed
to	the	experimenter	in	a	follow-up	interview,	describing	how	he	felt	as	“his”
office	was	rearranged	to	the	researcher’s	liking.	In	the	enriched	office,
participants	worked	harder	and	were	more	productive;	in	the	empowered	office,
people	performed	best	of	all.	They	got	30	percent	more	done	there	than	in	the
lean	office,	and	about	15	percent	more	than	in	the	enriched	office.	The	size	of
such	effects	is	large	enough	to	make	any	employer	sit	up	and	take	notice:	three
people	working	in	empowered	offices	accomplished	almost	as	much	as	four
people	in	lean	offices.
Perhaps	the	most	important	form	of	control	over	one’s	space	is	authority	over
who	comes	in	and	out—a	point	missed	by	those	who	believe	that	our
--- Page 121 ---
who	comes	in	and	out—a	point	missed	by	those	who	believe	that	our
workspaces	should	resemble	a	bustling	coffeehouse.	The	informal	exchanges
facilitated	by	proximity	are	indeed	generative.	But	the	value	of	such	interactions
can	be	extracted	only	if	it	is	also	possible,	when	necessary,	to	avoid	interacting
at	all.	Consider	again	in	this	light	the	denizens	of	the	St.	Paul’s	coffeehouse,	who
surely	had	private	studies	to	which	to	retreat	at	home,	or	the	professors	who
traverse	MIT’s	Infinite	Corridor—on	their	way	to	their	own	quiet,	book-lined
offices.
It’s	certainly	the	case	that	the	nature	of	today’s	work	demands	frequent
consultation	and	cooperation	with	others.	What	we	may	not	realize	is	that	good
work	also	requires	periods	of	abstention	from	such	exchanges—a	phenomenon
that	organizational	psychologists	call	“intermittent	collaboration.”
	Research	on
intermittent	collaboration	is	based	on	the	understanding	that	complex	problem
solving	proceeds	in	two	stages,	the	first	of	which	entails	gathering	the	facts	we
need	to	clarify	the	nature	of	the	problem	and	begin	constructing	a	solution.	In
this	stage,	communication	and	
collaboration	are	essential.	But	there	is	a	second
phase,	equally	vital:	the	process	of	generating	and	developing	solutions,	and
figuring	out	which	of	these	solutions	is	best.	During	this	phase,	studies	find,
excessive	collaboration	is	actually	
detrimental.
The	reason	can	be	found	in	our	nature	as	a	group-dwelling	species.	We	are
exquisitely	sensitive	to	social	pressure,	easily	drawn	into	consensus	and
conformity.	When	we’re	constantly	in	touch	with	others,	we	all	end	up
gravitating	toward	the	same	pretty-good-but-not-great	answers.	Research	finds
that	people	who	keep	lines	of	communication	perpetually	open	consistently
generate	middling	solutions—nothing	terrible,	but	nothing	exceptional	either.
Meanwhile,	people	who	isolate	themselves	during	the	solution-generation	phase
tend	to	come	up	with	a	few	truly	extraordinary	solutions—along	with	a	lot	of
losers.	The	best	of	all	worlds	is	enjoyed	by	those	who	engage	in	cycles	of
sociable	interaction	and	quiet	focus.	Just	as	we	need	walls	to	protect	us	from	our
propensity	to	be	distracted,	so	we	require	walls	to	shield	us	from	our
susceptibility	to	social	pressure.
	
W
HAT	ARRANGEMENT
	of	space	could	support	this	way	of	thinking	and	working?
A	surprisingly	apt	model	can	be	found	in	the	one	adopted	by	Jonas	Salk	and
Louis	Kahn:	the	monastery.	In	the	popular	imagination,	monks	are	solitary,
hermit-like	creatures—but	historically	they	have	lived	within	a	communal
setting	that	balanced	time	spent	alone	in	study	and	contemplation	with	time
spent	with	others	in	robust	social	interaction.	Richard	Irvine,	an	anthropologist	at
the	University	of	Cambridge,	explored	this	equilibrium	in	an	ethnographic	study
--- Page 122 ---
he	conducted	at	Downside	Abbey,	a	Benedictine	monastery	in	Somerset,
England,	where	the	way	of	life	has	remained	little	changed	for	centuries.
In	describing	the	abbey’s	architecture,	Irvine	observes	that	the	buildings
reflect	their	inhabitants’	daily	cycles	of	intense	engagement	and	hushed
withdrawal,	accommodating	communal	spaces	like	the	library,	the	refectory,	the
workshop,	and	the	courtyard,	as	well	as	the	monks’	solitary	cells.	The	monastery
even	has	its	own	version	of	the	Infinite	Corridor—in	the	form	of	the	cloister,	a
long	passageway	that	“serves	as	the	key	element	of	connection
	in	the
architecture	of	the	monastery,”	Irvine	notes.	“The	cloister	is	a	space	of
movement	which	facilitates	frequent	interpersonal	encounter,	as	the	monks	pass
through	it	regularly	to	reach	the	com
mon	areas	of	Abbey	Church	(where	they
attend	six	communal	services	a	day)	[and	the]	refectory	(where	they	join
together	in	silence	to	eat	three	meals	a	day).”
Though	organizational	psychologists	have	only	recently	recognized	its	value,
the	monks	of	Downside	Abbey	have	been	practicing	intermittent	collaboration
for	more	than	four	hundred	years.	“While	the	monastery	is	the	site	of	frequent
interpersonal	encounter,	the	importance	of	solitude	is	also	structured	into	the
timetable	through	the	commitment	to	twice-daily	private	prayer,	as	well	as	the
summum	silentium
	(complete	silence,	sometimes	referred	to	as	‘the	great
silence’)	at	the	end	of	the	day,”	Irvine	explains.	This	silence	“restricts	interaction
and	gives	the	monk	opportunity	to	be	alone.”	(He	notes	that	members	of	the
community	have	available	to	them	another	way	of	ensuring	intermittent
interaction:	they	can	pull	up	the	hood	of	their	vestment,	“hence	covering	the	ears
and	closing	off	part	of	the	peripheral	vision,	thus	[making	them]	less	inclined	to
distraction	from	other	people.”)
The	ancient	arrangement	of	space	in	a	monastery	bears	some	resemblance	to
today’s	“activity-based	workspaces,”	which	nod	to	the	human	need	for	both
social	interaction	and	undisturbed	solitude	by	providing	dedicated	areas	for	each:
a	café-style	meeting	place,	a	soundproof	study	carrel	with	a	door.	Too	often,
however,	such	offices	still	fail	to	provide	their	occupants	with	that	most	effective
mental	extension:	a	private	space,	persistent	and	therefore	familiar,	over	which
they	have	a	sense	of	ownership	and	control.	Such	a	space	can	generate	benefits
even	beyond	those	we’ve	already	covered	because	they	are	so	well	positioned	to
meet	two	additional	pressing	human	needs:	the	need	to	claim	one’s	own	identity
and	the	need	to	belong	to	a	larger	group.	For	this	extension	of	mind	by	physical
space,	there	can	be	no	better	model	than	the	
studiolo.
Recall	the	richly	decorated	walls	of	the	study	belonging	to	Federico	da
Montefeltro,	Duke	of	Urbino.	They	surrounded	their	occupant	with	visual
reminders	of	who	he	was:	an	aesthete,	a	warrior,	a	scholar.	There	was	the	lute
--- Page 123 ---
and	the	harp,	the	mace	and	the	pair	of	spurs,	the	bound	volume	of	Virgil.	On
display	as	well	were	symbols	representing	his	membership	in	meaningful
groups.	Worked	into	the	intricately	inlaid	paneling	was	the	Montefeltro	
imprese
—a	kind	of	family	crest—featuring	an	image	of	an	ostrich	holding	an	arrow	in
its	beak;	inscribed	underneath	the	bird	was	a	swaggering	motto,
	rendered	in
German	and	first	proclaimed	by	Federico’s	
grandfather:	
“Ich	kann	ein	großes
Eisen	essen,”
	or	“I	can	eat	a	big	iron.”	The	walls	also	featured	the	emblem	of	the
Order	of	the	Garter,	England’s	highest	chivalric	order,	awarded	to	Federico	by
King	Edward	IV.
Self-referential	images	and	messages	are	not	mere	decorations—whether
they’re	built	into	the	paneling	of	a	duke’s	splendidly	outfitted	retreat	or	tacked	to
the	walls	of	an	office	worker’s	cubicle.	Research	shows	that	in	the	presence	of
cues	of	
identity
	and	cues	of	
affiliation,
	people	perform	better
:	they’re	more
motivated	and	more	productive.	The	first	of	these	are	the	tangible	signs	and
signals	we	employ	to	support	our	self-conception:	we’re	the	kind	of	person	who
likes	cats,	or	rock	climbing,	or	“Far	Side”	cartoons.	We	use	our	space	to
advertise	our	hobbies,	to	show	off	our	awards	and	honors,	to	express	an
unexpected	creative	streak	or	a	quirky	sense	of	humor.	Such	displays	may
sometimes	be	aimed	at	informing	other	people	of	who	we	are	(or	who	we’d	like
to	be),	but	often	they	are	intended	for	a	more	intimate	audience:	ourselves.	For	a
study	published	in	the	
Academy	of	Management	Journal,
	researchers	examined
the	workspaces	of	people	holding	a	variety	of	jobs—from	engineer	to	event
planner,	from	creative	director	to	real	estate	agent.	The	investigators	found	that
about	one-third	of	the	personal	tokens
	these	professionals	had	incorporated	into
their	workspaces	were	positioned	so	as	to	be	visible	only	to	their	owners.	Of	the
objects	whose	stated	purpose	for	their	owners	was	“reminding	them	of	their
goals	and	values,”	70	percent	were	placed	out	of	sight	of	others.
Why	would	we	need	such	reminders?	While	our	sense	of	self	may	feel	stable
and	solid,	it	is	in	fact	quite	fluid,
	dependent	on	external	structure
	for	its	shape.
We	can	sense	this	truth	when	we	travel	to	a	foreign	country.	Everything	around
us	is	strange	and	unfamiliar,	producing	in	us	a	dizzy	sense	of	discombobulation.
This	disorientation	can	be	pleasurable,	if	exhausting,	while	on	a	holiday	in	a
faraway	land—but	in	our	day-to-day	lives,	we	need	to	cultivate	a	steady	sense	of
identity	in	order	to	function	effectively.	The	material	things	we	arrange	around
us	help	us	maintain	that	sturdy	self-conception.	As	the	psychologist	Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi	has	written,	we	keep	certain	objects	in	view	because	“they	tell
us	things	about	ourselves
	that	we	need	to	hear	in	order	to	keep	our	selves	from
falling	apart.”
--- Page 124 ---
Moreover,	we	need	to	have	close	at	hand	those	prompts	that	highlight
particular	
facets
	of	our	identity.	Each	of	us	has	not	one	identity	but	many	
—
worker,	student,	spouse,	parent,	friend—and	different	environmental	cues	evoke
different	identities.	Daphna	Oyserman,	a	psychologist	at	the	University	of
Southern	California,	notes	that	signals	from	the	environment	function	to	bring
one	of	these	many	personas	to	the	fore,	with	real	effects	on	our	thought	and
behavior.	“Which	identity	is	salient	in	the	moment
	influences	both	what	one
pays	attention	to	and	what	one	chooses	to	do,”	she	writes.	One	particularly
striking	example:	research	has	found	that	cues	that	remind	Asian	American	girls
of	their	ethnicity	improve	their	performance	on	math	tests,	while	cues	that
remind	them	of	their	gender	undermine	their	performance.	For	all	of	us,	the
objects	on	which	our	eyes	come	to	rest	each	day	reinforce	what	we’re	doing	in
that	place,	in	that	role.
Through	the	ups	and	downs	of	our	lives	at	school	and	at	work,	the	reassuring
stability	of	meaningful	material	objects	can	also	help	us	manage	our	moods	and
emotions.	When	we	engage	in	such	“environmental	self-regulation,”
	we	rely	on
cues	
outside
	ourselves	to	maintain	the	kind	of	equilibrium	
inside
	ourselves	that
facilitates	the	pursuit	of	our	goals.	In	a	study	of	mid-level	professionals,	Gregory
Laurence,	a	professor	of	management	at	the	University	of	Michigan–Flint,	found
that	incorporating	personal	items	into	their	workspaces	helped	them	relieve	the
“emotional	exhaustion”
	brought	on	by	a	stressful	job.	Especially	for	employees
whose	office	settings	did	not	afford	much	privacy,	being	able	to	personalize	their
work	area—with	photographs,	posters,	comic	strips,	mugs—helped	them	“carve
out	their	own	space,	inscribe	it	with	personal	meaning,	and	thus	create	a	kind	of
sanctuary	at	work,”	write	Laurence	and	his	coauthors.
Laurence	is	not	the	only	researcher	to	detect	an	almost	spiritual	cast	to	the
way	people	regard	their	personal	space.	In	an	ethnographic	study
	of	research	and
development	professionals	in	the	US	headquarters	of	the	Japanese	technology
company	Hitachi,	authors	Ryoko	Imai	and	Masahide	Ban	note	that	the
employees	they	studied	did	“intensive	reading,	writing,	and	most	importantly,
thinking	in	the	comfort	and	solitude	of	[their]	own	cubicles	.
 
.
 
.	Often	stocked
with	personal	comfort	items,	familiar	references,	[and]	favorite	tools,	a	dedicated
private	space	served	as	a	sacred	space	to	rejuvenate	and	regroup.”	It’s	possible	to
see	shades	of	the	monastery	and	the	
studiolo
	in	these	modern-day	workstations
and	cubicles—evidence	of	the	persistent	human	need	to	imbue	our	spaces	with
meaning	and	significance.
Yet	many	organizations	discourage	or	even	ban
	the	display	of	personal	items
in	employees’	workspaces.	Such	“clutter”	may	be	frowned	upon	as	an	irrelevant
distraction	from	the	work	at	hand,	or	as	an	obstacle	to	achieving	the	clean,	spare
--- Page 125 ---
aesthetic	associated	with	admired	leaders	like	the	late	Apple	Computer	founder
Steve	Jobs.	For	psychologists	Craig	Knight	and	Alexander	Haslam,	such	dictates
bring	a	different	figure	to	mind
:	Frederick	Winslow	Taylor,	the	early-twentieth-
century	engineer	who	introduced	“scientific	management”	to	American
corporations.	Taylor	specifically	prohibited	workers	from	bringing	their	personal
effects	into	the	factories	he	redesigned	for	maximum	speed	and	minimum	waste.
Stripped	of	their	individuality,	he	insisted,	employees	would	function	as
perfectly	efficient	cogs	in	the	industrial	machine.
Knight	and	Haslam,	who	conducted	the	study	of	“lean”	versus	“enriched”	and
“empowered”	versus	“disempowered”	working	environments	described	earlier,
believe	that	an	embrace	of	neo-Taylorism	is	a	mistake,	especially	in	an	era	when
employees	are	expected	to	behave	not	as	generic	cogs	but	as	critical	and	creative
thinkers.	As	their	own	research	has	demonstrated,	people	are	
less
	productive	in	a
lean,	featureless	office.	“Making	people	feel
	they	are	in	the	wrong	place,	that	it
isn’t	their	place,	is	a	very	powerful	way	of	undermining	performance,”	says
Haslam.	Although	managers	and	administrators	may	fear	that	the	presence	of
personal	tokens	will	reduce	organizational	cohesion	and	loyalty,	research
evidence	suggests	that	just	the	opposite	is	the	case:	employees	feel	
more
committed	to	their	company	when	they	are	able	to	see	themselves	reflected	in	it.
A	sense	of	ownership	extends	from	the	individual	to	the	organization,	and	it
flows	through	physical	space.
	
T
HE	WAY	SPACE
	is	arranged	can	recognize	our	individuality,	with	positive	effects
on	our	motivation	and	performance.	It	can	also	affirm—or	deny—our	sense	of
belonging
	within	an	organization.	Members	of	groups	that	have	historically	been
excluded,	marginalized,	or	negatively	stereotyped	are	especially	attuned	to	the
signals
	of	belonging	or	non-belonging	they	encounter	in	the	environments	they
enter.	Such	signals	are	pervasive	and	powerful,	though	they	are	rarely	the	focus
of	discussions	about	bias.	“When	we	think	of	prejudice,
	most	of	us	think	of	it	as
a	problem	of	
people,
”	says	Mary	Murphy,	a	professor	of	psychological	and	brain
sciences	at	Indiana	University	Bloomington.	But,	she	points	
out,	inequalities	of
experience	and	outcome	are	also	generated	by	features	of	the	“organizational
setting,”	of	which	the	built	environment	is	a	significant	part.	Murphy	and	her
colleagues	have	advanced	a	theory	of	“prejudiced	places,”
	which	they	define	as
places	that	“unequally	tax	the	emotions,	physiology,	cognitive	function,	and
performance	of	some	groups	more	than	others.”
When	we	regard	prejudice	as	a	property	of	people	alone—as	an	entity	that
exists	inside	individuals’	heads—we	fail	to	see	the	full	picture	of	how	bias
operates	within	institutions,	and	we	miss	out	on	opportunities	to	push	back
--- Page 126 ---
against	it.	According	to	what	Murphy	calls	the	“prejudice-in-places	model,”
systemic	inequality	will	not	be	eradicated	by	identifying	and	rooting	out	a	few
bad	actors	who	hold	racist	or	sexist	beliefs.	Indeed,	prejudice	can	be	perpetuated
by	places	even	when	the	people	within	them	are	endeavoring	to	act	in	egalitarian
ways.	Precisely	because	physical	places	exert	such	a	profound	effect	on	the
behavior	of	the	people	who	work	and	learn	within	them,	altering	aspects	of	these
spaces	might	offer	the	most	effective	route	to	reducing	bias.	Efforts	to	change
people’s	beliefs	more	directly	may	provoke	resistance	or	resentment—and,	in
fact,	research	has	repeatedly	found	unimpressive	results
	for	conventional
diversity	workshops	and	training	sessions.
“Prejudiced	places”	might	well	have	described	the	environments	Sapna
Cheryan	encountered
	in	the	summer	of	2001.	Recently	graduated	from	college,
Cheryan	was	interviewing	for	internships	at	tech	firms	located	in	California’s
Bay	Area.	At	one	of	the	companies	she	visited,	she	found	herself	put	off	by	a
workspace	that	looked	like	a	computer	geek’s	basement	hangout:	“the	action
figures,
	the	Nerf	guns,	the	soda	cans	stacked	up	to	make	a	model	of	the	Golden
Gate	Bridge,”	as	Cheryan	recalls	it	now.	The	firm’s	adherence	to	a	very
particular	aesthetic	seemed	designed	to	promote	an	exclusive	conception	of	its
ideal	employee—one	that	felt	unwelcoming	or	even	alienating	to	her,	a	young
woman	and	person	of	color.	Cheryan	encountered	a	very	different	setting	when
interviewing	at	the	software	company	Adobe;	there,	the	workspace	was	bright
and	inviting.	Cheryan	accepted	Adobe’s	offer	and	stayed	on	at	the	firm	for	five
years.	Her	next	move	was	to	a	psychology	PhD	program	at	Stanford	University,
where	she	enrolled	with	the	aim	of	investigating	how	cues	in	the	physical
environment	affect	the	way	people	think.
In	an	experiment	she	conducted	while	still	a	graduate	student,	
Cheryan
commandeered	space
	in	Stanford’s	Gates	Computer	Science	Building,	creating
what	she	called	a	“stereotypical”	classroom	and	a	“non-stereotypical”	classroom.
The	stereotypical	classroom	was	filled	with	soda	cans,	books	of	science-fiction
fantasy,	and	
Star	Trek
	and	
Star	Wars
	posters.	The	non-stereotypical	classroom
featured	accoutrements	like	nature	posters,	literary	novels,	and	bottles	of	water.
After	spending	time	in	each	room,	undergraduates	were	surveyed	about	how
interested	they	were	in	computer	science	and	how	well	they	thought	they	would
perform	in	that	discipline.
Following	a	few	minutes	in	the	stereotypical	room,	male	students	reported	a
high	level	of	interest	in	pursuing	computer	science;	female	students	indicated
much	less	interest	than	their	male	counterparts.	But	after	they	spent	time	in	the
non-stereotypical	room,	women’s	interest	in	computer	science	increased
markedly—actually	exceeding	that	of	the	men.	Subsequent	research	by	Cheryan
--- Page 127 ---
has	found	that	women	exposed	to	a	non-stereotypical	classroom	are	more	likely
to	predict
	that	they	will	perform	well	in	computer	science	courses,	whereas	men
tend	to	predict	that	they	will	succeed	regardless	of	which	room	they	encounter.
That’s	important,	says	Cheryan,	because	“we	know	from	past	work
	in
psychology	that	how	well	you	expect	to	do	in	a	certain	environment	can
determine	how	you	actually	perform.”
Cheryan	called	the	phenomenon	documented	in	her	study	“ambient
belonging,”	defined	as	individuals’	sense	of	fit	with	a	physical	environment,
“along	with	a	sense	of	fit	with	the	people	who	are	imagined	to	occupy	that
environment.”	Ambient	belonging,	she	proposed,	“can	be	ascertained	rapidly,
even	from	a	cursory	glance	at	a	few	objects.”	In	the	research	she	has	since
produced,	Cheryan	has	explored	how	ambient	belonging	can	be	enlarged	and
expanded—how	a	wider	array	of	individuals	can	be	induced	to	feel	that	crucial
sense	of	“fit”	in	the	environments	in	which	they	find	themselves.	The	key,	she
says,	is	not	to	
eliminate
	stereotypes
	but	to	
diversify
	them—to	convey	the
message	that	people	from	many	different	backgrounds	can	thrive	in	a	given
setting.	Just	such	an	effort	was	undertaken	at	the	University	of	Washington,
where	Cheryan	is	now	a	professor.	UW	revamped	its	computer	science	lab,
applying	a	fresh	coat	of	paint,	hanging	new	artwork,	and	arranging	the	seating	to
encourage	more	social	interaction.	Five	years	later,	the	proportion	of
undergrad
uate	computer	science	degrees	earned	by	women	at	UW	reached	32
percent,
	higher	than	at	any	other	flagship	public	university	in	the	country.
Cheryan	and	others	are	now	exploring	how	to	create	a	sense	of	ambient
belonging	in	online	“spaces,”	an	example	of	extending	technology	with	what	we
know	to	be	true	about	physical	spaces	in	the	offline	world.	As	is	the	case	in	“real
life,”	research	finds	that	members	of	historically	stigmatized	groups	are
especially	attuned	to	cues	of	exclusion
	that	appear	on	digital	platforms,	such	as
online	courses.	And	just	as	in	non-digital	realms,	these	signals	of	non-belonging
can	negatively	affect	their	levels	of	interest,	and	their	expectations	of	success,	in
subjects	like	computer	science,	as	well	as	influencing	how	actively	they	engage
these	topics.
René	Kizilcec,	an	assistant	professor	of	information	science	at	Cornell
University,	investigated	the	effect	of	adding	a	“gender-inclusive”
	image	and
statement	to	an	advertisement	for	an	online	computer	science	course	that	ran	on
Facebook.	The	image	featured	a	group	of	eight	women	of	diverse	ages	and
ethnicities;	the	statement	read:	“The	history	of	computer	programming	is	a
history	of	WOMEN.	You	can	join	this	epic	journey.”	Female	viewers	clicked
through	to	find	out	more	at	a	rate	that	was	26	percent	higher	than	for	a	similar	ad
that	did	not	include	such	cues.	When	gender-inclusive	signals	were	embedded	in
--- Page 128 ---
the	enrollment	page	for	the	course,	women	were	18	percent	more	likely	to	sign
up.
In	another	study	led	by	Kizilcec,	the	inclusion	of	a	diversity	statement	on	the
Web	pages	of	online	courses	in	science,	technology,	engineering,	and
mathematics	increased	the	enrollment	of	students	of	lower	socioeconomic	status
—another	group	that	is	often	underrepresented	in	STEM	fields.	“This	is	an	equal
opportunity	course	that	offers	you	a	supportive	and	inclusive	space	to	learn,”	the
statement	read.	“Everyone,	no	matter	their	age,	gender,	or	nationality,	can	be
successful	in	this	course.	People	like	you	are	joining	from	all	over	the	world	and
we	value	this	diversity.”	Such	“psychologically	inclusive	design,”	as	Kizilcec
calls	it,	aims	to	lower	barriers	to	participation	by	“strategically	placing	content
and	design	cues	in	the	environment”—an	effort	that	is	as	important	in	the	online
world	as	it	is	in	the	material	one.
	
B
RINGING	EMPIRICAL	RESEARCH
	to	bear	on	our	experience	of	the	built
environment	is	a	relatively	new	phenomenon.	For	centuries,	archi
tects	and
builders	have	worked	on	the	basis	of	tradition	and	intuition.	Architect	Louis
Kahn,	for	example,	consciously	drew	on	the	forms	and	styles	of	the	past;	he
relied	as	well	on	his	tactile	sense	of	the	material	world,	and	on	what	the	site	or
the	structure	demanded.	In	one	of	his	characteristically	gnomic	remarks,	Kahn
described	an	imagined	exchange	between	himself	and	the	stuff	of	which	his
buildings	were	made.	“You	say	to	brick,
	‘What	do	you	want,	brick?’
 
”	he	began.
“Brick	says	to	you,	‘I	like	an	arch.’	If	you	say	to	brick,	‘Arches	are	expensive,
and	I	can	use	a	concrete	lintel	over	an	opening.	What	do	you	think	of	that,
brick?’	Brick	says,	‘I	like	an	arch.’
 
”
Jonas	Salk	observed	of	his	architect	that	Kahn	had	“the	vision	of	an	artist,
	the
understanding	of	a	philosopher,”	and	“the	knowledge	of	a	metaphysician.”
Sometime	in	the	future,	architects	may	need	to	add	to	that	arsenal	“the	expertise
of	a	neuroscientist.”	The	burgeoning	discipline	of	neuroarchitecture	has	begun	to
explore	the	way	our	brains	respond
	to	the	built	settings	we	encounter—finding,
for	example,	that	high-ceilinged	places
	incline	us	toward	more	expansive,
abstract	thoughts.	That’s	not	hard	to	believe	when	one	pictures	the	domed
ceiling	of	the	reading	room	at	the	Bibliothèque	Nationale	in	Paris,	rounded	like	a
bouquet	of	balloons,	or	the	ethereal,	cloud-studded	ceiling	of	the	Rose	Main
Reading	Room	at	the	New	York	Public	Library	in	Manhattan.	Symmetrical
shapes,
	meanwhile,	impress	upon	us	a	sense	of	power	and	robustness.	Call	to
mind	the	Taj	Mahal,	built	of	white	marble	in	the	Indian	city	of	Agra	by	the
seventeenth-century	Mughal	emperor	Shah	Jahan.	It	is	perfectly	symmetrical,
from	the	pair	of	minarets	arrayed	on	either	side,	down	to	the	tiles	inlaid	on	the
--- Page 129 ---
floor.	(It’s	noteworthy	that	the	Salk	Institute	is	also	symmetrical,	and	indeed	has
been	compared	to	the	Taj	Mahal.)
As	intensely	social	creatures,	we	respond	positively	to	architectural	designs
that	resemble	faces
—like	the	beloved	Villa	Rotonda,	an	Italian	Renaissance	villa
designed	by	architect	Andrea	Palladio.	Curved	shapes,
	it	has	been	found,	induce
in	us	a	sense	of	ease	and	comfort;	babies	as	young	as	one	week	old
	prefer	to	look
at	curved	objects	rather	than	sharp	ones.	The	attraction	goes	so	deep	that	it	is
found	across	generations,	across	cultures—even	across	
species.
	Consider	the
undulating	sculpture	
Sheep	Piece,
	created	in	1971–72	by	the	British	artist	Henry
Moore.	A	study	that	scanned	the	brains	of	rhesus	monkeys
	found	that	the	areas
of	their	brains	associated	with	the	experience	of	reward	and	pleasure	lit	up	when
they	looked	at	it.	The	human	animal	is	similarly	delighted	by	the	sight	of	gentle
curves,	like	those	that	characterize	the	building	Frank	Gehry	designed	to	house
the	Guggenheim	Museum	in	Bilbao,	Spain.	When	the	eminent	architect	Philip
Johnson	first	saw	it,
	he	was	so	moved	that	he	began	to	weep.
Though	its	insights	are	suggestive,	neuroarchitecture	is	far	from	a	mature
discipline.	For	now,	when	building	and	designing	we	still	need	to	rely	on	our
stock	of	conventional	forms—and	from	these	we	must	choose	carefully,
knowing	how	profoundly	setting	can	shape	the	way	we	think	and	act.	We’ve
seen	how	fully	the	coffeehouse	model	has	come	to	dominate	our	notion	of	how
workplaces	should	be	arranged,	for	example.	It	is	quintessentially	modern	in	its
rejection	of	bounded	spaces	and	closed	social	circles,	its	embrace	of
transparency	and	openness—but	it	bears	both	the	advantages	and	the	drawbacks
of	this	stance.	The	appeal	of	such	places,	so	suited	to	our	current	sensibilities,
can	blind	us	to	the	virtues	of	other	models—premodern	forms,	such	as	the
monastery	and	the	
studiolo,
	that	served	their	inhabitants	well	before	the
coffeehouse	was	even	invented.
But	perhaps	more	concerning	than	spaces	that	affect	our	thinking	in
problematic	ways	are	spaces	that	decline	to	shape	us	at	all.	Richard	Coyne,	a
professor	of	architectural	computing	at	the	University	of	Edinburgh	in	Scotland,
has	lamented	the	“cognitive	deficiency	of	non-places,”
	those	spaces—all	too
common	in	the	modern	world—that	are	empty	of	cues	or	associations.	Recall	the
major	finding	from	Roger	Barker’s	“Midwest	Study”:	physical	places	influence
our	thinking	and	behavior	far	more	than	personality	or	other	factors.	This	is
possible	because	places	offer	our	minds	so	much	to	work	with—a	“rich	layering
of	custom,
	history,	and	meaning,”	as	Coyne	writes.	He	continues:	“A	sign	saying
‘wait	here’	would	be	superfluous	in	the	vestibule	of	the	cathedral	or	temple,	as
the	appropriate	behavior	or	action	is	already	inscribed	in	the	architecture	and
ritual	practices	of	the	place.	Neither	would	we	require	a	text	saying	‘Think	of
--- Page 130 ---
God,’	or	‘Consider	your	finitude’	in	such	places.	In	fact	it	could	be	said	that	we
are	already	caught	up	in	such	thought	by	virtue	of	being	in	the	sacred	place.”	But
such	rich	signification	is	missing	from	non-places.	What	meaning	or	message	is
inscribed	on	a	featureless	chain	store,	or	a	generic	hotel	lobby,	or	the	bleak	urban
“plaza”	that	surrounds	many	a	skyscraper?	What	thoughts	are	inspired,	what
emotions	are	stirred	by	a	row	
of	beige	cubicles,	or	a	classroom	housed	inside	a
windowless	trailer?	We	are	set	adrift	in	such	spaces,	alienated	and	purposeless.
This	is	not	simply	a	question	of	aesthetics;	it	is	a	question	of	what	we	think,	how
we	act,	who	we	
are.
Not	surprisingly,	Louis	Kahn	was	one	who	understood	the	transformative
effect	places	could	have	on	the	human	psyche.	Kahn,	deeply	versed	as	he	was	in
the	history	of	architecture,	once	reflected	on	the	felt	impact	of	the	soaring	design
of	public	baths	in	ancient	Rome.	“If	you	look	at	the	Baths	of	Caracalla,”
	said
Kahn,	“we	all	know	that	we	can	bathe	just	as	well	under	an	eight-foot	ceiling	as
we	can	under	a	150-foot	ceiling.”	But,	he	went	on,	“there’s	something	about	a
150-foot	ceiling	that	makes	a	man	a	different	kind	of	man.”
--- Page 131 ---
6
Thinking	with	the	Space	of	Ideas
B
EN	PRIDMORE	IS	FAMOUS
	for	his	astonishingly	accurate	memory.	A	three-time
winner	of	the	World	Memory	Championship,	Pridmore	has	pulled	off	feats	such
as	reciting	without	error	almost	a	hundred	historic	dates	after	just	five	minutes’
study,	correctly	recalling	the	order	of	more	than	1,400	randomly	shuffled
playing	cards,	and	committing	to	memory	the	digits	of	pi	to	thousands	of
decimal	places.	He	was	prominently	featured
	in	the	best-selling	
Moonwalking
with	Einstein,
	a	2011	book	by	journalist	Joshua	Foer	detailing	the	triumphs	of
memory	prodigies.
Yet	Pridmore,	a	resident	of	the	town	of	Redditch	in	the	United	Kingdom,
can’t	be	counted	on	to	remember	his	“lucky	hat”
—a	black	fedora	that	brought
him	good	fortune	at	memory	competitions,	until	he	left	it	behind	on	a	train.
Pridmore	sometimes	forgets	to	bring	his	briefcase	or	important	papers	to	his	job
as	an	accountant,	and	he	admits	that	he	is	hopeless	at	remembering	friends’
birthdays.	“I	am	famously	bad
	at	being	able	to	remember	people’s	names	and
faces,”	he	concedes.	He	became	a	celebrated	memory	champion	only	through
the	application	of	what	is	known	as	the	“method	of	loci”
:	a	mental	strategy	that
draws	on	the	powerful	connection	to	
place
	that	all	humans	share.
The	method	of	loci	is	a	venerable	technique,
	invented	by	the	ancient	Greeks
and	used	by	educators	and	orators	over	many	centuries.	It	works	by	associating
each	item	to	be	remembered	with	a	particular	spot	found	in	a	familiar	place,	such
as	one’s	childhood	home	or	current	neighborhood.	For	Ben	Pridmore,	this	place
is	Queen	Elizabeth’s	Grammar	School,	
which	he	attended	as	a	child	growing	up
in	Horncastle,	England.	Preparing	to	recall	the	sequence	of,	say,	a	randomly
shuffled	deck	of	cards,	he	imagines	placing	each	card,	in	order,	in	a	succession
of	physical	locations	he	would	pass	by	if	strolling	through	his	old	school:
through	the	front	door,	down	the	corridor,	past	the	sixth-form	common	room,
into	the	classroom	where	math	was	taught.	The	method	of	loci—also	known	as
--- Page 132 ---
the	“memory	palace”	strategy,	or	in	Pridmore’s	phrasing,	the	“journey
technique”—is	remarkably	effective.	On	their	own,	bits	of	data	like	the	number
or	suit	shown	on	a	playing	card	are	quickly	forgotten.	But	when	linked	to	a
physical	place	we	know	well,	that	same	information	can	be	durably	integrated
into	memory.
Pridmore	is	not	the	only	memory	champion	to	make	use	of	the	method	of	loci.
Indeed,	research	conducted	with	other	memory	contest	winners	has	concluded
that	the	strategy	of	tying	new	information	to	preexisting	memories	of	physical
space	is	the	key	to	the	extraordinary	performance	of	many	of	these	“memory
athletes.”	One	such	study	was	conducted	by	Eleanor	Maguire,	a	professor	of
cognitive	neuroscience	at	University	College	London.	“Using
neuropsychological	measures,
	as	well	as	structural	and	functional	brain	imaging,
we	found	that	superior	memory	was	not	driven	by	exceptional	intellectual	ability
or	structural	brain	differences,”	Maguire	and	her	coauthors	reported.	“Rather,	we
found	that	superior	memorizers	used	a	spatial	learning	strategy,	engaging	brain
regions	such	as	the	hippocampus	that	are	critical	for	memory	and	for	spatial
memory	in	particular.”	The	difference	between	“superior	memorizers”	and
ordinary	people,	Maguire	determined,	lay	in	the	
parts
	of	the	brain	that	became
active	when	the	two	groups	engaged	in	the	act	of	recall;	in	the	memory
champions’	brains,	regions	associated	with	spatial	memory	and	navigation	were
highly	engaged,	while	in	ordinary	people	these	areas	were	much	less	active.
What	sets	memory	champs	apart,	then,	is	their	conscious	cultivation	of	an
ability	every	one	of	us	comes	by	naturally—the	capacity	to	find	our	way	around
and	to	remember	where	we’ve	been.	Research	has	found	that	all	of	us	seem	to
use	the	brain’s	built-in	navigational	system
	to	construct	mental	maps,	not	just	of
physical	places	but	of	the	more	abstract	landscape	of	concepts	and	data—the
space	of	ideas.	This	repurposing	of	our	sense	of	physical	place	to	navigate
through	purely	mental	structures	is	reflected	in	the	language
	we	use	every	day:
we	say	the	future	lies	“up	ahead,”	
while	the	past	is	“behind”	us;	we	endeavor	to
stay	“on	top	of	things”	and	not	to	get	“out	of	our	depth”;	we	“reach”	for	a	lofty
goal	or	“stoop”	low	to	commit	a	disreputable	act.	These	are	not	merely	figures	of
speech	but	revealing	evidence	of	how	we	habitually	understand	and	interact	with
the	world	around	us.	Notes	Barbara	Tversky,	a	professor	of	psychology	and
education	at	Teachers	College	in	New	York:	“We	are	far	better
	and	more
experienced	at	spatial	thinking	than	at	abstract	thinking.	Abstract	thought	can	be
difficult	in	and	of	itself,	but	fortunately	it	can	often	be	mapped	onto	spatial
thought	in	one	way	or	another.	That	way,	spatial	thinking	can	substitute	for	and
scaffold	abstract	thought.”
--- Page 133 ---
Scientists	have	long	known	that	the	hippocampus	is	centrally	involved	in	our
ability	to	navigate	through	physical	space.	More	recently,	researchers	have
shown	that	this	region	is	engaged	in	organizing	our	thoughts	and	memories	more
generally:	it	maps	abstract	spaces
	as	well	as	concrete	ones.	In	a	study	published
in	2016,	neuroscientist	Branka	Milivojevic,	of	the	Donders	Institute	for	Brain,
Cognition	and	Behaviour	in	the	Netherlands,	scanned	the	brains
	of	a	group	of
volunteers	as	they	watched	the	1998	movie	
Sliding	Doors.
	In	this	romantic
comedy-drama,	the	main	character,	Helen—played	by	actress	Gwyneth	Paltrow
—meets	two	different	fates.	In	one	storyline,	she	makes	it	onto	a	train	and
returns	home	in	time	to	find	her	boyfriend	in	bed	with	another	woman.	In	a
second,	parallel	storyline,	she	misses	the	train	and	remains	oblivious	to	her
boyfriend’s	infidelity.	As	the	study	participants	watched	the	film,	Milivojevic
and	her	collaborators	observed	activity	in	their	hippocampi	identical	to	that	of
people	who	are	mentally	tracing	a	path	through	a	physical	space.	Milivojevic
proposes	that	the	viewers	of	
Sliding	Doors
	were	effectively	navigating	through
the	events	of	the	movie,	finding	their	way	along	its	branching	plotline	and
constructing	a	map	of	the	cinematic	territory	as	they	went.	We	process	our
firsthand	experiences	in	the	same	manner,	she	submits.
Some	researchers	have	even	suggested	that	the	way	our	sense	of	space	helps
organize	mental	content	can	explain	the	puzzling	phenomenon	of	“infantile
amnesia”
—the	fact	that	we	can’t	recall	much	about	our	earliest	years.	Because
very	young	children	are	not	able	to	move	through	space	under	their	own
locomotion,	the	theory	goes,	they	may	lack	a	mental	scaffold	on	which	to	hang
their	memories.	Children’s	impressions	of	their	own	experiences	may	become
well	enough	structured	to	be	memorable	
only	once	kids	are	able	to	move	about
of	their	own	volition.	As	adults,	our	memories	continue	to	be	tagged
	with	a	sense
of	the	physical	place	where	the	original	experience	occurred.	When	re-listening
to	a	podcast	or	audiobook,	for	example,	we	may	find	that	we	spontaneously
recall	the	place	where	we	first	heard	the	words.	The	automatic	place	log
maintained	by	our	brains	has	been	preserved	by	evolution	because	of	its	clear
survival	value:	it	was	vitally	important	for	our	forebears	to	remember	where	they
had	found	supplies	of	food	or	safe	shelter,	as	well	as	where	they	had	encountered
predators	and	other	dangers.	The	elemental	importance	of	
where
	such	things
were	located	means	the	mental	tags	attached	to	our	place	memories	are	often
charged	with	emotion,	positive	or	negative—making	information	about	place
even	more	memorable.
All	of	us	possess	this	powerful	place-based	memory	system	simply	by	virtue
of	being	human—but	some,	like	Ben	Pridmore	and	his	memory	champion	peers,
make	far	better	use	of	it.	The	rest	of	us	can	learn	to	do	what	they	do,	as
--- Page 134 ---
demonstrated	in	a	study	led	by	neuroscientist	Martin	Dresler	of	Radboud
University	in	the	Netherlands.	Dresler	and	his	collaborators	(who	included	Boris
Nikolai	Konrad,	himself	a	decorated	memory	athlete)	tested	two	dozen	of	the
world’s	top	memory	competitors,
	comparing	their	performance	on	a	word-
memorization	task	to	that	of	a	group	of	ordinary	citizens.	Not	surprisingly,	the
memory	champions	came	out	ahead,	correctly	recalling	an	average	of	seventy-
one	words	from	the	list	of	seventy-two	words	they	were	given,	with	a	number	of
them	turning	in	perfect	scores.	Regular	people	recalled	an	average	of	only
twenty-nine	words.	After	six	weeks	of	training	using	the	method	of	loci,
however,	these	previously	undistinguished	experimental	participants	turned	in	an
impressively	improved	performance,	more	than	doubling	their	average	score.
Associating	information	to	be	learned	with	a	sense	of	physical	space	can	help
people	remember	in	real-world	situations	too—whether	it’s	a	high	school	student
memorizing	verb	conjugations,	a	medical	resident	learning	a	litany	of	diseases
and	their	symptoms,	or	a	best	man	practicing	a	speech	for	a	rehearsal	dinner.
Undergraduates	who	take	the	course	on	civil	liberties
	taught	by	Charles	Wilson,
a	professor	of	political	science	at	the	University	of	North	Georgia,	have	to	learn
a	multitude	of	new	facts	and	ideas.	Wilson	helps	them	do	so	by	showing	them
how	to	link	individ
ual	pieces	of	information	to	particular	locations	within	a
space	they	know	well:	the	campus	cafeteria,	familiarly	called	the	“Chow	Hall.”
For	students	struggling	to	recall	the	provisions	set	forth	in	the	Bill	of	Rights,
for	example,	Wilson	encourages	them	to	imagine	stepping	up	to	the	Chow	Hall
soup	tureens:	the	soup	course,	which	comes	first	in	a	meal,	thus	becomes
associated	with	the	First	Amendment.	Then	on	to	the	station	where	bread	is
sliced;	here	Wilson	recommends	that	students	picture	a	pile	of	the	severed	limbs
of	grizzly	bears,	a	scenario	sure	to	prompt	a	memory	of	the	Second	Amendment
and	its	assurance	of	the	right	to	“bear	arms.”
That	image	is	a	bit	grisly,	but	Wilson	and	his	students	have	found	that
imagery	that	is	garish	or	outlandish	more	readily	triggers	recall.	Obeying	that
principle,	Wilson’s	students	learn	to	associate	the	landmark	court	case	of
McDonald	v.	City	of	Chicago
	with	an	image	of	the	fast	food	clown	Ronald
McDonald,	wearing	a	Chicago	Bulls	jersey,	filling	his	plate	at	the	salad	bar.	And
so	on	through	the	remaining	eight	amendments	in	the	Bill	of	Rights,	each	one
paired	with	an	imagined	sampling	of	the	Chow	Hall’s	culinary	offerings.
Wilson’s	students	enjoy	the	exercise,	and	they	say	it	helps	them	enormously	in
remembering	material	for	the	course.	Many	students	have	told	him	that	they’ve
started	using	the	method	of	loci	to	study	for	their	other	classes	as	well.
The	human	brain	is	not	well	equipped	to	remember	a	mass	of	abstract
information.	But	it	is	perfectly	tuned	to	recalling	details	associated	with	places	it
knows—and	by	drawing	on	this	natural	mastery	of	physical	space,	we	can	(as
--- Page 135 ---
knows—and	by	drawing	on	this	natural	mastery	of	physical	space,	we	can	(as
Martin	Dresler	showed)	more	than	double	our	effective	memory	capacity.
Extending	our	minds	via	physical	space	can	do	more	than	improve	our	recall,
however.	Our	powers	of	spatial	cognition	can	help	us	to	think	and	reason
effectively,	to	achieve	insight	and	solve	problems,	and	to	come	up	with	creative
ideas.	Such	powers	are	especially	generative	when	permitted	to	operate	not	on
imagined	space,	as	in	the	method	of	loci,	but	on	the	real	thing:	tangible,	three-
dimensional	space,	of	the	kind	our	minds	and	bodies	are	so	accustomed	to
navigating.
Our	culture	tends	to	valorize	doing	things	in	one’s	head;	we	are	awed	by
mathematicians	who	can	engage	in	elaborate	mental	calculations,	chess
grandmasters	who	can	plot	a	long	progression	of	moves	in	their	mind’s	eye—
and,	yes,	memory	champions,	who	can	remember	so	much	
without	reference	to
external	prompts.	But	true	human	genius	lies	in	the	way	we	are	able	to	take	facts
and	concepts	
out
	of	our	heads,	using	physical	space	to	spread	out	that	material,
to	structure	it,	and	to	see	it	anew.	The	places	we	make	for	ideas	can	take	many
forms:	a	bank	of	computer	screens,	the	pages	of	a	field	notebook,	the	surface	of
a	workshop	table—or	even,	as	one	celebrated	author	demonstrates,	an	expanse
of	office	wall.
	
“B
RILLIANT
,”	“masterful,”	and	“monumental”	are	words	regularly	used	to
describe	the	work	of	historian	Robert	Caro.
	He	was	awarded	a	Pulitzer	Prize	for
The	Power	Broker,
	his	sweeping	biography	of	the	urban	planner	Robert	Moses.
Assigned	in	many	college	courses,	the	book	has	sold	more	than	400,000	copies
and	has	never	been	out	of	print	since	its	publication	in	1974.	For	the	past	four
decades,	Caro	has	been	writing	about	the	midcentury	political	maestro	Lyndon
B.	Johnson—four	volumes	and	counting,	including	
Master	of	the	Senate
(another	Pulitzer	winner)	and	
Means	of	Ascent.
	In	total,	he	has	written	more	than
four	thousand	well-honed,	fact-rich	pages	of	prose	over	the	course	of	an
acclaimed	career.
But	at	first	Caro	struggled	even	to	wrap	his	head	around	his	subjects.	While
researching	and	reporting	
The	Power	Broker,
	he	was	overwhelmed	by	the
volume	of	information	he	had	collected.	“It	was	so	big,
	so	immense,”	he	has
said.	“I	couldn’t	figure	out	what	to	do	with	the	material.”	Caro’s	books	are	too
colossal	to	be	held	entirely	in	mind—even	their	author’s	mind.	Nor	is	the	space
of	a	typewritten	page	(Caro	does	not	use	a	computer)	nearly	big	enough	to
contain	the	full	sweep	of	his	storytelling.	In	order	to	complete	these	massive
projects,	Caro	has	to	extend	his	thinking	into	physical	space.	One	entire	wall	of
his	office	on	Manhattan’s	Upper	West	Side	is	taken	up	by	a	cork	board	four	feet
--- Page 136 ---
high	and	ten	feet	wide;	the	board	is	covered	with	a	detailed	outline	of	Caro’s
current	work	in	progress,	plotting	its	trajectory	from	beginning	to	end.	(So
thorough	is	Caro	that	he	must	know	the	
last
	sentence	of	a	book	before	he	starts
composing	its	first	lines.)
As	he	writes,	the	stretch	of	wall	becomes	another	dimension	in	which	to	think.
“I	can’t	start	writing	a	book
	until	I’ve	thought	it	through	and	can	see	it	whole	in
my	mind,”	he	told	a	visitor	to	his	office.	“So	before	I	start	writing,	I	boil	the
book	down	to	three	paragraphs,	or	two	or	one—that’s	when	it	comes	into	view.
That	process	might	take	weeks.	And	then	I	turn	those	paragraphs	into	an	outline
of	the	whole	book.	That’s	what	you	see	
up	here	on	my	wall	now.”	In	another
interview,	Caro	explained	how	the	outline	wall	helps	him	stay	in	the	zone.	“I
don’t	want	to	stop
	while	I’m	writing,	so	I	have	to	know	where	everything	is,”	he
explained.	“It’s	hard	for	me	to	keep	in	the	mood	of	the	chapter	I’m	writing	if	I
have	to	keep	searching	for	files.”
Out	of	necessity,	Caro	found	his	way	to	a	mode	of	thinking	and	working	that
would	not	have	been	possible	had	he	tried	to	keep	his	voluminous	material
entirely	in	his	head.	“When	thought	overwhelms	the	mind,
	the	mind	uses	the
world,”	psychologist	Barbara	Tversky	has	observed.	Once	we	recognize	this
possibility,	we	can	deliberately	shape	the	material	worlds	in	which	we	learn	and
work	to	facilitate	mental	extension—to	enhance	“the	cognitive	congeniality	of	a
space,”
	in	the	words	of	David	Kirsh,	a	professor	at	the	University	of	California,
San	Diego.
To	understand	how	this	works,	let’s	take	a	closer	look	at	what	Caro’s	wall	is
doing	for	his	mind.	On	the	most	basic	level,	the	author	is	using	physical	space	to
offload
	facts	and	ideas.
	He	need	not	keep	mentally	aloft	these	pieces	of
information	or	the	complex	structure	in	which	they	are	embedded;	his	posted
outline	holds	them	at	the	ready,	granting	him	more	mental	resources	to	think
about
	that	same	material.	Keeping	a	thought	in	mind—while	also	doing	things	to
and	with	that	thought—is	a	cognitively	taxing	activity.	We	put	part	of	this
mental	burden	down	when	we	delegate	the	representation	of	the	information	to
physical	space,	something	like	jotting	down	a	phone	number	instead	of	having	to
continually	refresh	its	mental	representation	by	repeating	it	under	our	breath.
Caro’s	wall	turns	the	mental	“map”	of	his	book	into	a	stable	external	artifact.
This	is	the	second	way	in	which	the	cork	board	in	Caro’s	office	extends	his
ability	to	think:	looking	it	over,	he	can	now	see—far	more	clearly	and	concretely
than	if	the	map	had	remained	inside	his	head—how	his	ideas	relate	to	one
another,	how	the	many	paths	taken	by	his	narrative	twist	and	turn,	diverge	and
converge.	Although	Caro	tailored	his	longtime	method	to	suit	his	particular	style
of	working,	the	strategy	he	came	up	with	is	similar	to	one	that	has	received
--- Page 137 ---
substantial	empirical	support	from	psychology:	an	approach	known	as	
concept
mapping.
	A	concept	map	is	a	visual	representation	of	facts	and	ideas,	and	of	the
relationships	among	them.	It	can	take	the	form	of	a	detailed	outline,	as	in	Robert
Caro’s	case,	but	it	is	often	more	graphic	and	schematic	in	form.
Research	has	revealed	that	the	
act
	of	creating	a	concept	map,	on	its	
own,
generates	a	number	of	cognitive	benefits.	It	forces	us	to	reflect	on	what	we
know,	and	to	organize	it	into	a	coherent	structure.	As	we	construct	the	concept
map,	the	process	may	reveal	gaps	in	our	understanding	of	which	we	were
previously	unaware.	And,	having	gone	through	the	process	of	concept	mapping,
we	remember	the	material	better—because	we	have	thought	deeply	about	its
meaning.	Once	the	concept	map	is	completed,	the	knowledge	that	usually	resides
inside	the	head	is	made	visible.	By	inspecting	the	map,	we’re	better	able	to	see
the	big	picture,	and	to	resist	becoming	distracted	by	individual	details.	We	can
also	more	readily	perceive	how	the	different	parts	of	a	complex	whole	are
related	to	one	another.
Joseph	Novak,	now	a	professor	emeritus	of	biology	and	science	education	at
Cornell	University,	was	investigating	the	way	children	learn	science
	when	he
pioneered	the	concept-mapping	method	in	the	1970s.	Although	the	technique
originated	in	education,	Novak	notes	that	it	is	increasingly	being	applied	in	the
world	of	work—where,	he	says,	“the	knowledge	structure	necessary	to
understand
	and	resolve	problems	is	often	an	order	of	magnitude	more	complex”
than	that	which	is	required	in	academic	settings.	Concept	maps	can	vary
enormously	in	size	and	complexity,	from	a	simple	diagram	to	an	elaborate	plan
featuring	hundreds	of	interacting	elements.
Robert	Caro’s	map,	for	example,	is	
big:
	big	enough	to	stand	in	front	of,	to
walk	along,	to	lean	into	and	stand	back	from.	The	sheer	expansiveness	of	his
outline	allows	Caro	to	bring	to	bear	on	his	project	not	only	his	purely	cognitive
faculties	of	reasoning	and	analysis	but	also	his	more	visceral	powers	of
navigation	and	wayfinding.	Researchers	are	now	producing	evidence	that	these
ancient	evolved	capacities	can	help	us	to	think	more	intelligently	about	abstract
concepts—an	insight	that	showed	up	first	in,	of	all	places,	a	futuristic	action
film.
	
T
HE	SCENE	FROM
	the	2002	movie	
Minority	Report
	is	famous	because,	well,	it’s
just	so	cool:	Chief	of	Precrime	John	Anderton,	played	by	Tom	Cruise,	stands	in
front	of	a	bank	of	gigantic	computer	screens.	He	is	reviewing	evidence	of	a
crime	yet	to	be	committed,	but	this	is	no	staid	intellectual	exercise;	the	way	he
interacts	with	the	information	splayed	before	him	is	active,	almost	tactile.	He
reaches	out	with	his	hands	to	grab	and	move	images	as	if	they	were	physical
--- Page 138 ---
objects;	he	turns	his	head	to	catch	
a	scene	unfolding	in	his	peripheral	vision;	he
takes	a	step	forward	to	inspect	a	picture	more	closely.	Cruise,	as	Anderton,
physically	navigates	through	the	investigative	file	as	he	would	through	a	three-
dimensional	landscape.
The	movie,	based	on	a	short	story	by	Philip	K.	Dick	and	set	in	the	year	2054,
featured	technology	that	was	not	yet	available	in	the	real	world—yet	John
Anderton’s	use	of	the	interface	comes	off	as	completely	plausible,	even	(to	him)
unexceptional.	David	Kirby,	a	professor	of	science,	technology,	and	society	at
California	Polytechnic	State	University,	maintains	that	this	is	the	key	to
moviegoers’	suspension	of	disbelief.	“The	most	successful	cinematic
technologies
	are	taken	for	granted	by	the	characters”	in	a	film,	he	writes,	“and
thus,	communicate	to	the	audience	that	these	are	not	extraordinary	but	rather
everyday	technologies.”
The	director	of	
Minority	Report,
	Steven	Spielberg,	had	an	important	factor
working	in	his	favor	when	he	staged	this	scene.	The	technology	employed	by	his
lead	character	relied	on	a	human	capacity	that	could	hardly	be	more	“everyday”
or	“taken	for	granted”:	the	ability	to	move	ourselves	through	space.	For	added
verisimilitude,	Spielberg	invited	computer	scientists
	from	the	Massachusetts
Institute	of	Technology	to	collaborate	on	the	film’s	production,	encouraging
them	“to	take	on	that	design	work	as	if	it	were	an	R&D	effort,”	says	John
Underkoffler,	one	of	the	researchers	from	MIT.	And	in	a	sense,	it	was:	following
the	release	of	the	movie,	Underkoffler	says,	he	was	approached	by	“countless”
investors	and	CEOs	who	wanted	to	know	“Is	that	real?
	Can	we	pay	you	to	build
it	if	it’s	not	real?”
Since	then,	scientists	have	succeeded	at	building	something	quite	similar	to
the	technology	that	Tom	Cruise	engaged	to	such	dazzling	effect.	(John
Underkoffler	is	now	himself	the	CEO	of	Oblong	Industries,	developer	of	a
Minority	Report
–like	user	interface	he	calls	a	Spatial	Operating	Environment.)
What’s	more,	researchers	have	begun	to	study	the	cognitive	effects	of	this
technology,	and	they	find	that	it	makes	real	a	promise	of	science	fiction:	it	helps
people	to	think	more	intelligently.
The	particular	tool	that	has	become	the	subject	of	empirical	investigation	is
the	“large	high-resolution	display”—an	oversized	computer	screen	to	which
users	can	bring	some	of	the	same	navigational	capacities	they	would	apply	to	a
real-world	landscape.	Picture	a	bank	of	computer	screens	three	and	a	half	feet
wide	and	nine	feet	long,	presenting	to	the	eye	
some	31.5	million	pixels	(the
average	computer	monitor	has	fewer	than	800,000	pixels).	Robert	Ball,	an
associate	professor	of	computer	science	at	Weber	State	University	in	Utah,	has
run	numerous	studies	comparing	people’s	performance	when	interacting	with	a
--- Page 139 ---
display	like	this	to	their	performance	when	consulting	a	conventionally
proportioned	screen.
The	improvements	generated	by	the	use	of	the	super-sized	display	are	striking.
Ball	and	his	collaborators	have	reported	that	large	high-resolution	displays
increase	by	more	than	tenfold
	the	average	speed	at	which	basic	visualization
tasks	are	completed.	On	more	challenging	tasks,	such	as	pattern	finding,	study
participants	improved	their	performance	by	200	to	300	percent	when	using	large
displays.	Working	with	the	smaller	screen,	users	resorted	to	less	efficient	and
more	simplistic	strategies,	producing	fewer	and	more	limited	solutions	to	the
problems	posed	by	experimenters.	When	using	a	large	display,
	they	engaged	in
higher-order	thinking,	arrived	at	a	greater	number	of	discoveries	and	achieved
broader,	more	integrative	insights.	Such	gains	are	not	a	matter	of	individual
differences	or	preferences,	Ball	emphasizes;	
everyone
	who	engages	with	the
larger	display
	finds	that	their	thinking	is	enhanced.
Why	would	this	be?	Large	high-resolution	displays	allow	users	to	deploy	their
“physical	embodied	resources,”
	says	Ball,	adding,	“With	small	displays,	much	of
the	body’s	built-in	functionality	is	wasted.”	These	corporeal	resources	are	many
and	rich.	They	include	
peripheral	vision,
	or	the	ability	to	see	objects	and
movements	outside	the	area	of	the	eye’s	direct	focus.	Research	by	Ball	and
others	shows	that	the	capacity	to	access	information	through	our	peripheral
vision	enables	us	to	gather	more	knowledge
	and	insight	at	one	time,	providing	us
with	a	richer	sense	of	context.	The	power	to	see	“out	of	the	corners	of	our	eyes”
also	allows	us	to	be	more	efficient
	at	finding	the	information	we	need,	and	helps
us	to	keep	more	of	that	information	in	mind	as	we	think	about	the	challenge
before	us.	Smaller	displays,	meanwhile,	encourage	a	narrower	visual	focus,
	and
consequently	more	limited	thinking.	As	Ball	puts	it,	the	availability	of	more
screen	pixels	permits	us	to	use	more	of	our	own	“brain	pixels”	to	understand	and
solve	problems.
Our	built-in	“embodied	resources”	also	include	our	
spatial	memory
:	our
robust	capacity,	exploited	by	the	method	of	loci,	to	remember	where	things	are.
This	ability	is	often	“wasted,”	as	Ball	would	have	it,	by	
conventional	computer
technology:	on	small	displays,	information	is	contained	within	windows	that	are,
of	necessity,	stacked	on	top	of	one	another	or	moved	around	on	the	screen,
interfering	with	our	ability	to	relate	to	that	information	in	terms	of	where	it	is
located.	By	contrast,	large	displays,	or	multiple	displays,	offer	enough	space	to
lay	out	all	the	data	in	an	arrangement	that	persists	over	time,	allowing	us	to
leverage	our	spatial	memory	as	we	navigate	through	that	information.
Researchers	from	the	University	of	Virginia	and	from	Carnegie	Mellon
University	reported	that	study	participants	were	able	to	recall	56	percent	more
--- Page 140 ---
information
	when	it	was	presented	to	them	on	multiple	monitors	rather	than	on	a
single	screen.	The	multiple	monitor	setup	induced	the	participants	to	orient	their
own	bodies	toward	the	information	they	sought—rotating	their	torsos,	turning
their	heads—thereby	generating	memory-enhancing	mental	tags	as	to	the
information’s	spatial	location.	Significantly,	the	researchers	noted,	these	cues
were	generated	“without	active	effort.”	Automatically	noting	place	information
is	simply	something	we	humans	do,	enriching	our	memories	without	depleting
precious	mental	resources.
Other	embodied	resources
	engaged	by	large	displays	include	
proprioception,
or	our	sense	of	how	and	where	the	body	is	moving	at	a	given	moment,	and	our
experience	of	
optical	flow,
	or	the	continuous	stream	of	information	our	eyes
receive	as	we	move	about	in	real-life	environments.	Both	these	busy	sources	of
input	fall	silent	when	we	sit	motionless	before	our	small	screens,	depriving	us	of
rich	dimensions	of	data	that	could	otherwise	be	bolstering	our	recall	and
deepening	our	insight.
Indeed,	the	use	of	a	compact	display	actively	
drains
	our	mental	capacity.	The
screen’s	small	size	means	that	the	map	we	construct	of	our	conceptual	terrain
has	to	be	held	inside	our	head	rather	than	fully	laid	out	on	the	screen	itself.	We
must	devote	some	portion	of	our	limited	cognitive	bandwidth	to	maintaining	that
map	in	mind;	what’s	more,	the	mental	version	of	our	map
	may	not	stay	true	to
the	data,	becoming	inaccurate	or	distorted	over	time.	Finally,	a	small	screen
requires	us	to	engage	in	
virtual
	navigation	through	information—scrolling,
zooming,	clicking—rather	than	the	more	intuitive	
physical
	navigation
	our	bodies
carry	out	so	effortlessly.	Robert	Ball	reports	that	as	display	size	increases,
	virtual
navigation	activity	decreases—and	so	does	the	time	required	to	carry	out	a	task.
Large	displays,	he	has	found,	require	as	much	as	90	percent	less	“window
management”
	than	small	monitors.
Of	course,	few	of	us	are	about	to	install	a	thirty-square-foot	screen	in	our
home	or	office	(although	large	interactive	displays	are	becoming	an	ever	more
common	sight	in	industry,	academia,	and	the	corporate	world).	But	Ball	notes
that	much	less	dramatic	changes	to	the	places	where	we	work	and	learn	can
allow	us	to	garner	the	benefits	of	physically	navigating	the	space	of	ideas.	The
key,	he	says,	is	to	turn	away	from	choosing	technology	that	is	itself	ever	faster
and	more	powerful,	toward	tools	that	make	better	use	of	our	own	human
capacities—capacities	that	conventional	technology	often	fails	to	leverage.
Rather	than	investing	in	a	lightning-quick	processor,	he	suggests,	we	should
spend	our	money	on	a	larger	monitor—or	on	multiple	monitors,	to	be	set	up	next
to	one	another	and	used	at	the	same	time.	The	computer	user	who	makes	this
choice,	he	writes,	“will	most	likely	be	more	productive
	because	she	invested	in
--- Page 141 ---
the	human	component	of	her	computer	system.	She	has	more	information
displayed	at	one	time	on	her	monitor,	which,	in	turn,	enables	her	to	take
advantage	of	the	human	side	of	the	equation.”
	
T
HE	“TECHNOLOGY”	THAT
	allows	us	to	explore	the	space	of	ideas	need	not	be
digital.	Sometimes	the	most	generative	tools	are	the	simplest:	a	pencil,	a
notebook,	an	observing	gaze.	For	a	young	Charles	Darwin,	such	modest
equipment	provided	the	key	to	developing	a	theory	that	would	change	the	world.
In	1831	Darwin	was	twenty-two	years	old,	recently	graduated	from	Christ’s
College,	Cambridge,	uncertain	whether	to	pursue	a	conventional	career	as	a
doctor	or	parson—or	to	follow	his	burgeoning	interest	in	natural	history.	In
August	of	that	year,	he	received	a	letter	from	his	former	tutor	at	Cambridge,
asking	if	he	would	be	interested	in	serving	as	a	naturalist	on	a	two-year
expedition	aboard	the	HMS	
Beagle.
	Darwin	accepted,	and	in	December	he
began	his	seaborne	apprenticeship	to	Captain	Robert	FitzRoy.
The	young	man	carefully	observed	and	emulated	the	actions	of	the
experienced	captain.	Darwin	had	never	kept	a	journal	before	coming	aboard	the
Beagle,
	for	example,	but	he	began	to	do	so	under	the	influence	of	FitzRoy,
whose	naval	training	had	taught	him	to	keep	a	precise	record	of	every	happening
aboard	the	ship	and	every	detail	of	its	ocean
going	environment.	Each	day,
Darwin	and	FitzRoy	ate	lunch	together;	following	the	meal,	FitzRoy	settled
down	to	writing,	bringing	both	the	formal	ship’s	log	and	his	personal	journal	up
to	date.	Darwin	followed	suit,	keeping	current	his	own	set	of	papers:	his	field
notebooks,	in	which	he	recorded	his	immediate	observations,	often	in	the	form
of	drawings	and	sketches;	his	scientific	journal,	which	combined	observations
from	his	field	notebooks	with	more	integrative	and	theoretical	musings;	and	his
personal	diary.	Even	when	Darwin	disembarked	from	the	ship	for	a	time,
traveling	by	land	through	South	America,	he	endeavored	to	maintain	the	nautical
custom	of	noting	down	every	incident,	every	striking	sight	he	encountered.
The	historian	of	science	and	Harvard	University	professor	Janet	Browne	has
remarked	upon	the	significance	of	this	activity	of	Darwin’s:	“In	keeping	such
copious	records,
	he	learned	to	write	easily	about	nature	and	about	himself.	Like
FitzRoy,	he	taught	himself	to	look	closely	at	his	surroundings,	to	make	notes	and
measurements,	and	to	run	through	a	mental	checklist	of	features	that	ought	to	be
recorded,	never	relying	entirely	on	memory	and	always	writing	reports	soon
after	the	event.”	She	adds,	“Although	this	was	an	ordinary	practice	in	naval
affairs,	it	was	for	Darwin	a	basic	lesson	in	arranging	his	thoughts	clearly	and	an
excellent	preparation	for	composing	logical	scientific	arguments	that	stood	him
in	good	stead	for	many	years	afterwards.”	But	Darwin’s	careful	note	keeping	did
--- Page 142 ---
not	simply	help	him	learn	to	“arrange	his	thoughts	clearly”	and	“compose	logical
scientific	arguments.”	The	projection	of	the	internal	workings	of	his	mind	onto
the	physical	space	of	his	journal	created	a	conceptual	map	he	was	able	to	follow
all	the	way	to	his	theory	of	evolution.	Some	twenty-five	years	before	the
publication	of	his	epochal	book	
The	Origin	of	Species,
	the	entries	in	the	journal
Darwin	kept	throughout	his	expedition	moved	his	thinking	forward,	step	by
tentative	step.
On	October	10,	1833,	for	example,	Darwin	discovered	a	fossilized	horse	tooth
on	the	banks	of	the	Rio	Paraná	in	northeastern	Argentina.	Alongside	the	tooth	he
found	the	fossilized	bones	of	a	
Megatherium,
	a	giant	ground	sloth.	Writing	in	his
journal,	Darwin	puzzled	over	the	fact	that	although	these	fossilized	remains	were
apparently	of	the	same	age,	horses	still	populated	the	earth	in	great	numbers,
while	the	
Megatherium
	was	long	extinct.	Eighteen	months	later,	on	April	1,
1835,	Darwin	came	upon	a	“fossil	forest”	high	in	the	Andes—what	he	described
in	a	letter	to	
his	tutor	in	Cambridge	as	“a	small	wood	of	petrified	trees.”	Again
he	pondered	the	implications	of	this	discovery	in	his	journal,	noting	that	one
possible	explanation	for	the	existence	of	the	forest	was	a	long-ago	“subsidence,”
or	a	sinking	of	the	land	under	the	sea,	where	the	trees	would	have	become
calcified	by	marine	sediment.	Darwin	knew	that	such	dramatic	topographical
shifts—down	and	then	up	again,	to	the	mountainous	elevation	at	which	he
encountered	the	fossil	forest—were	not	endorsed	by	the	thinking	of	the	day,
which	assumed	geological	stability	since	the	time	of	Earth’s	creation.	“I	must
confess	however
	that	I	myself	cannot	quite	banish	the	idea	of	subsidence,
enormous	as	the	extent	of	movement	required	assuredly	is,”	he	confided	in	his
journal.
Such	precise	and	yet	open-minded	observations	helped	keep	Darwin	moving
on	a	steady	path	toward	a	conclusion	that	now	appears	inevitable,	but	which
hardly	seemed	so	at	the	time.	In	1849,	at	forty	years	of	age—his	voyage	on	the
HMS	
Beagle
	behind	him	but	the	publication	of	
The
	
Origin	of	Species
	still	to
come—Darwin	advised	those	who	would	follow	in	his	footsteps	to	“acquire	the
habit	of	writing
	very	copious	notes,	not	all	for	publication,	but	as	a	guide	for
himself.”	The	naturalist	must	take	“precautions	to	attain	accuracy,”	he
continued,	“for	the	imagination	is	apt	to	run	riot	when	dealing	with	masses	of
vast	dimensions	and	with	time	during	almost	infinity.”
When	thought	overwhelms	the	mind,	the	mind	uses	the	world—and
researchers	have	reported	some	intriguing	findings	about	why	this	use	of	the
(physical,	spatial)	world	is	so	beneficial	for	our	thinking.	As	with	the	creation	of
concept	maps,	the	
process
	of	taking	notes	in	the	field—whether	that	field	is	a
sales	floor,	a	conference	room,	or	a	high	school	chemistry	lab—itself	confers	a
--- Page 143 ---
cognitive	bonus.	When	we	simply	watch	or	listen,	we	take	it	all	in,	imposing	few
distinctions	on	the	stimuli	streaming	past	our	eyes	and	ears.	As	soon	as	we	begin
making	notes,	however,	we	are	forced	to	discriminate,	judge,	and	select.	This
more	engaged	mental	activity	leads	us	to	process	what	we’re	observing	more
deeply.	It	can	also	lead	us	to	have	
new
	thoughts;	our	jottings	build	for	us	a	series
of	ascending	steps	from	which	we	can	survey	new	vistas.
Erick	Greene,	a	professor	of	ecology	and	evolutionary	biology	at	the
University	of	Montana,	has	relied	on	his	field	notebooks	throughout	his	long
career.
	His	stacks	of	spiral-bound	notebooks	contain	descriptions	of	macaws	and
parrots	flying	at	dusk	to	roost	in	palm	swamps	in	Peru;	of	the	
“wahoo”	alarm
calls	of	olive	baboons	in	the	Okavango	Delta	of	Botswana,	warning	one	another
of	approaching	lions;	of	teenage	male	sperm	whales	flipping	up	their	tails	as
they	begin	their	hour-long	dives	to	catch	giant	squid	in	a	deepwater	trench	off
New	Zealand.	But	his	notes	are	not	merely	a	record	of	what	he	has	observed	and
experienced;	they	are,	he	says,	“the	main	source	of	ideas	that	take	my	research	in
new	directions.”
Seeking	to	give	his	students	a	sense	of	this	process,	Greene	assigned	a	field
notebook	exercise	in	the	upper-level	ecology	class	he	teaches	to	UM
undergraduates.	He	asked	them	to	“pick	one	thing”	and	observe	it	carefully	over
the	entire	semester;	the	object	of	study	could	be	a	single	tree,	a	bird	feeder,	a
beaver	dam,	the	student’s	own	garden.	This	was	not,	he	stressed	to	his	class,	a
rote	exercise	in	recording	but	a	highly	generative	activity,	the	starting	point	of
scientific	discovery.	“One	of	the	main	things	I	wanted	to	get	across	is	that	one	of
the	hardest	parts	of	science	is	coming	up	with	new	questions,”	says	Greene.
“Where	do	fresh	new	ideas	come	from?	Careful	observations	of	nature	are	a
great	place	to	start.”	In	addition	to	making	observations	of	their	chosen	site	over
time,	students	were	required	to	come	up	with	at	least	ten	research	questions
inspired	by	what	they	saw.
As	Greene’s	students	discovered,	the	very	act	of	noticing	and	selecting	points
of	interest	to	put	down	on	paper	initiates	a	more	profound	level	of	mental
processing.	Things	really	get	interesting,	however,	when	we	pause	and	look	back
at	what	we’ve	written.	Representations	in	the	mind	and	representations	on	the
page	may	seem	roughly	equivalent,	when	in	fact	they	differ	significantly	in
terms	of	what	psychologists	call	their	“affordances”
—that	is,	what	we’re	able	to
do
	with	them.	External	representations,	for	example,	are	more	
definite
	than
internal	ones.	Picture	a	tiger,	suggests	philosopher	Daniel	Dennett	in	a	classic
thought	experiment;
	imagine	in	detail	its	eyes,	its	nose,	its	paws,	its	tail.
Following	a	few	moments	of	conjuring,	we	may	feel	we’ve	summoned	up	a
fairly	complete	image.	Now,	says	Dennett,	answer	this	question:	How	many
--- Page 144 ---
stripes	does	the	tiger	have?	Suddenly	the	mental	picture	that	had	seemed	so	solid
becomes	maddeningly	slippery.
	If	we	had	
drawn
	the	tiger	on	paper,	of	course,
counting	its	stripes	would	be	a	straightforward	task.
Here,	then,	is	one	of	the	unique	affordances	of	an	external	representation:	we
can	apply	one	or	more	of	our	physical	senses	to	it.	As	the	tiger	example	shows,
“seeing”	an	image	in	our	mind’s	eye	is	not	the	same	as	
seeing	it	on	the	page.
Daniel	Reisberg,	a	professor	emeritus	of	psychology	at	Reed	College	in	Oregon,
calls	this	shift	in	perspective	the	“detachment	gain”
:	the	cognitive	benefit	we
receive	from	putting	a	bit	of	distance	between	ourselves	and	the	content	of	our
minds.	When	we	do	so,	we	can	see	more	clearly	what	that	content	is	made	of—
how	many	stripes	are	on	the	tiger,	so	to	speak.	This	measure	of	space	also	allows
us	to	activate	our	powers	of	
recognition.
	We	leverage	these	powers	whenever	we
write	down	two	or	more	ways	to	spell	a	word,	seeking	the	one	that	“looks	right.”
The	curious	thing	about	this	common	practice	is	that	we	
do
	tend	to	know
immediately	which	spelling	appears	correct—indicating	that	this	is	knowledge
we	already	possess	but	can’t	access	until	it	is	externalized.
A	similar	phenomenon	has	been	reported	by	researchers	investigating	science
learning.	In	a	study	published	in	2016,	experimenters	asked	eighth-grade
students
	to	illustrate	with	drawings	the	operation	of	a	mechanical	system	(a
bicycle	pump)	and	a	chemical	system	(the	bonding	of	atoms	to	form	molecules).
Generating	visual	explanations	of	how	these	systems	work	led	the	students	to
achieve	a	deeper	level	of	understanding;	without	any	additional	instruction,
participants	were	able	to	use	their	own	drawings	as	a	“check	for	completeness
and	coherence	as	well	as	a	platform	for	inference,”	the	researchers	note.	Turning
a	mental	representation	into	shapes	and	lines	on	a	page	supported	the	students’
growing	understanding,	helping	them	to	elucidate	more	fully	what	they	already
knew	about	these	scientific	systems.	At	the	same	time,	the	explicitness—the
definiteness
—of	the	drawings	they	made	revealed	with	ruthless	rigor	what	the
students	did	not	yet	know	or	understand,	leading	them	to	fill	in	the	gaps	thus
exposed.
So	external	representations	are	more	definite	than	internal	ones—and	yet,	in
another	sense,	they	are	also	more	usefully	
ambiguous.
	When	a	representation
remains	inside	our	heads,	there’s	no	mystery	about	what	it	signifies;	it’s	
our
thought,
	and	so	“there	can	be	neither	doubt
	nor	ambiguity	about	what	is
intended,”	notes	Daniel	Reisberg.	Once	we’ve	placed	it	on	the	page,	however,
we	can	riff	on	it,	play	with	it,	take	it	in	new	directions;	it	can	almost	seem	as	if
we	ourselves	didn’t	make	it.	And	indeed,	researchers	who	have	observed	artists,
architects,	and	designers	as	they	create	report	that	they	often	“discover”	elements
in	their	own	work
	that	they	did	not	“put	there,”	at	least	not	intentionally.
--- Page 145 ---
Gabriela	Goldschmidt,	professor	emeritus	of	architecture	at	the	Technion-
Israel	Institute	of	Technology,	explains	how	this	works:	“One	reads	off	the
sketch
	more	information	than	was	invested	in	its	making.	This	becomes	possible
because	when	we	put	down	on	paper	dots,	lines,	and	other	marks,	new
combinations	and	relationships	among	these	elements	are	created	that	we	could
not	have	anticipated	or	planned	for.	We	discover	them	in	the	sketch	as	it	is	being
made.”	Architects,	artists,	and	designers	often	speak	of	a	“conversation”	carried
on
	between	eye	and	hand;	Goldschmidt	makes	the	two-way	nature	of	this
conversation	clear	when	she	refers	to	“the	backtalk	of	self-generated	sketches.”
Research	by	Goldschmidt	and	others	shows	that	those	who	are	skilled	at
drawing	excel	in	managing	this	lively	dialogue.	Such	studies	find,	for	example,
that	expert	architects	are	far	more	adept
	at	identifying	promising	possibilities
within	their	existing	sketches	than	are	relative	novices.	In	one	in-depth	analysis
of	an	experienced	architect’s	methods,	researchers	determined	that	fully	80
percent	of	his	
new
	ideas	came	from	reinterpreting	his	
old
	drawings.	Expert
architects	are	also	less	likely	than	beginners	to	get	stuck	perseverating	on	a
single	unproductive	concept;	they	are	proficient	at	recombining	disparate
elements	found	in	their	sketches	into	new	and	auspicious	forms.
From	these	observations	of	expert	draftsmen,	some	promising	prescriptions
can	be	drawn.	When	setting	out	to	generate	new	ideas,	we	should	begin	with
only	the	most	general	plan	or	goal;	early	on	in	the	process,	vagueness	and
ambiguity	are	more	generative	than	explicitness	or	definition.	Think	of	the	task
not	in	linear	terms—tracing	a	direct	line	from	point	A	to	point	B—but	rather	as	a
cycle:	think,	draw,	look,	rethink,	redraw.	Likewise,	don’t	envision	the	mind
telling	the	pencil	what	to	do;	instead,	allow	a	conversation	to	develop	between
eye	and	hand,	the	action	of	one	informing	the	other.	Finally,	we	ought	to
postpone	judgment	as	long	as	possible,	such	that	this	give-and-take	between
perception	and	action	can	proceed	without	becoming	inhibited	by	preconceived
notions	or	by	critical	self-doubt.
Across	the	board,	in	every	field,	experts	are	distinguished	by	their	skillful	use
of	externalization;
	as	cognitive	scientist	David	Kirsh	has	written	of	video	game
virtuosos,	“Better	players	use	the	world	better.”
	Skilled	artists,	scientists,
designers,	and	architects	don’t	limit	themselves	to	the	two-dimensional	space	of
the	page.	They	regularly	reach	
for	three-dimensional	models,	which	offer
additional	advantages:	users	can	manipulate	the	various	elements	of	the	model,
view	the	model	from	multiple	perspectives,	and	orient	their	own	bodies	to	the
model,	bringing	the	full	complement	of	their	“embodied	resources”	to	bear	on
thinking	about	the	task	and	the	challenges	it	presents.
--- Page 146 ---
David	Kirsh	has	made	close	observations	of	the	way	architects	use	physical
mock-ups	of	the	buildings	they	are	designing;	when	they	interact	with	the
models	they	have	constructed,	he	maintains,	“they	are	literally	
thinking
	with
these	objects.”	Interactions	carried	out	in	three	dimensions,	he	says,	“enable
forms	of	thought
	that	would	be	hard	if	not	impossible	to	reach	otherwise.”	Kirsh
calls	this	the	“cognitive	extra”	that	comes	from	moving	concrete	objects	through
physical	space—a	mental	dividend	that	made	the	difference	for	one	scientist
struggling	with	a	seemingly	insoluble	problem.
	
A	
DREARY	DAY
	in	February	1953	found	James	Watson	in	low	spirits.
	He	and	his
collaborator	Francis	Crick—both	young	scientists	at	the	Cavendish	Laboratory
in	Cambridge,	England—had	been	working	for	months	to	determine	the
structure	of	DNA,	the	molecule	that	contains	the	genetic	code	for	living	things.
That	morning	a	colleague	had	urged	him	“not	to	waste	any	more	time
	with	my
harebrained	scheme,”	as	Watson	later	recounted	in	his	autobiography.	Hoping	to
demonstrate	that	his	proposed	arrangement	of	the	four	chemical	bases	that	make
up	DNA—adenine,	guanine,	cytosine,	and	thymine—was	true	to	life,	he	had
asked	the	machinists	at	the	Cavendish	workshop	to	solder	models	of	the	bases
out	of	tin.	The	models	were	taking	too	long	to	be	finished,	however,	and	Watson
felt	as	if	he	had	“run	into	a	stone	wall.”	Finally,	“in	desperation,”
	he	took	on	the
job	himself,	and	spent	the	afternoon	fashioning	models	out	of	stiff	cardboard.
Watson	continues	the	story:	“When	I	got	to	our	still	empty	office
	the
following	morning,	I	quickly	cleared	away	the	papers	from	my	desktop	so	that	I
would	have	a	large,	flat	surface	on	which	to	form	pairs	of	bases	held	together	by
hydrogen	bonds.”	At	first	he	tried	fitting	his	cardboard	bases	together	in	a
fashion	dictated	by	his	latest	thinking	about	how	the	elements	of	DNA	might	be
arranged—but,	Watson	related,	“I	saw	all	too	well	that	they	led	nowhere.”	So	he
“began	shifting	the	bases	in	and	out	of	various	other	pairing	possibilities.”
Then	realization	dawned:	“Suddenly	I	became	aware	that	an	adenine-thymine
pair	held	together	by	two	hydrogen	bonds	was	identical	in	shape	to	a	guanine-
cytosine	pair	held	together	by	at	least	two	hydrogen	bonds.”	Moving	around	the
pieces	of	his	cardboard	model,	Watson	began	to	envision	the	chemical	bases
embedded	in	a	double	helix	structure.	“All	the	hydrogen	bonds	seemed	to	form
naturally,”	he	noted;	“no	fudging	was	required	to	make	the	two	types	of	base
pairs	identical	in	shape.”	His	“morale	skyrocketed,”	he	recalled,	as	the	pieces
quite	literally	came	together	before	his	eyes.	Just	then	his	partner,	Crick,	made
his	appearance,	and	Watson	wasted	no	time	in	announcing	the	breakthrough:
“Upon	his	arrival	Francis	did	not	get	more	than	halfway	through	the	door	before
I	let	loose	that	the	answer	to	everything	was	in	our	hands.”
--- Page 147 ---
The	final	step	of	Watson	and	Crick’s	long	journey	of	discovery	demonstrates
the	value	of	what	psychologists	call	
interactivity:
	the	physical	manipulation	of
tactile	objects	as	an	aid	to	solving	abstract	problems.	The	fact	that	Watson	had	to
make	his	models	himself	is	telling.	Outside	the	architect’s	studio—or	the
kindergarten	classroom—interactivity	is	not	widely	employed;	our	assumption
that	the	brain	operates	like	a	computer	has	led	us	to	believe	that	we	need	only
input	the	necessary	information	in	order	to	generate	the	correct	solution.	But
human	minds	don’t	work	that	way,	observes	Frédéric	Vallée-Tourangeau,	a
professor	of	psychology	at	Kingston	University	in	the	UK.	The	computer
analogy	“implies	that	simulating	a	situation
	in	your	head	while	you	think	is
equivalent	to	living	through	that	situation	while	you	think,”	he	writes.	“Our
research	strongly	challenges	this	assumption.	We	show	instead	that	people’s
thoughts,	choices,	and	insights	can	be	transformed	by	physical	interaction	with
things.	In	other	words,	thinking	with	your	brain	alone—like	a	computer	does—is
not	equivalent	to	thinking	with	your	brain,	your	eyes,	and	your	hands.”
A	series	of	studies	conducted	by	Vallée-Tourangeau	and	his	colleagues	all
follow	a	similar	pattern.
	Experimenters	pose	a	problem;	one	group	of	problem
solvers	is	permitted	to	interact	physically	with	the	properties	of	the	problem;	a
second	group	must	think	through	the	problem	in	their	heads.	Interactivity
“inevitably	benefits	performance,”
	he	reports.	This	holds	true	for	a	wide	variety
of	problem	types—from	basic	arithmetic,
	to	complex	reasoning,
	to	planning	for
future	events,
	to	solving	creative	“insight”	problems.
	People	who	are	permitted
to	manipulate	concrete	tokens	
representing	elements	of	the	problem	to	be	solved
bear	less	cognitive	load	and	enjoy	increased	working	memory.
	They	learn	more,
and	are	better	able	to	transfer	their	learning
	to	new	situations.	They	are	less
likely	to	engage	in	“symbol	pushing,”
	or	moving	numbers	and	words	around	in
the	absence	of	understanding.	They	are	more	motivated	and	engaged,
	and
experience	less	anxiety.
	They	even	arrive	at	correct	answers	more	quickly.	(As
the	title	of	one	of	Vallée-Tourangeau’s	studies	puts	it,	“Moves	in	the	World
	Are
Faster	Than	Moves	in	the	Head.”)
Given	the	demonstrated	benefits	of	interactivity,	why	do	so	many	of	us
continue	to	solve	problems	with	our	heads	alone?	Blame	our	entrenched	cultural
bias	in	favor	of	brainbound	thinking,	which	holds	that	the	only	activity	that
matters	is	purely	mental	in	kind.	Manipulating	real-world	objects	in	order	to
solve	an	intellectual	problem	is	regarded	as	childish	or	uncouth;	real	geniuses	do
it	in	their	heads.
This	persistent	oversight	has	occasionally	been	the	cause	of	some	irritated
impatience	among	those	who	do	recognize	the	value	of	externalization	and
interactivity.	There’s	a	classic	story,	for	example,	concerning	the	theoretical
--- Page 148 ---
physicist	Richard	Feynman,	who	was	as	well	known	for	authoring	popular	books
such	as	
Surely	You’re	Joking,	Mr.	Feynman!
	as	for	winning	the	Nobel	Prize
(awarded	to	him	and	two	colleagues	in	1965).	In	a	post-Nobel	interview	with	the
historian	Charles	Weiner,	Weiner	referred	in	passing	to	a	batch	of	Feynman’s
original	notes	and	sketches,	observing	that	the	materials	represented	“a	record	of
the	day-to-day	work”
	done	by	the	physicist.	Instead	of	simply	assenting	to
Weiner’s	remark,	Feynman	reacted	with	unexpected	sharpness.
“I	actually	did	the	work	on	the	paper,”	he	said.
“Well,”	Weiner	replied,	“the	work	was	done	in	your	head,	but	the	record	of	it
is	still	here.”
Feynman	wasn’t	having	it.
“No,	it’s	not	a	
record,
	not	really.	It’s	
working.
	You	have	to	work	on	paper	and
this	is	the	paper.	Okay?”
Feynman	wasn’t	(just)	being	crotchety.	He	was	defending	a	view	of	the	act	of
creation	that	would	be	codified	four	decades	later	in	Andy	Clark’s	theory	of	the
extended	mind.	Writing	about	this	very	episode,	Clark	argues	that,	indeed,
“Feynman	was	actually	
thinking
	on	the	paper.	The	loop	through	pen	and	paper	is
part	of	the	physical	machinery	responsible	for	the	shape	of	the	flow	of	thoughts
and	ideas	that	we	take,	nonetheless,	
to	be	distinctively	those	of	Richard
Feynman.”	We	often	ignore	or	dismiss	these	loops,	preferring	to	focus	on	what
goes	on	in	the	brain—but	this	incomplete	perspective	leads	us	to	misunderstand
our	own	minds.	Writes	Clark,	“It	is	because	we	are	so	prone	to	think
	that	the
mental	action	is	all,	or	nearly	all,	on	the	inside,	that	we	have	developed	sciences
and	images	of	the	mind	that	are,	in	a	fundamental	sense,	inadequate.”	We	will
“begin	to	see	ourselves	aright,”	he	suggests,	only	when	we	recognize	the	role	of
material	things	in	our	thinking—when	we	correct	the	errors	and	omissions	of	the
brainbound	perspective,	and	“put	brain,	body,	and	world
	together	again.”
--- Page 149 ---
PART	III
THINKING	WITH	OUR
RELATIONSHIPS
--- Page 150 ---
7
Thinking	with	Experts
G
ERMANY	HAS	LONG	BEEN
	Europe’s	economic	powerhouse;	among	the
nation’s	many	strengths,	observers	often	single	out	its	distinctive	system	of
apprenticeships.	Every	year,	about	half	a	million	young	Germans
	move	directly
from	high	school	into	well-designed	apprentice	programs	operated	inside
companies,	where	they	learn	technical	skills	such	as	welding,	machining,	and
electrical	engineering.	This	deeply	entrenched	system	has	for	decades	enabled
Germany’s	manufacturing	sector	to	thrive.	But	as	in	other	Western	countries,	the
dominance	of	industry	in	Germany	is	giving	way	to	a	more	information-centric
economy,	creating	demand	for	skills	like	computer	programming.	This	change
has	brought	new	challenges,	and	students	and	instructors	have	struggled	to
adapt.
At	the	University	of	Potsdam—a	school	of	some	twenty	thousand	students,
located	outside	Berlin—a	key	step	for	undergraduates	who	want	a	career	in	tech
is	a	course	on	theoretical	computer	science.
	Yet	year	after	year,	the	rate	at	which
students	failed	the	course	was	stunning:	as	high	as	60	percent.	The	problem
seemed	related	to	the	course’s	highly	abstract	content;	sitting	passively	in
lectures,	students	simply	weren’t	grasping	the	meaning	of	concepts	like	“parsing
algorithms,”	“closure	properties,”	and	“linear-bounded	automata.”	Then	a	group
of	computer	science	professors	hit	upon	a	solution,	one	that	harked	back	to
Germany’s	historical	strength.	Led	by	Potsdam	professor	Christoph	Kreitz,	the
faculty	members	reimagined	the	class	as	an	apprenticeship,	albeit	of	a	special
sort.	The	
course	was	reorganized	around	making	the	internal	thought	processes
of	computer	scientists	“visible”	to	students—as	visible	as	a	carpenter	fitting	a
joint	or	a	tailor	cutting	a	bolt	of	cloth.
This	is	what’s	known	as	a	
cognitive	apprenticeship,
	a	term	coined	by	Allan
Collins,	now	a	professor	emeritus	of	education	at	Northwestern	University.	In	a
1991	article	written	with	John	Seely	Brown	and	Ann	Holum,	Collins	noted	a
--- Page 151 ---
crucial	difference	between	traditional	apprenticeships	and	modern	schooling:	in
the	former,	“learners	can	see	the	processes	of	work,”	while	in	the	latter,	“the
processes	of	thinking	are	often	invisible	to	both	the	students	and	the	teacher.”
Collins	and	his	coauthors	identified	four	features	of	apprenticeship	that	could	be
adapted	to	the	demands	of	knowledge	work:	
modeling,
	or	demonstrating	the	task
while	explaining	it	aloud;	
scaffolding,
	or	structuring	an	opportunity	for	the
learner	to	try	the	task	herself;	
fading,
	or	gradually	withdrawing	guidance	as	the
learner	becomes	more	proficient;	and	
coaching,
	or	helping	the	learner	through
difficulties	along	the	way.
Christoph	Kreitz	and	his	colleagues	incorporated	these	features	of	traditional
apprenticeships	into	their	course	redesign,	reducing	the	amount	of	time	students
spent	in	lectures	and	increasing	the	length	and	frequency	of	small-group	sessions
led	by	tutors.	In	these	sessions,	students	didn’t	listen	to	a	description	of
computer	science	concepts,	or	engage	in	a	discussion	about	the	work	performed
by	computer	scientists;	they	actually	
did
	the	work	themselves,	under	the	tutors’
close	supervision.	The	results	of	these	changes	were	dramatic:	the	proportion	of
students	failing	the	course	shrank	from	above	60	percent	to	less	than	10	percent.
The	kind	of	shift	Kreitz	and	his	colleagues	made	at	Potsdam	is	one	that	many
of	us	will	contemplate	in	coming	years.	All	over	the	world,	in	every	sector	and
specialty,	education	and	work	are	less	and	less	about	executing	concrete	tasks
and	more	and	more	about	engaging	in	internal	thought	processes.	As	Allan
Collins	observed,	these	processes	are	largely	inaccessible	to	
both
	novice	and
expert:	the	novice	doesn’t	yet	know	the	material	well	enough,	while	the	expert
knows	it	so	well	that	it	has	become	second	nature.	This	reality	means	that	if	we
are	to	extend	our	thinking	with	others’	expertise,	we	must	find	better	ways	of
effecting	an	accurate	transfer	of	knowledge	from	one	mind	to	another.	Cognitive
apprenticeships	are	one	such	method;	we’ll	explore	several	others	in	this	chapter,
starting	with	an	approach	that	boasts	both	a	long	historical	pedigree	
and	an
increasingly	robust	foundation	in	scientific	research.	So	what	if	it	makes	us	a	bit
uneasy?
	
I
NSIDE	THE	HÔPITAL
	Universitaire	Pitié-Salpêtrière
	in	Paris,	a	young	man	stares
vacantly	into	space;	a	twitch	contorts	his	mouth,	and	a	tremor	runs	through	his
body	like	an	electric	shock.	Nearby,	another	young	man	accepts	help	getting	up
from	his	chair.	His	right	arm	is	bent	at	an	awkward	angle,	and	his	right	leg	drags
stiffly	behind	him.	Across	the	room,	a	young	woman	is	asked	if	she	can	touch
her	nose	with	her	index	finger;	she	tries,	but	her	finger	misses	the	mark	and
lands	on	her	cheek.
On	this	day,	the	often	uncanny	symptoms	of	neurological	disease	are	on	vivid
display.	But	these	individuals	are	not	patients;	they	are	medical	students,	doctors
--- Page 152 ---
display.	But	these	individuals	are	not	patients;	they	are	medical	students,	doctors
in	training.	Coached	by	their	professors,	they	are	learning	how	to	mimic	the
symptoms	of	the	ailments	they	will	be	called	upon	to	treat.	Instructors	show	the
students	how	to	arrange	their	facial	features,	how	to	move	their	hands,	how	to	sit
and	stand	and	walk.	Faculty	members	also	guide	the	responses	of	another
contingent	of	students,	dressed	in	white	lab	coats,	who	are	role-playing	the
physicians	they	will	become.	After	extensive	practice,	the	“patients”	and
“doctors”	will	perform	a	series	of	clinical	vignettes	for	their	peers	from	the	stage
of	the	hospital’s	amphitheater.
Jean-Martin	Charcot,	the	nineteenth-century	physician	known	as	the	father	of
neurology,	practiced	and	taught	at	this	very	institution.	Charcot	brought	his
patients	onstage	with	him	as	he	lectured,	allowing	his	students	to	see	firsthand
the	many	forms	neurological	disease	could	take.	Imitating	such	forms	with	one’s
own	face	and	body	is	an	even	more	effective	means	of	learning,	maintains
Emmanuel	Roze,	who	introduced	his	“mime-based	role-play	training	program”
to	the	students	at	Pitié-Salpêtrière	in	2015.	Roze,	a	consulting	neurologist	at	the
hospital	and	a	professor	of	neurology	at	Sorbonne	University,	had	become
concerned
	that	traditional	modes	of	instruction	were	not	supporting	students’
acquisition	of	knowledge,	and	were	not	dispelling	students’	apprehension	in	the
face	of	neurological	illness.	He	reasoned	that	actively	imitating	the	distinctive
symptoms	of	such	maladies—the	tremors	of	Parkinson’s,	the	jerky	movements
of	chorea,	the	slurred	speech	of	cerebellar	syndrome—could	help	students	learn
while	defusing	their	discomfort.
And	indeed,	a	study	conducted	by	Roze	and	his	colleagues	found	that	
two	and
a	half	years	after	their	neurological	rotation,	medical	students	who	had
participated	in	the	miming	program	recalled	neurological	signs	and	symptoms
much	better	than	students	who	had	received	only	conventional	instruction
centered	on	lectures	and	textbooks.	Medical	students	who	had	simulated	their
patients’	symptoms	also	reported	that	the	experience	deepened	their
understanding
	of	neurological	illness	and	increased	their	motivation	to	learn
about	it.
In	an	earlier	chapter	on	sensations,	we	saw	that	our	automatic	and
unconscious	mimicry	of	other	people	helps	us	understand	them	better—aids	us
in	sensing	their	emotions,	for	example.	The	same	is	true	for	more	deliberate
imitation.	Researchers	have	demonstrated,	for	instance,	that	intentionally
imitating	someone’s	accent
	allows	us	to	comprehend	more	easily	the	words	the
person	is	speaking	(a	finding	that	might	readily	be	applied	to	second-language
learning).	When	we	copy	the	accent	of	our	conversation	partner—when	we
produce	the	sounds	that	individual	is	making	with	our	own	mouth—we	become
--- Page 153 ---
better	able	to	predict,	and	thus	to	make	sense	of,	what	he	or	she	is	saying.	As
with	the	medical	students	at	Pitié-Salpêtrière,	it’s	a	matter	of	attaining
understanding	from	the	inside,	of	taking	aspects	of	the	other	into	ourselves.
We	also	come	to	feel	more	positive
	about	the	people	whose	speech	we	mimic
—an	effect	that	holds	true	for	imitation	more	generally.	Emmanuel	Roze	has
found	that	the	experience	of	imitating	patients	makes	the	young	doctors	he	trains
more	empathetic,	as	well	as	more	comfortable	with	the	signs	of	their	patients’
disorders.	Imitation	permits	us	to	extend	to	the	other	some	of	the	familiar	regard
we	feel	for	ourselves,	as	well	as	some	of	the	insight	we	gain	from	inhabiting	the
role	of	dynamic	actor	in	the	world,	rather	than	that	of	passive	observer.	It	is	a
general	purpose	strategy	with	boundless	applications	in	education,	in	the
workplace,	and	in	the	learning	we	do	on	our	own	time.
There’s	just	one	problem:	as	a	society	we	are	suspicious	of	imitation,
regarding	it	as	juvenile,	disreputable,	even	morally	wrong.	It’s	a	reaction	Roze
has	come	to	know	well.	Despite	the	demonstrated	benefits	of	mime-based	role
play,	many	of	his	fellow	medical	school	professors	have	expressed	apprehension
about	implementing	the	practice.	Some	of	his	students,	too,	initially	voiced
discomfort	at	the	prospect	of	imitating	patients.	Roze	is	careful	to	note	that	those
who	participate	are	in	no	way	mocking	or	making	fun	of	their	charges.	In	fact,
he	says,	the	act	of	imita
tion	is	imbued	with	respect:	it’s	treating	patients	as	the
ultimate	authority,	as	the	experts	on	what	it’s	like	to	have	their	condition.
The	conventional	approach	to	cognition	has	persuaded	us	that	the	only	route
to	more	intelligent	thinking	lies	in	cultivating	our	own	brain.	Imitating	the
thought	of	other	individuals	courts	accusations	of	being	derivative,	or	even	of
being	a	plagiarist—a	charge	that	can	end	a	writer’s	career	or	a	student’s	tenure	at
school.	But	this	was	not	always	the	case.	Greek	and	Roman	thinkers	revered
imitation	as	an	art	in	its	own	right,
	one	that	was	to	be	energetically	pursued.
Imitation	occupied	a	central	role	in	classical	education,	where	it	was	treated	not
as	lazy	cheating	but	as	a	rigorous	practice	of	striving	for	excellence	by	emulating
the	masters.
In	the	Romans’	highly	structured	system	of	schooling,	students	would	begin
by	reading	and	analyzing	aloud	a	model	text.	Early	in	pupils’	education,	this
might	be	a	simple	fable	by	Aesop;	later	on,	a	complex	speech	by	Cicero	or
Demosthenes.	The	students	would	memorize	the	text	and	recite	it	from	memory.
Then	they	would	embark	on	a	succession	of	exercises	designed	to	make	them
intimately	familiar	with	the	work	in	question.	They	would	paraphrase	the	model
text,	putting	it	in	their	own	words.	They	would	translate	the	text	from	Greek	to
Latin	or	Latin	to	Greek.	They	would	turn	the	text	from	Latin	prose	into	Latin
verse,	or	even	from	Latin	prose	into	Greek	verse.	They	would	compress	the
--- Page 154 ---
model	into	fewer	words,	or	elaborate	it	at	greater	length;	they	would	alter	its
tone	from	plainspoken	to	grandiloquent,	or	the	other	way	around.	Finally,	they
would	write	their	own	pieces—but	in	the	style	of	the	admired	author.	Having
imitated	the	model	from	every	angle,	students	would	begin	the	sequence	anew,
moving	on	to	a	more	challenging	text.
We	know	about	the	Roman	system	largely	from	the	writings	of	Quintilian,	the
“master	teacher	of	Rome.”	Marcus	Fabius	Quintilianus,	born	around	the	year
AD	35,	headed	a	school	of	rhetoric	that	enrolled	students	from	the	city’s	most
illustrious	families,	including	the	emperor	Domitian’s	two	heirs.	In	his
masterwork,	the	
Institutio	Oratoria
	(subtitle:	
Education	of	an	Orator	in	Twelve
Books
),	Quintilian	unapologetically	asserted	the	value	of	copying.	From	authors
“worthy	of	our	study,”
	he	wrote,	“we	must	draw	our	stock	of	words,	the	variety
of	our	figures,	and	our	methods	of	composition”	so	as	to	“form	our	minds	on	the
model	of	every	excellence.”	The	educator	continued:	“There	can	be	no	doubt
that	in	art,	no	small	portion	of	our	task	lies	in	imitation,	since,	although
invention	came	first	and	is	all-important,	it	is	expedient	to	imitate	whatever	has
been	invented	with	success,	and	it	is	a	universal	rule	of	life	that	we	should	wish
to	copy	what	we	approve	in	others.”
This	system	of	education,	founded	on	mimicking	the	masters,	was	remarkably
robust,	persisting	for	centuries	and	spreading	throughout	Europe	and	beyond.
Fifteen	hundred	years	after	Quintilian,	children	in	Tudor	England	were	still
being	taught	in	this	fashion.	A	scholar	and	teacher	of	that	time,	Juan	Luis	Vives,
explained	why	imitation	was	necessary.	While	some	basic	capacities—such	as
speaking	one’s	native	language—seem	to	come	naturally	to	humans,	“Nature	has
fashioned	man,
	for	the	most	part,	strangely	hostile	to	‘art,’
 
”	he	observed.	“Since
she	let	us	be	born	ignorant	and	absolutely	skill-less	of	all	arts,	we	require
imitation.”	Vives	had	intuited	a	truth	that	cognitive	science	would	later
demonstrate	empirically:	many	of	the	achievements	of	human	culture	do	not
come	“naturally”	but	must	be	painstakingly	acquired.	The	most	effective	way	to
take	possession	of	these	skills,	Vives	and	others	of	his	time	believed,	was
imitation.
Then,	as	the	eighteenth	century	was	drawing	to	a	close,	the	Romantics	arrived
on	the	scene.	This	band	of	poets	and	painters	and	musicians	worshiped
originality,	venerated	authenticity.	They	rejected	all	that	was	old	and	familiar
and	timeworn	in	favor	of	what	was	inventive	and	imaginative	and	heartfelt.
Their	insistence	on	originality	came	in	response	to	two	major	developments	of
the	age.	The	first	of	these	was	industrialization.	As	factories	rose	brick	by	brick,
an	aesthetic	countermovement	mounted	in	tandem:	
machines
	could	stamp	out
identical	copies;	only	humans	could	come	up	with	one-of-a-kind	ideas.	A
--- Page 155 ---
particular	sort	of	machine	occasioned	the	second	major	development	of	the	time:
a	flood	of	texts	produced	by	the	newly	common	printing	press.	More	than	any
generation	before	them,	the	thinkers	of	the	Romantic	era	bore	what	literary	critic
Walter	Jackson	Bate	called	“the	burden	of	the	past,”
	as	masterworks	from	earlier
eras	became	widely	available	for	the	first	time.	Immersed	in	a	sea	of	their
predecessors’	words,	they	felt	an	urgent	need	to	create	something	new	and	fresh
and	never	before	said.
William	Blake,	the	English	poet	and	artist	born	in	1757,	was	one	of	the
earliest	and	most	passionately	original	Romantics.	In	creating	works	like	
Songs
of	Innocence	and	of	Experience
	and	
Visions	of	the	Daughters	of	Albion,
	Blake
employed	a	technique	he	had	invented	himself,
	relief	
etching,	in	which	he	used
acid-resistant	chemicals	to	mark	a	copper	plate,	then	applied	acid	to	etch	away
the	untreated	areas.	(The	mystical-minded	Blake	claimed	that	his	deceased
brother	Robert	had	revealed	the	technique	to	him	in	a	vision.)	These	works	took
a	form	that	was	also	newly	devised	by	Blake:	illuminated	books	that	combined
text	and	drawings	and	that	were	etched,	printed,	and	colored	by	Blake	himself.
No	two	books	were	the	same.	And	their	content	was	nothing	if	not	original:	an
elaborate	invented	cosmology	featuring	allegorical	figures	with	names	like
Urizen	(representing	reason)	and	Los	(imagination).	In	his	illuminated	book
Jerusalem,
	Los—Blake’s	alter	ego—voiced	a	sentiment	that	might	have	served
as	the	Romantics’	motto.	“I	must	create	a	system,”
	Blake’s	character	declared,	or
else	“be	enslav’d	by	another	man’s.”
Under	the	Romantics’	influence,	imitation	did	not	merely	become	less	favored
than	previously.	It	came	to	be	actively	disdained	and	disparaged—an	attitude
that	was	carried	forward	into	succeeding	decades.	The	naturalists	of	the	late
nineteenth	century	described	imitation	as	the	habit	of	children,	women,	and
“savages,”
	and	held	up	original	expression	as	the	preserve	of	European	men.
Innovation	climbed	to	the	top	of	the	cultural	value	system,	while	imitation	sank
to	an	unaccustomed	low.
This	is	the	cult	of	originality	to	which	we	ourselves	subscribe—more	so	now
than	ever	before.	Our	society	celebrates	pioneers	and	trailblazers—like,	for
example,	the	late	Steve	Jobs,	the	Apple	Computer	founder	famous	for	offering
dazzling	onstage	introductions	of	the	company’s	latest	inventions.	His
company’s	advertisements	glorified	those	who	break	the	mold,	rather	than	those
who	allow	themselves	to	be	shaped	by	it.	“Here’s	to	the	crazy	ones,”
	intoned	the
voice-over	of	an	Apple	commercial	that	aired	in	1997.	“The	misfits.	The	rebels.
The	troublemakers.	The	round	pegs	in	the	square	holes.	The	ones	who	see	things
differently.	They’re	not	fond	of	rules.	And	they	have	no	respect	for	the	status
quo.”
--- Page 156 ---
Think	different,
	went	the	ad’s	tagline.	But	at	least	in	some	quarters,	thinking
the	same
—that	is,	engaging	in	imitation—is	now	gaining	new	respect.
	
I
T	WAS	THE
	“proudest	moment”
	of	Kevin	Laland’s	professional	career,	he	says:
the	prestigious	journal	
Science
	published	a	photograph	of	Laland	mowing	his
lawn.
In	the	picture,	Laland’s	three-year-old	son	is	walking	just	behind	him,	
intently
pushing	his	own	toy	lawnmower;	the	photo	accompanied	a	commentary	on
Laland’s	research	about	the	importance	of	imitation	in	human	culture.	In	the
same	issue,	Laland,	a	professor	of	biology	at	the	University	of	St.	Andrews	in
the	UK,	reported	on	the	results	of	a	computerized	competition	he	and	his
collaborators	had	set	up.	This	was	a	multi-round	tournament	in	which	the
contenders—bots	that	had	been	programmed	to	behave	in	particular	ways—
battled	to	victory	for	a	monetary	prize.	A	hundred	entrants	from	around	the
world	had	faced	off,	each	designed	to	act	according	to	one	of	three	strategies	(or
a	combination	thereof):	applying	original	ideas,	engaging	in	trial	and	error,	or
copying	others.
As	for	which	strategy	worked	best,	there	was	really	no	contest:	copying	was
far	and	away	the	most	successful	approach.	The	winning	entry	exclusively
copied	others—it	
never
	innovated.	By	comparison,	a	player-bot	whose	strategy
relied	almost	entirely	on	innovation	finished	ninety-fifth	out	of	the	one	hundred
contestants.	The	result	came	as	a	surprise	to	Laland	and	to	one	of	his
collaborators,	Luke	Rendell.	“We	were	expecting	someone
	to	come	up	with	a
really	clever	way	to	say,	‘In	these	conditions	you	should	copy,	and	in	these
conditions	you	should	learn	stuff	for	yourself,’
 
”	says	Rendell.	“But	the	winner
just	copied	all	the	time.”
Kevin	Laland	acknowledges	that	imitation	has	a	bad	reputation.	But,	he	says,
researchers	like	him—in	fields	from	biology	to	economics	to	psychology	to
political	science—are	discovering	how	valuable	imitation	can	be
	as	a	way	of
learning	new	skills	and	making	intelligent	decisions.	Researchers	from	these
varied	disciplines	are	using	models	and	simulations,	as	well	as	historical
analyses	and	real-world	case	studies,	to	show	that	imitation	is	often	the	most
efficient	and	effective	route
	to	successful	performance.	And	they’re	elaborating
the	reasons	why	this	is	so—reasons	vividly	illustrated	by	examples	from	the
business	world.
First	on	the	list:	by	copying	others,	imitators	allow	other	individuals	to	act	as
filters,	efficiently	sorting	through	available	options.	Finance	professors	Gerald
Martin	and	John	Puthenpurackal	examined	what	would	happen	if	an	investor	did
nothing	but	copy
	the	moves	of	celebrated	investor	Warren	Buffett.	(Buffett’s
--- Page 157 ---
investment	choices	are	periodically	made	public,	when	his	company	files	a
report	with	the	Securities	and	Exchange	Commission.)	An	individual	who
simply	buys	what	Buffett	is	buying,	the	researchers	found,	will	earn	an	average
of	more	than	10	percent	above	market	returns.
Of	course,	investors	already	do	take	notice	of	the	activity	of	a	high-powered
investor	like	Buffett—but	even	so,	they’re	missing	out	on	the	benefits	of
imitating	his	selections	more	closely.	Investors	are	leaving	money	on	the	table,
Martin	suggests,	because	everyone	likes	to	think	they’ve	got	an	innovative
strategy	or	an	overlooked	gem.	Although	it	can	feel	good	to	chart	our	own
course,	he	says,	we	often	perform	better	when	we	copy	someone	more
experienced	and	more	knowledgeable	than	ourselves.
Second:	imitators	can	draw	from	a	wide	variety	of	solutions	instead	of	being
tied	to	just	one.	They	can	choose	precisely	the	strategy	that	is	most	effective	in
the	current	moment,	making	quick	adjustments	to	changing	conditions.	That
sums	up	the	business	model	of	Zara,	a	worldwide	chain	of	clothing	stores	based
in	the	industrial	city	of	Arteixo,	Spain.
At	the	headquarters	of	its	parent	company,	Inditex,	Zara’s	designers	cluster
around	tables	covered	with	pages	ripped	from	fashion	magazines	and	catalogs;
with	photographs	snapped	of	stylish	people	on	streets	and	in	airports;	and	with
the	deconstructed	parts	of	other	designers’	garments,	fresh	from	the	runway.
“Zara	is	engaged	in	a	permanent	quest
	for	inspiration,	everywhere	and	from
everybody,”	says	Spanish	journalist	Enrique	Badía,	who	has	written	extensively
about	the	company.	Zara	even	copies	its	own	
customers.
	Store	managers	from
the	chain’s	hundreds	of	locations	are	in	frequent	touch	with	its	designers,
passing	along	new	looks	spotted	on	Zara’s	fashion-forward	clientele.
Kasra	Ferdows,	a	professor	of	operations	and	information	management	at
Georgetown	University,	notes	that	Zara’s	adroit	use	of	imitation	has	helped
make	Inditex	the	largest	fashion	apparel	retailer	in	the	world.	Its	success,	he	and
two	coauthors	concluded	in	a	company	profile	written	for	the	
Harvard	Business
Review,
	“depends	on	a	constant	exchange
	of	information	throughout	every	part
of	Zara’s	supply	chain—from	customers	to	store	managers,	from	store	managers
to	market	specialists	and	designers,	from	designers	to	production	staff.”
Crucially,	the	“information”	that	flows	so	freely	at	the	company	concerns	not
new	ideas,	but	ideas	good	enough	to	copy.
The	third	advantage	of	imitation:	copiers	can	evade	mistakes	by	steering	clear
of	the	errors	made	by	others	who	went	before	them,	while	innovators	have	no
such	guide	to	potential	pitfalls.	A	case	in	point:	diapers.	Among	parents	who	rely
on	disposable	diapers,	Pampers	is	a	household	
name.	Less	familiar	is	the	brand
--- Page 158 ---
Chux—and	yet	Chux	was	the	first	to	arrive	on	the	market,	all	the	way	back	in
1935.
The	problem:	Chux	were	expensive,	costing	about	8.5	cents	per	diaper,	at	a
time	when	parents	could	wash	cloth	diapers	at	a	cost	of	1.5	cents	each.	As	a
result,	parents	tended	to	use	the	product	only	when	traveling,	and	Chux
accounted	for	just	1	percent	of	the	overall	market	for	diapers.	Procter	&	Gamble
saw	an	opportunity.	It	imitated	the	basic	idea	behind	Chux	while	intentionally
addressing	parents’	main	objection	to	the	product:	its	high	price.	When	Pampers
were	rolled	out	nationwide	in	1966—at	a	cost	of	three	cents	per	diaper—P&G’s
version	was	enthusiastically	welcomed	by	parents.
Gerard	Tellis	and	Peter	Golder,	both	professors	of	marketing,	conducted	a
historical	analysis
	of	fifty	consumer	product	categories	(including	diapers,	from
which	the	Pampers	versus	Chux	example	was	taken).	Their	results	showed	that
the	failure	rate	of	“market	pioneers”	is	an	alarming	47	percent,	while	the	mean
market	share	they	capture	is	only	10	percent.	Far	better	than	being	first,	Tellis
and	Golder	concluded,	is	being	what	some	have	called	a	“fast	second”:	an	agile
imitator.	Companies	that	capitalize	on	others’	innovations	have	“a	minimal
failure	rate”	and	“an	average	market	share	almost	three	times	that	of	market
pioneers,”	they	found.	In	this	category	they	include	Timex,	Gillette,	and	Ford,
firms	that	are	often	recalled—wrongly—as	being	first	in	their	field.
Fourth,	imitators	are	able	to	avoid	being	swayed	by	deception	or	secrecy:	by
working	directly	off	of	what	others	do,	copiers	get	access	to	the	best	strategies	in
others’	repertoires.	Competitors	have	no	choice	but	to	display	what	social
scientists	call	“honest	signals,”
	as	they	make	decisions	for	themselves	based	on
their	own	best	interests.	This	is	the	case	in	every	sort	of	contest—including
sporting	events	like	the	America’s	Cup,	the	high-profile	sailing	race.
Jan-Michael	Ross	and	Dmitry	Sharapov,	both	business	professors	at	Imperial
College	London,	studied	the	competitive	interactions	among	yachts
	engaged	in
head-to-head	races	in	the	America’s	Cup	World	Series.	The	researchers	found
that	sailors	often	engaged	in	“covering,”
	or	copying,	the	moves	made	by	their
rivals—especially	when	their	boat	was	in	the	lead.	It	might	seem	surprising	that
sailors	at	the	front	of	the	pack	would	imitate	those	who	are	trailing,	but	Ross
notes	that	such	emulation	makes	sense:	as	long	as	the	leaders	do	as	their	rivals
behind	them	do,	their	
lead	will	remain	locked	in	place.	Says	Ross,	“Our	research
challenges	the	common	view	that	it’s	only	the	laggards,	the	also-rans,	who
imitate.”
Last,	and	perhaps	most	important,	imitators	save	time,	effort,	and	resources
that	would	otherwise	be	invested	in	originating	their	own	solutions.	Research
shows	that	the	imitator’s	costs
	are	typically	60	to	75	percent	of	those	borne	by
--- Page 159 ---
the	innovator—and	yet	it	is	the	imitator	who	consistently	captures	the	lion’s
share	of	financial	returns.
Such	findings,	arriving	from	many	directions,	converge	on	the	conclusion	that
imitation	(if	we	can	get	past	our	aversion	to	it)	opens	up	possibilities	far	beyond
those	that	dwell	inside	our	own	heads.	Engaging	in	effective	imitation	is	like
being	able	to	think	with	other	people’s	brains—like	getting	a	direct	download	of
others’	knowledge	and	experience.	But	contrary	to	its	reputation	as	a	lazy	cop-
out,	imitating	well	is	not	easy.	It	rarely	entails	automatic	or	mindless	duplication.
Rather,	it	requires	cracking	a	sophisticated	code—solving	what	social	scientists
call	the	“correspondence	problem,”
	or	the	challenge	of	adapting	an	imitated
solution	to	the	particulars	of	a	new	situation.	Tackling	the	correspondence
problem	involves	breaking	down	an	observed	solution	into	its	constituent	parts,
and	then	reassembling	those	parts	in	a	different	way;	it	demands	a	willingness	to
look	past	superficial	features	to	the	deeper	reason	why	the	original	solution
succeeded,	and	an	ability	to	apply	that	underlying	principle	in	a	novel	setting.
It’s	paradoxical	but	true:	imitating	well	demands	a	considerable	degree	of
creativity.
	
A
DAPTING	SOLUTION
	to	problem	was	the	tall	task	facing	graduate	nursing	student
Tess	Pape	in	1999.	Pape	could	see	the	problem	clearly	enough:	hospital	patients
were	being	harmed	by	medication	errors	committed	by	doctors	and	nurses.	In
that	year,	the	Institute	of	Medicine	had	released	a	landmark	report
	on	patient
safety,	
To	Err	Is	Human.
	The	report	found	that	as	many	as	98,000	Americans
were	dying	each	year	as	a	result	of	preventable	medical	errors	occurring	in
hospitals—more	people	than	succumbed	to	car	accidents,	workplace	injuries,	or
breast	cancer.	And	some	significant	portion	of	these	deaths	involved	mistakes	in
the	dispensing	of	drugs.
But	as	she	investigated	ways	to	address	the	medication	error	crisis,	Pape
didn’t	rack	her	brain	for	an	innovative	fix.	Instead	she	sought	to	
imitate
	a
solution	that	had	been	successfully	applied	in	another	industry.	
That	industry
was	aviation—an	enterprise,	like	health	care,	in	which	people’s	lives	depend	on
professionals’	precision	and	accuracy.	While	reading	up	on	aviation	safety,	Pape
learned	that	the	moments	of	highest	risk
	occurred	during	takeoffs	and	landings—
periods	when	the	plane	was	under	ten	thousand	feet.	She	spotted	a
correspondence	in	her	own	field:	for	hospital	patients	who	are	given	medication,
the	riskiest	moments	happen
	during	the	
preparation
	of	the	drug	dosage,	and
during	
administration
	of	the	drug	to	the	patient.
Delving	deeper,	Pape	discovered	that	distractions	and	interruptions	of	the	pilot
by	other	crew	members	accounted	for	a	majority	of	airline	“incidents.”	Another
--- Page 160 ---
correspondence	came	into	view:	interruptions	of	health	care	professionals,
	she
knew,	were	also	to	blame	for	many	medication	mistakes.	(Consider	this	striking
incident	reported	by	a	team	of	researchers	observing	real-life	conditions	in
hospitals:	one	nurse,	dispensing	one	medication,
	to	one	single	patient,	was
interrupted	
seventeen
	times.)	Pape	also	became	aware	that	aviation	experts	had
devised	a	solution	to	the	problem	of	pilot	interruption:	the	“sterile	cockpit	rule.”
Instituted	by	the	Federal	Aviation	Administration	in	1981,	the	rule	forbids	pilots
from	engaging	in	conversation	unrelated	to	the	immediate	business	of	flying
when	the	plane	is	below	ten	thousand	feet.
In	her	2002	dissertation,
	and	then	in	a	series	of	articles	published	in	medical
journals,	Pape	made	a	case	for	imitating	this	practice.	“The	key	to	preventing
medication	errors
	lies	with	adopting	protocols	from	other	safety-focused
industries,”	Pape	wrote	in	the	journal	
MEDSURG	Nursing
	in	2003.	“The	airline
industry,	for	example,	has	methods	in	place	that	improve	pilots’	focus	and
provide	a	milieu	of	safety	when	human	life	is	at	stake.”	Such	methods	could	be
adapted	to	the	hospital	setting,	she	argued,	by	creating	a	“no-interruptions	zone”
around	medication	preparation	areas,	and	by	having	nurses	who	are
administering	medication	wear	special	vests	or	sashes	signaling	that	they	are	not
to	be	disturbed.	Added	Pape,	pointedly,	“Medication	administration	should	be
considered	as	critical	as	piloting	a	plane,	because	patients	place	their	lives	in	the
hands	of	healthcare	professionals.”
Pape	wasn’t	sure	if	her	peers	in	the	health	care	community	would	be	open	to
listening	to	the	idea.	But	listen	they	did.	Hospitals	began	following	the	lead	of
airlines,	and	the	change	made	a	dramatic	difference.	At	Kaiser	Permanente
South	San	Francisco	Medical	Center,	for	exam
ple,	the	introduction	of	no-
interruption	signaling	in	2006	led	to	the	“virtual	elimination	of	nurse	distractions
for	those	wearing	the	vests,”	according	to	the	US	government’s	Agency	for
Healthcare	Research	and	Quality.	Over	a	six-month	period,	medication	errors	at
the	hospital	fell	by	47	percent.	Nearly	two	decades	after	she	initiated	it,	Pape’s
lifesaving	act	of	imitation	has	spread	all	over	the	country	and	the	world.
Tess	Pape	figured	out	the	correspondence	problem	on	her	own.	But	what	if
she	had	been	
taught
	how	to	imitate?	Imitating	well	is	a	skill,	one	that	Oded
Shenkar	believes	should	be	deliberately	cultivated.	Shenkar,	a	professor	of
management	and	human	resources	at	Ohio	State	University,	studies	how
companies	use	imitation	to	gain	a	strategic	edge	in	the	marketplace.	He
maintains	that	we	are	living	in	a	golden	“age	of	imitation,”
	in	which	access	to
information	about	how	other	people	are	addressing	problems	similar	to	our	own
has	made	it	more	feasible	than	ever	to	copy	effective	solutions.	Shenkar	would
like	to	see
	students	in	business	schools	and	other	graduate	programs	taking
--- Page 161 ---
courses	on	effective	imitation.	He	imagines	companies	opening	“imitation
departments,”	devoted	to	identifying	promising	opportunities	for	copying.	And
he	anticipates	a	day	when	successful	imitators	are	celebrated	and	admired	just	as
much	as	innovators	are	now.
Shenkar	notes	that	at	least	one	profession	has	been	taking	steps	in	the
direction	of	his	push:	health	care.	The	urgent	need	to	reduce	medical	errors,
perceived	by	Tess	Pape	and	many	others,	has	led	hospitals	to	imitate
	the
practices	of	a	host	of	other	industries,	including	the	military,	railroads,	chemical
manufacturing,	nuclear	power—and,	of	course,	aviation.	In	addition	to	the	sterile
cockpit	concept	Pape	adapted,	health	care	professionals	have	also	borrowed
from	pilots	the	onboard	“checklist”
—a	standardized	rundown	of	tasks	to	be
completed.	In	this	case,	too,	imitation	has	worked	wonders.	In	2009,	researchers
from	the	Harvard	School	of	Public	Health	and	the	World	Health	Organization
reported	that	after	the	surgical	teams	in	their	study	started	using	a	nineteen-item
checklist,
	the	average	patient	death	rate	fell	more	than	40	percent,	and	the	rate	of
complications	decreased	by	about	a	third.
The	medical	field	has	also	adopted	the	“peer-to-peer	assessment	technique,”
	a
common	practice	in	the	nuclear	power	industry.	A	delegation	from	one	hospital
visits	another	hospital	in	order	to	conduct	a	“structured,	confidential,	and	non-
punitive	review”	of	the	host	institution’s	
safety	and	quality	efforts.	Without	the
threat	of	sanctions	carried	by	regulators,	these	peer	reviews	can	surface	problems
and	suggest	fixes,	making	the	technique	itself	a	vehicle	for	constructive	copying
among	organizations.
Even	within	health	care,	however,	the	practice	of	imitation	leaves	much	room
for	improvement.	It	took	seventy	years	for	the	checklist	concept	to	migrate	from
aviation	to	medicine,	and	twenty	years	for	the	sterile	cockpit	to	make	the	leap.	A
more	structured	and	intentional	approach	to	imitation	could	speed	up	this
process	considerably.	In	order	to	elevate	the	social	value	of	copying,	says
Shenkar,	we	need	not	only	to	promote	new	acts	of	imitation	but	also	to	recognize
that	imitation	is	
already
	behind	the	success	of	many	of	our	most	admired
individuals	and	organizations—a	group	that	assuredly	includes	the	famed
innovator	Steve	Jobs.
In	1979,	Jobs	and	his	colleagues	at	the	fledgling	Apple	Computer	company
were	wrestling	with	how	to	turn	the	crude,	clunky	computers	of	the	day	into
sleek	personal	appliances	that	were	easy	and	even	fun	to	use.	In	December	of
that	year,	he	got	a	glimpse	of	the	solution	while	on	a	visit	to	Xerox	PARC,
	a
research	facility	operated	by	the	photocopier	giant	in	Palo	Alto,	California.	Jobs
was	shown	a	series	of	technological	innovations	that	he	knew	he	could	put	to	use
in	his	own	project:	a	networking	platform	that	allowed	computers	to	connect	to
--- Page 162 ---
and	communicate	with	one	another;	a	set	of	visually	appealing	and	user-friendly
onscreen	graphics;	a	mouse	that	enabled	users	to	point	and	click.	“This	is	it!”	he
shouted	to	an	Apple	associate	as	their	car	sped	away	from	PARC.	“We’ve	got	to
do	it!”
In	Oded	Shenkar’s	contemplated	academic	course	on	imitation,	he	might	well
use	Apple	as	a	case	study.	And	he	might	point	out	to	his	class	that	Jobs	had
already	taken	the	first	of	three	steps
	required	to	solve	the	all-important
correspondence	problem.	Step	one,	according	to	Shenkar:	specify	one’s	own
problem	and	identify	an	analogous	problem	that	has	been	solved	successfully.
Step	two:	rigorously	analyze	why	the	solution	is	successful.	Jobs	and	his
engineers	at	Apple’s	headquarters	in	Cupertino,	California,	immediately	got	to
work	deconstructing	the	marvels	they’d	seen	at	the	Xerox	facility.	Soon	they
were	on	to	the	third	and	most	challenging	step:	identify	how	one’s	own
circumstances	differ,	then	figure	out	how	to	adapt	the	original	solution	to	the
new	setting.	Xerox	had	already	brought	its	own	computer	to	market,	but	it	was
awkward	and	difficult	to	use.	It	was	de
signed	for	the	needs	of	business	rather
than	the	individual	consumer.	And	it	was	prohibitively	expensive,	costing	more
than	$16,000.
Xerox	had	found	technological	solutions	that	eluded	Apple’s	scientists,	but	it
was	Jobs	who	adapted	these	solutions	to	the	potential	market	he	saw	for	personal
devices.	An	example:	the	mouse	he’d	seen	at	PARC	had	three	buttons,	which
Jobs	deemed	excessively	fussy;	it	didn’t	roll	easily,	even	on	smooth	surfaces;
and	it	cost	a	whopping	$300.	Jobs	worked	with	a	local	design	firm	to	produce	a
one-button	mouse	that	could	be	operated	on	any	surface	(even	his	blue	jeans,
Jobs	specified)	and	that	cost	only	$15.
The	rest	is	history,	though	not	history	as	it	is	usually	told—a	story	of	solitary
geniuses	(“the	ones	who	see	things	differently”).	The	lesson	of	this	case	study	is
that	skilled	imitation,	and	not	just	brilliant	innovation,	is	behind	many	of	the
successes	we	celebrate.
	
I
MITATION	EVEN	APPEARS
	to	be	behind	our	success	as	a	
species.
	Developmental
psychologists	are	increasingly	convinced	that	infants’	and	children’s	facility	for
imitation	is	what	allows	them	to	absorb	so	much,	so	quickly.	So	efficient	is
imitation	as	a	method	of	learning,	in	fact,	that	roboticists	are	studying	babies	in
order	to	understand	how	they	pull	off	the	trick	of	observing	an	adult	and	then
doing	as	the	grown-up	does.	Imagine	if	a	robot	could	watch	a	human	perform	an
action—say,	place	a	silicon	chip	on	a	circuit	board,	or	make	a	repair	on	a	space
capsule—and	then	replicate	that	movement	itself.	Elon	Musk,	founder	of	Tesla
and	SpaceX,	has	invested	in	research	on	just	such	“one-shot	imitation	learning.”
--- Page 163 ---
But,	as	University	of	California,	Berkeley,	psychologist	Alison	Gopnik	notes,
the	most	sophisticated	forms	of	artificial	intelligence	“are	still	far	from	being
able
	to	solve	problems	that	human	four-year-olds	accomplish	with	ease.”
While	it	was	once	regarded	as	a	low-level,	“primitive”	instinct,	researchers	are
coming	to	recognize	that	imitation—at	least	as	practiced	by	humans,	including
very	young	ones—is	a	complex	and	sophisticated	capacity.	Although	non-human
animals	do	imitate,	their	mimicry	differs
	in	important	ways	from	ours.	For
example,	young	humans’	copying	is	unique	in	that	children	are	quite	selective
about	
whom
	they	choose	to	imitate.	Even	preschoolers	prefer	to	imitate	people
who	have	shown	themselves	to	be	knowledgeable	and	competent.	Research
shows	that	
while	toddlers	will	choose	to	copy	their	mothers
	rather	than	a	person
they’ve	just	met,	as	children	grow	older	they	become	increasingly	willing	to
copy	a	stranger	if	the	stranger	appears	to	have	special	expertise.	By	the	time	a
child	reaches	age	seven,	Mom	no	longer	knows	best.
At	the	same	time,	children	are	strikingly	unselective
	about	
what
	they	imitate
—another	way	in	which	our	practice	of	imitation	departs	from	that	of	animals.
Humans	are	“high-fidelity”	copiers
:	our	young	imitate	adults	to	the	letter,	while
other	animals	will	make	do	with	a	slapdash	approximation.	This	difference	can
make	apes,	monkeys,	and	even	dogs	look	like	the	smarter	species.	Shown	a
procedure	with	an	extra,	unnecessary	step—like	touching	a	box	with	one’s
forehead	before	prying	it	open	and	retrieving	the	treat	inside—chimps	and
canines	will	skip	the	superfluous	move	to	go	right	for	the	goods.	Children,
however,	will	faithfully	imitate	every	step.
There	is	sense	behind	this	seemingly	irrational	behavior.	Humans’	tendency	to
“overimitate”
—to	reproduce	even	the	gratuitous	elements	of	another’s	behavior
—may	operate	on	a	copy	now,	understand	later	basis.	After	all,	there	might	be
good	reasons	for	such	steps	that	the	novice	does	not	yet	grasp,	especially	since
so	many	human	tools	and	practices	are	“cognitively	opaque”
:	not	self-
explanatory	on	their	face.	Even	if	there	doesn’t	turn	out	to	be	a	functional
rationale	for	the	actions	taken,	imitating	the	customs	of	one’s	culture
	is	a	smart
move	for	a	highly	social	species	like	our	own.	Indeed,	researchers	have
demonstrated	that	a	four-year-old	child	is	
more
	likely	to	overimitate
	than	a	two-
year-old,	indicating	a	growing	sensitivity	to	social	cues.	Our	tendency	to	engage
in	overimitation	continues	to	increase	across	development,
	all	the	way	into
adulthood.	Because	so	much	of	human	culture	is	arbitrary	in	form—why	do	we
clap	at	the	end	of	a	performance,	or	eat	cake	at	birthday	parties,	or	wear	wedding
rings	on	the	fourth	finger	of	the	left	hand?—it	depends	on	imitation	for	its
perpetuation.	Imitation	is	at	the	root	of	our	social	and	cultural	life;	it	is,	quite
literally,	what	makes	us	human.
--- Page 164 ---
There	is	evidence	that	we	are	born	with	a	predisposition	to	imitate.	Several
decades	ago,	University	of	Washington	psychologist	Andrew	Meltzoff	showed
that	babies	who	were	days	or	even	hours	old
	responded	to	his	opening	his	mouth
or	sticking	out	his	tongue	by	forming	the	same	facial	expressions	in	return.	At
the	same	time,	the	capacity	to	imitate,	and	to	learn	from	observation,	can	be
nurtured:	in	some	present-day	cul
tures,	it	is	cultivated	quite	deliberately,	with
impressive	results.	In	studies	comparing	European	American	children	with
Mayan	children	from	Guatemala,
	psychologists	Maricela	Correa-Chávez	and
Barbara	Rogoff	asked	children	from	each	culture	to	wait	while	an	adult
performed	a	demonstration—folding	an	origami	shape—for	another	child
nearby.	The	Mayan	youth	paid	far	more	sustained	attention	to	the	demonstration
—and	therefore	learned	more—than	the	American	kids,	who	were	often
distracted	or	inattentive.	Correa-Chávez	and	Rogoff	note	that	in	Mayan	homes,
children	are	encouraged	to	carefully	observe	older	family	members	so	that	they
can	learn	how	to	carry	out	the	tasks	of	the	household,	even	at	very	young	ages.
Because	our	own	culture	discourages	imitation,	American	children	aren’t
granted
	similar	opportunities	to	show	how	competent	they	can	be;	they	also	lack
exposure	to	inspiring	examples,	or	“models,”	of	the	kind	of	work	that	kids	their
age	are	capable	of	producing.	For	decades,	educator	Ron	Berger	towed	around	a
rolling	suitcase
	filled	with	hundreds	of	such	models:	sketches,	poems,	and	essays
created	by	children,	which	he	would	pull	out	and	share	with	teachers	and
students	at	schools	around	the	country.	Among	his	favorite	examples	is	a	picture
he	calls	“Austin’s	Butterfly,”
	drawn	by	a	first-grader	in	Boise,	Idaho.	When	he
displays	the	drawing—which	depicts	a	tiger	swallowtail	butterfly	in	graceful
detail—students	often	murmur	in	awe.	Berger’s	aim	is	to	inspire	his	audience
with	examples	of	excellent	work	by	their	peers,	but	also	to	demonstrate	to	them
how	such	work	is	made.	One	by	one	he	shows	them	the	six	drafts	Austin
produced	on	the	way	to	his	finished	drawing,	and	tells	them	about	the
constructive	critiques	Austin	received	from	his	classmates	at	each	stage.
The	contents	of	Berger’s	rolling	suitcase	are	now	available	in	an	online
archive—but	he	has	found	that	many	teachers	and	parents	object	to	the	use	of
models,	afraid	that	it	will	suppress	students’	creativity	and	originality.	In	fact	the
opposite	is	true,	says	Berger,	who	spent	twenty-eight	years	as	a	classroom
teacher	before	becoming	chief	academic	officer	of	the	nonprofit	organization	EL
Education.	Seeing	examples	of	outstanding	work	motivates	students	by	giving
them	a	vision	of	the	possible.	How	can	we	expect	students	to	produce	first-rate
work,	he	asks,	when	they	have	no	idea	what	first-rate	work	looks	like?
The	capacity	of	models	to	promote—rather	than	quash—students’	creativity
was	long	recognized	by	teachers	of	composition	and	rhetoric,
	
subjects	that	were
--- Page 165 ---
once	a	central	part	of	the	curriculum	in	American	schools.	One	of	the	field’s
leading	textbooks	was	authored	by	literature	scholar	Edward	P.	J.	Corbett,	who
never	relinquished
	the	notion	that	emulating	the	work	of	the	masters	was	the	first
step	toward	developing	one’s	own	distinctive	style.	
“Imitate,	that	you	may	be
different!”
	Corbett	thundered.	Even	as	the	use	of	models	has	faded	from	the
teaching	of	English	more	generally,	it	is	enjoying	a	resurgence	among	educators
who	are	training	students	to	write	within	particular	academic	genres,
	an	activity
sometimes	called	“disciplinary	writing.”
	In	this	context,	the	emulation	of	model
texts	is	valued	for	its	capacity	to	reduce	cognitive	load—especially	important
when	students	are	juggling	new	concepts	and	vocabulary	while	also	trying	to
construct	a	coherent	argument	in	writing.	Following	the	contours	of	a	prototype
provided	by	the	instructor	permits	students	to	process	more	deeply	the	material
they	are	expected	to	learn.
Marin	Robinson,	a	chemistry	professor	at	Northern	Arizona	University,	leads
an	undergraduate	course	aimed	at	teaching	students	to	“write	like	a	chemist.”
Those	who	enroll	practice	the	writing	of	four	forms	central	to	the	discipline:	the
journal	article,	the	conference	abstract,	the	poster	presentation,	and	the	research
proposal.	In	each	case,	students	follow	the	scientific	and	linguistic	conventions
on	display	in	the	“authentic	texts”
	they	are	given:	actual	articles,	abstracts,
posters,	and	proposals.	This	act	of	imitation	relieves	students	of	some	of	their
mental	burden,	Robinson	notes,	allowing	them	to	devote	the	bulk	of	their
cognitive	bandwidth	to	the	content	of	the	assignment.	She	and	her	collaborator,
English	professor	Fredricka	Stoller,	have	authored	a	textbook,	
Write	Like	a
Chemist,
	that	is	used	at	universities	around	the	country.
A	similar	movement	is	emerging	in	teaching	legal	writing,
	another	endeavor
that	requires	students	to	assimilate	a	host	of	new	terms	and	ideas	even	as	they
are	learning	to	write	in	an	unfamiliar	genre.	In	the	course	of	teaching	hundreds
of	first-year	law	students,	Monte	Smith,	a	professor	and	dean	at	Ohio	State
University’s	law	school,	grew	increasingly	puzzled	by	the	seeming	inability	of
his	bright,	hardworking	students	to	absorb	basic	tenets	of	legal	thinking	and	to
apply	them	in	writing.	He	came	to	believe	that	the	manner	of	his	instruction	was
demanding	more	from	them	than	their	mental	bandwidth	would	allow.	Students
were	being	asked	to	employ	a	whole	new	vocabulary	and	a	whole	new	suite	of
concepts,	even	as	they	were	attempting	to	write	in	an	unaccustomed	style	
and	an
unaccustomed	form.	It	was	too	much,
	and	they	had	too	few	mental	resources	left
over	to	actually	learn.
His	solution:	at	the	start	of	the	course,	Smith	provides	students	with	several
sample	legal	memorandums	like	those	written	by	working	lawyers.	Guided	by	a
set	of	instructions	and	targeted	questions,	students	are	expected	to	detail	their
responses	to	various	aspects	of	the	memos—thereby	relieving	them	of	the
--- Page 166 ---
responses	to	various	aspects	of	the	memos—thereby	relieving	them	of	the
burden	of	having	to	produce	their	own	memos	even	as	they	are	laboring	to	learn
what	a	memo	looks	and	sounds	like.	Only	after	several	such	structured
encounters	with	legal	documents	are	students	asked	to	author	their	own
memorandums.
As	Smith	notes,	the	emulation	of	model	texts	was	once	a	standard	feature	of
instruction	in	legal	writing;	it	fell	out	of	favor	because	of	concern	that	the
practice	would	fail	to	foster	a	capacity	for	independent	thinking.	The	careful
observation	of	how	students	actually	learn,	informed	by	research	on	the	role	of
cognitive	load,	may	be	bringing	models	back	into	fashion.
	
O
F	COURSE,
	the	richest,	deepest,	and	potentially	most	useful	models	are	
people.
Yet	the	very	individuals	who	are	most	expert	are	often	least	able	to	share	what
they	know.	After	years	of	practice,	much	of	experts’	knowledge	and	skill	has
become	“automatized”
—so	well	practiced	that	they	no	longer	need	to	think
about	it.	Automatization	allows	experts	to	work	efficiently	and	effectively,	but	it
also	prevents	them	from	offering	to	others	a	full	account	of	
how
	they	do	what
they	do.	Kenneth	Koedinger,	a	professor	at	Carnegie	Mellon	University	and	the
director	of	its	Pittsburgh	Science	of	Learning	Center,	estimates	that	experts	are
able	to	articulate	only	about	30	percent	of	what	they	know.	His	conclusion	is
based	on	research	like	the	following:	A	study	that	asked	expert	trauma	surgeons
to	describe	how	they	insert	a	shunt	into	the	femoral	artery	(the	large	blood	vessel
in	the	upper	leg)	reported	that	the	surgeons	neglected	to	cite	nearly	70	percent	of
the	actions	they	performed	during	the	procedure.	A	study	of	expert	experimental
psychologists
	found	that	they	omitted	or	inaccurately	characterized	an	average	of
75	percent	of	the	steps	they	took	when	designing	experiments	and	analyzing
data.	And	a	study	of	expert	computer	programmers
	revealed	that	they
enumerated	fewer	than	half	of	the	tasks	they	actually	carried	out	when
debugging	a	computer	program.
Our	systems	of	academic	education	and	workplace	training	rely	on	
experts
teaching	novices,	but	they	rarely	take	into	account	the	blind	spots	that	experts
acquire	by	virtue	of	being	experts.	In	the	era	of	knowledge	work,	it’s	not	only
the	case	that	learners	and	novices	must	become	more	assiduous	imitators;
instructors	and	experts	must	also	become	more	legible	models.	This	can	be
accomplished	through	what	philosopher	Karsten	Stueber	calls	“re-enactive
empathy”
:	an	appreciation	of	the	challenges	confronting	the	novice	that	is
produced	by	reenacting	what	it	was	like	to	have	once	been	a	beginner	oneself.
Ting	Zhang,	an	assistant	professor	of	business	administration	at	Harvard
Business	School,	found	a	clever	way	to	stage	such	a	reenactment
	among	expert
--- Page 167 ---
musicians.	For	her	experiment,	Zhang	enlisted	a	group	of	experienced	guitarists
to	play	their	instruments;	half	of	them	were	asked	to	play	as	they	normally
would,	while	the	other	half	were	instructed	to	reverse	the	position	of	their
instrument	and	play	it	with	their	non-dominant	hand.	All	the	musicians	were
then	asked	to	watch	a	video	clip	of	a	beginning	guitar	student	trying	to	form
basic	chords,	and	to	offer	him	advice.	The	guidance	provided	by	the	guitarists	in
the	reversed	instrument	condition—those	who	had	so	recently	struggled
themselves	to	play	in	an	unfamiliar	manner—was	judged	to	be	especially
helpful.
But	reenacting	the	experience	of	being	a	novice	need	not	be	so	literal;	experts
can	generate	empathy	for	the	beginner	through	acts	of	the	imagination,	changing
the	way	they	present	information	accordingly.	An	example:	experts	habitually
engage	in	“chunking,”
	or	compressing	several	tasks	into	one	mental	unit.	This
frees	up	space	in	the	expert’s	working	memory,	but	it	often	baffles	the	novice,
for	whom	each	step	is	new	and	still	imperfectly	understood.	A	math	teacher	may
speed	through	an	explanation	of	long	division,	not	remembering	or	recognizing
that	the	procedures	that	now	seem	so	obvious	were	once	utterly	inscrutable.
Math	education	expert	John	Mighton
	has	a	suggestion:	break	it	down	into	steps,
then	break	it	down	again—into	
micro
-steps,	if	necessary.
Though	Mighton	now	holds	a	PhD	in	mathematics,	he	struggled	with	math	as
a	child.	He	succeeded	by	teaching	himself	how	to	advance	one	tiny	move	at	a
time—the	method	he	now	advocates	as	the	founder	of	a	nonprofit	educational
organization,	JUMP	Math	(the	name	stands	for	Junior	Undiscovered	Math
Prodigies).	When	instructors	make	their	expertise	legible	in	this	way,	learners
are	able	to	master	one	small	step,	then	another	and	another,	acquiring	a	solid
understanding	and	gaining	con
fidence	as	they	go.	The	approach	has	allowed
many	JUMP	participants,	including	some	who	struggled	to	grasp	the	most	basic
mathematical	concepts	in	school,	to	achieve	proficiency	in	the	subject.	An
evaluation	of	the	JUMP	program,
	conducted	by	researchers	from	the	University
of	Toronto	and	Toronto’s	Hospital	for	Sick	Children	and	published	in	2019,
provides	support	for	Mighton’s	method.	By	the	second	year	of	the	study,	JUMP
students	in	grade	three	had	made	greater	progress	in	problem	solving,	and	JUMP
students	in	grade	six	had	made	greater	gains	across	a	broad	range	of
mathematical	skills—calculation,	math	fluency,	and	applied	problems—than
those	who	received	traditional	instruction.
Experts	have	another	edge	over	novices:	they	know	what	to	attend	to	and	what
to	ignore.	Presented	with	a	professionally	relevant	scenario,	experts	will
immediately	home	in	on	its	most	salient	aspects,	while	beginners	waste	their
time	focusing	on	unimportant	features.	But	research	shows	that	the	expertise	of
experienced	practitioners	can	be	made	more	accessible	by	deliberately
--- Page 168 ---
experienced	practitioners	can	be	made	more	accessible	by	deliberately
exaggerating	it,	even	distorting	it,	such	that	the	pertinent	elements	“pop	out”	for
the	novice	as	they	do	for	the	expert.
A	number	of	years	ago,	the	US	Air	Force	sought	the	advice	of	psychologist
Itiel	Dror,	now	a	senior	researcher	at	University	College	London.	Endeavoring
to	prevent	friendly	fire	aimed	at	their	own	aircraft,	air	force	leaders	were	looking
for	ways	to	improve	the	ability	of	pilots	in	training	to	instantly	recognize	the
shapes	of	various	planes.	Dror	observed	that	the	trainees	were	becoming
overwhelmed	with	details	about	the	many	airplanes	they	were	expected	to
identify.	He	took	a	new	tack,	digitally	morphing	the	outlines
	of	the	aircraft
diagrams	the	pilots	were	given	to	study.	Planes	with	a	wide	wingspan	became
even	wider;	sharp-angled	planes	were	made	pointier;	snub-nosed	planes
appeared	more	rounded.	The	differences	among	the	aircraft,	once	subtle	and
hard	to	notice,	now	leaped	out	at	the	pilots—and	they	continued	to	recognize
these	distinguishing	features	even	when	they	viewed	the	planes	at	normal	scale.
Dror’s	method	is	related	to	a	phenomenon	that	psychologists	call	“the
caricature	advantage”
:	the	fact	that	we	recognize	a	caricatured	face	even	more
readily	than	we	recognize	a	true-to-life	depiction.	While	a	caricature	does	distort
its	subject’s	actual	appearance,	it	does	so	in	a	
systematic
	way,	exaggerating	what
is	unique	or	distinctive	about	that	individual—thereby	making	him	or	her	even
more	instantly	identifiable.	(Think	of	George	W.	Bush’s	prominent	ears,	or	Bill
Clinton’s	bulbous	nose,	or	the	
late	Ruth	Bader	Ginsburg’s	oversized	glasses.)
Experts	can	leverage	the	caricature	advantage	by	playing	up	the	unique	features
that	differentiate	among	a	group	of	examples—examples	that,	to	a	novice,	may
come	off	as	confusingly	similar.
A	third	difference	between	experts	and	novices	lies	in	the	way	they	
categorize
what	they	see:	novices	sort	the	entities	they	encounter	according	to	their
superficial	features,	while	experts	classify	them	according	to	their	deep	function.
A	classic	experiment
	by	Arizona	State	University	professor	Michelene	Chi	asked
eight	experts	(advanced	PhD	students	from	a	university	physics	department)	and
eight	novices	(undergraduates	who	had	taken	a	single	semester	of	physics)	to
sort	two	dozen	physics	problems,	each	one	described	on	an	index	card,	into
categories	of	their	choosing.	The	classifications	devised	by	the	two	groups	could
not	have	been	more	different.	The	undergraduates	sorted	the	problems	according
to	their	surface	features:	whether	the	problems	involved	springs,	or	pulleys,	or
inclined	planes.	The	graduate	students,	meanwhile,	categorized	the	problems	on
the	basis	of	the	underlying	principles	of	physics	they	represented:	conservation
of	energy,	the	work-energy	theorem,	conservation	of	momentum.
--- Page 169 ---
There’s	far	more	useful	information	embedded	in	the	categories	applied	by
experts.	So	why	not	present	novices	with	information	that’s	
already
	organized
by	function?	That	notion	was	behind	a	new	kind	of	wine	store	created	by	Joshua
Wesson,	an	expert	sommelier	and	entrepreneur	who	founded	the	chain	Best
Cellars.	“I	heard	the	same	questions
	all	the	time,	and	they	all	reduced	to,	‘How
can	I	make	sense	of	the	world	of	wine	without	having	to	master	all	the	details?
How	can	I	deal	with	all	these	choices	when	all	I	want	is	a	wine	that	goes	with
pizza?’
 
”	says	Wesson.	In	most	stores	selling	wine,	he	observes,	bottles	are
arranged	by	grape	(Chardonnay,	Cabernet	Sauvignon)	or	by	region	(California,
France).	Such	classifications	communicate	little	to	the	uneducated	wine
consumer.
Wine	experts,	meanwhile,	know	about	surface-level	characteristics	like	grapes
and	regions—but	they	
think
	about	wine	in	terms	of	function:	wines	that	are
luscious	and	fruity,	good	for	pairing	with	spicy	food;	wines	that	are	big	and	bold
and	can	stand	up	to	a	hearty	meal;	wines	that	are	fizzy	and	festive,	fit	for	a
celebration.	“Luscious,”	“Big,”	and	“Fizzy”	are,	in	fact,	three	of	the	eight
categories	Wesson	devised	for	his	stores	(the	others	are	“Soft,”	“Fresh,”	“Juicy,”
“Smooth,”	and	“Sweet”).	Foreground
ing	these	features	is	like	giving	customers	a
shortcut	to	thinking	the	way	a	sommelier	does.	Following	Wesson’s	lead,
experts	more	generally	can	make	themselves	into	accessible	models	for	imitation
by	communicating	the	categories	they	use	to	organize	information,	categories
that	are	themselves	packed	with	meaning	about	how	experts’	thinking	operates.
These	strategies—breaking	down	agglomerated	steps,	exaggerating	salient
features,	supplying	categories	based	on	function—help	pry	open	the	black	box	of
experts’	automatized	knowledge	and	skill.	Extended	technology	may	offer	an
even	more	direct	probe	into	the	mind	of	the	expert.	For	example:	the	nature	of
expertise	is	now	being	studied	using	eye	tracking,	the	automated	monitoring	of
where	the	expert’s	gaze	falls,	when,	and	for	how	long.	Research	has	shown	that,
across	disciplines,	experts	look	in	ways	different	from	novices
:	they	take	in	the
big	picture	more	rapidly	and	completely,	while	focusing	on	the	most	important
aspects	of	the	scene;	they’re	less	distracted	by	visual	“noise,”	and	they	shift
more	easily	among	visual	fields,	avoiding	getting	stuck.	Within	any	occupation
—among	surgeons,	pilots,	programmers,	architects,	even	high	school	teachers
—
experts’	gaze	patterns	are	highly	similar,	while	beginners’	are	widely	divergent
and	idiosyncratic.
Yet	experts	are	not	aware	of	how	they	engage	in	looking;
	their	gaze	patterns
are	not	available	for	conscious	inspection.	Eye-tracking	technology	can	capture
this	aspect	of	their	expertise	and	make	it	available	for	use	by	novices,	guiding
their	gaze	with	unobtrusive	cues
	about	where	to	look.	It’s	a	way	of	“cheating
--- Page 170 ---
experience,”
	as	one	researcher	puts	it—a	shortcut	around	hours	of	observation
and	practice	that	could	potentially	make	learning	much	more	efficient	and
effective.
Researchers	are	also	experimenting	with	“haptic”	signals:	physical	nudges
delivered	via	special	gloves	or	tools	that	help	mold	a	novice’s	movement
patterns	into	those	of	an	expert.	While	brainbound	approaches	to	education	and
training	convey	information	almost	exclusively	through	visual	and	auditory
channels,	haptic	technologies	supply	guidance	and	feedback	directly	to	the	body.
Preliminary	results	suggest	that	their	use	can	reduce	cognitive	load	and	improve
performance
	for	many	kinds	of	learners,	from	students	learning	to	play	the	violin
to	medical	residents	learning	to	perform	laparoscopic	surgery.
In	a	sense,	these	innovations	represent	a	technologically	enhanced	take	on	the
teaching	that	has	unfolded	within	apprenticeships	for	centuries—
the	twenty-
first-century	version	of	a	master	craftsman’s	pointing	finger	or	guiding	hand.
The	indenture	contracts	for	those	old-time	apprenticeships	often	proposed	to
provide	the	apprentice’s	labor	in	exchange	for	instruction	in	“the	trade,	art,	and
mystery”
	of	the	craft,	whether	it	be	carpentry	or	blacksmithing	or	shipbuilding.
In	an	age	of	knowledge	work,	the	“mystery”	of	expertise	is	even	more
enshrouded,	hidden	by	the	scrim	of	automatization.	Pulling	this	curtain	aside
requires	experts	to	forgo	the	familiar	conventions	of	brainbound	instruction—to
think	outside	the	brain,	where	their	cognition	can	be	seen.
--- Page 171 ---
8
Thinking	with	Peers
C
ARL	WIEMAN	KNOWS
	his	way	around	a	perplexing	problem.	A	professor	of
physics	at	Stanford	University,	Wieman	was	awarded	the	Nobel	Prize	in	2001
for	figuring	out	(along	with	his	colleague	Eric	Cornell)	how	to	create,	in	the
laboratory,	an	extreme	state	of	matter	known	as	the	Bose-Einstein	condensate.
But	Wieman’s	mastery	in	the	lab	did	not	extend	to	the	classroom,
	as	he	would	be
the	first	to	admit.	For	years	he	wrestled	with	what	would	seem	to	be	a
straightforward	task:	how	to	get	undergraduates	to	understand	physics	in	the	way
he
	understood	physics.	Laying	it	out	for	them—describing,	explaining,	even
demonstrating	the	core	concepts	of	the	discipline—was	not	working.	No	matter
how	clearly	he	elucidated	these	ideas,	no	matter	how	energetically	he
communicated	them,	his	students’	ability	to	solve	the	problems	he	posed	to	them
remained	rudimentary.
This	failure	to	“think	like	a	physicist”	is	more	the	rule	than	the	exception.
Decades	of	research	have	found	that	high	school	and	college	students	who	are
taught	physics	in	the	conventional	manner,	via	lectures	and	textbooks,	typically
don’t	learn	the	subject	in	any	depth.	So	it	was	for	Wieman	and	his	students.
Wieman	knew	how	to	cool	and	trap	atoms	using	light	from	a	powerful	laser.
From	work	carried	out	in	his	lab,
	he	understood	how	atoms	interact	at	ultracold
temperatures,	more	than	four	hundred	degrees	below	zero.	He	had	discovered
how	to	cause	atoms	to	oscillate	at	the	same	frequency,	or	“sing	in	unison,”
	as	the
Royal	Swedish	Academy	of	Sciences	put	it	in	announcing	his	Nobel.	But	he
could	not	
seem	to	pin	down	the	process	by	which	a	halting	thinker	turned	into	a
dexterous	one.
Wieman	ultimately	found	the	key	to	his	conundrum	in	an	unexpected	place:
not	in	his	undergraduate	classes	but	among	the	graduate	students	who	came	to
work	in	his	laboratory.	When	they	first	arrived	at	the	lab,	Wieman	noticed,	his
PhD	candidates	were	more	like	the	undergrads	than	not.	They	knew	plenty	about
--- Page 172 ---
physics,	but	their	habits	of	thought	were	narrow	and	rigid.	Within	just	a	year	or
two,	however,	these	same	graduate	students	had	grown	into	models	of	the	kind
of	supple,	flexible	thinker	Wieman	was	trying	so	earnestly,	and	unsuccessfully,
to	mold.	“It	was	clear	to	me
	that	there	was	some	kind	of	intellectual	process
present	in	the	research	lab	that	was	sorely	missing	from	the	traditional	education
process,”	Wieman	recounts.
A	major	factor	in	the	grad	students’	transformation,	he	concluded,	was	their
experience	of	intense	
social	engagement
	around	a	body	of	knowledge—the
hours	they	spent	advising,	debating	with,	and	recounting	anecdotes	to	one
another.	A	2019	study
	published	in	the	
Proceedings	of	the	National	Academy	of
Sciences
	supports	Wieman’s	hunch.	Tracking	the	intellectual	advancement	of
several	hundred	graduate	students	in	the	sciences	over	the	course	of	four	years,
its	authors	found	that	the	development	of	crucial	skills	such	as	generating
hypotheses,	designing	experiments,	and	analyzing	data	was	closely	related	to	the
students’	engagement	with	their	peers	in	the	lab,	and	
not
	to	the	guidance	they
received	from	their	faculty	mentors.
Social	interaction	appeared	to	be	an	essential	facilitator	of	intelligent	thought
—but,	Wieman	realized,	such	exchanges	were	almost	completely	absent	from
traditional	undergraduate	lecture	courses.	The	way	he’d	been	teaching,	students
sat	listening	to	him	talk,	hardly	uttering	a	word	to	one	another.	Wieman	set	out
to	change	that,	aiming	to	generate	within	his	college	classes	the	very	sort	of
“intellectual	process”	that	turned	the	graduate	students	in	his	lab	into	first-rate
thinkers.	Students	no	longer	sat	silently	in	rows;	instead	they	huddled	together	in
clusters,	debating	the	solution	to	a	challenging	physics	problem	Wieman	had
posed.	While	the	deliberations	went	on,	Wieman	and	his	teaching	assistants
circulated	around	the	room,	listening	for	misconceptions	and	offering	feedback.
When	Wieman	retook	the	podium,	it	was	to	reveal	and	explain	the	right	answer,
and	
to	offer	a	commentary	on	where	alternative	responses	went	wrong.	By
initiating	what	he	called	“multiple	brief	small-group	discussions”
	among	the
students,	and	by	asking	them	to	venture	a	judgment—one	they	were	expected	to
defend	against	challenges	from	classmates	who	held	a	different	view—Wieman
was	creating	the	conditions	in	which	undergraduates	could	learn	to	think	like
expert	physicists.
Wieman	is	one	of	a	growing	number	of	professors	in	the	STEM	disciplines
who	are	bringing	this	“active	learning”	approach
	to	their	courses.	Research
demonstrates	that	students	who	engage	in	active	learning
	acquire	a	deeper
understanding	of	the	material,	score	higher	on	exams,	and	are	less	likely	to	fail
or	drop	out.	Wieman,	who	holds	an	appointment	in	Stanford’s	school	of
education	as	well	as	in	its	physics	department,	spends	most	of	his	time
--- Page 173 ---
evangelizing	for	more	effective	ways	of	teaching	science;	he	donated	his	Nobel
Prize	winnings	(“this	big	pot	of	money
	that	fell	from	the	sky”)	to	improving
physics	instruction.	His	aspiration	is	to	move	science	education	away	from	the
lecture	format,	toward	a	model	that	is	more	active	and	more	engaged.
Wieman	is	working	to	achieve	wider	recognition	of	an	often	overlooked	truth:
the	development	of	intelligent	thinking	is	fundamentally	a	social	process.	We
can
	engage	in	thinking	on	our	own,	of	course,	and	at	times	solitary	cognition	is
what’s	called	for	by	a	particular	problem	or	project.	Even	then,	solo	thinking	is
rooted	in	our	lifelong	experience	of	social	interaction;	linguists	and	cognitive
scientists	theorize	that	the	constant	patter	we	carry	on	in	our	heads	is	a	kind	of
internalized	conversation.
	Our	brains	evolved	to	think	
with
	people:	to	teach
them,	to	argue	with	them,	to	exchange	stories	with	them.	Human	thought	is
exquisitely	sensitive	to	context,	and	one	of	the	most	powerful	contexts	of	all	is
the	presence	of	other	people.	As	a	consequence,	when	we	think	socially,	we
think	differently—and	often	better—than	when	we	think	non-socially.
To	offer	just	one	example:	the	brain	stores	social	information
	differently	than
it	stores	information	that	is	non-social.	Social	memories	are	encoded	in	a	distinct
region	of	the	brain.	What’s	more,	we	remember	social	information	more
accurately,
	a	phenomenon	that	psychologists	call	the	“social	encoding
advantage.”
	If	findings	like	this	feel	unexpected,	that’s	because	our	culture
largely	excludes	social	interaction	from	the	realm	of	the	intellect.	Social
exchanges	with	others	might	be	enjoyable	
or	entertaining,	this	attitude	holds,	but
they’re	no	more	than	a	diversion,	what	we	do	around	the	edges	of	school	or
work.	Serious	thinking,	
real
	thinking,	is	done	on	one’s	own,	sequestered	from
others.
Science	has	not	infrequently	served	to	reinforce	this	notion.
	All	of	us	have
seen	the	images	generated	by	fMRI,	or	functional	magnetic	resonance	imaging:
the	gray	mass	of	the	brain,	enlivened	with	patches	of	color	denoting	regions	that
are	actively	engaged	in	thought.	The	way	technologies	like	fMRI	are	applied	is	a
product
	of	our	brainbound	orientation;	it	has	not	seemed	odd	or	unusual	to
examine	the	individual	brain	on	its	own,	unconnected	to	others.	And	the
ubiquitous	depictions	generated	by	fMRI	in	turn	
perpetuate
	that	very	orientation:
the	scans	offer	a	vivid	visual	affirmation	of	the	assumption	that	everything	worth
observing	happens	within	the	bounds	of	a	single	skull.	Scientists	who	might
have	wished	to	investigate	the	role	of	social	interaction	on	cognition	have	until
recently	been	hampered	by	technical	constraints;
	for	many	years	following	the
introduction	of	fMRI,	researchers	were	all	but	required	to	examine	the	individual
in	seclusion,	shut	inside	the	solitary	bore	of	the	MRI	machine.	Thus	the
--- Page 174 ---
neuroscientific	study	of	how	people	think	has	been,	for	decades,	the	study	of
people	thinking	alone.
Now	that	is	changing,	as	a	growing	interest	in	the	social	dimension	of
cognition	has	arrived	alongside	a	new	generation	of	more	flexible	and	adaptable
tools.	Technologies	such	as	electroencephalography	(EEG)	and	functional	near-
infrared	spectroscopy	(fNIRS)	are	allowing	scientists	to	scan	multiple	people’s
brains	as	they	interact	in	naturalistic	settings—making	deals,	playing	games,	or
simply	talking	to	one	another.	Using	these	tools,	researchers	have	found
persuasive	evidence	for	what	is	known	as	the	“interactive	brain	hypothesis”
:	the
premise	that	when	people	interact	socially,	their	brains	engage	different	neural
and	cognitive	processes	than	when	those	same	people	are	thinking	or	acting	on
their	own.
A	representative	example	of	this	research	emerges	out	of	the	study	of	how	the
brain	comprehends	and	produces	language.	As	far	back	as	the	nineteenth
century,	two	bundles	of	gray	matter—Broca’s	area	and	Wernicke’s	area—have
been	regarded	as	the	brain’s	“canonical”	language	regions.	They	are	named	after
Paul	Broca	and	Carl	Wernicke,	scientists	who	discovered	the	regions’	language-
related	function	through	their	studies	of	brain-damaged	patients	(including
autopsies	of	the	patients	follow
ing	their	deaths).	Confirming	the	scientists’
hunches	a	century	after	they	were	advanced,	Broca’s	area	and	Wernicke’s	area
were	the	very	regions	that	lit	up	in	fMRI	scans	of	study	participants	who	were
asked	to	read	or	listen	to	words.	But	the	long-established	canon	elaborating	the
brain’s	functional	anatomy	is	now	being	revised	by	a	new	wave	of	research,
carried	out	with	a	new	array	of	tools.
In	experiments	that	track	brain	activity
	while	subjects	are	not	reading	or
passively	listening	but	actually	
talking
	to	other	people,	a	third	and	heretofore
unknown	language-related	neural	circuit	has	been	identified.	Studies	using
fNIRS—a	brain-scanning	technology	that	works	via	a	flexible	band	encircling
the	head—demonstrate	that	this	newly	recognized	network,	called	the	subcentral
area,	is	specialized	for	predicting	and	responding	to	language	as	it	is	used
moment	by	moment	in	conversation.	This	discovery	adds	to	accumulating
evidence	showing	that	engaging	in	real-time	conversation	involves	much	more
nimble	and	nuanced	cognitive	processes	than	does	the	simple	recognition	of
discrete	words.	It	requires	us	to	anticipate	the	language	our	conversational
partner	will	use	in	speaking	to	us,	and	to	improvise	the	language	we	ourselves
will	muster	in	response.
A	related	finding	emerged	when	scientists,	again	employing	fNIRS,	compared
the	brain	scans	of	people	playing	poker
	with	a	human	partner	to	those	of	people
playing	the	same	game	with	a	computer.	The	areas	of	the	brain	involved	in
--- Page 175 ---
generating	a	“theory	of	mind”—inferring	the	mental	state	of	another	individual
—were	active	in	competing	with	a	human	but	dormant	in	matching	wits	with	a
machine.	In	a	sense,	it	was	not	the	“same	game”	at	all;	play	against	a	human
partner	produced	a	distinctively	different	pattern	of	brain	activity.	A	larger
number	of	brain	regions	were	activated,	and	these	regions	manifested	a	higher
degree	of	connectivity	with	one	another.	Playing	against	another	human
produced	a	richer	experience,	neurologically	speaking,	than	playing	against	a
computer.	Other	studies	have	found
	that	areas	of	the	brain	involved	in	planning
and	anticipation,	and	in	feeling	empathy,	are	more	active	when	we	are	playing
against	a	human	as	compared	to	a	computer.	Brain	regions	associated	with
reward
	also	show	stronger	stimulation	when	we	play—and	especially	when	we
win
—against	a	human	opponent.
The	tools	employed	in	such	research	are	so	unobtrusive	they	can	even	be	used
with	babies	and	toddlers,	allowing	scientists	to	explore	how	
social	interaction
shapes	the	thinking	of	children	as	they	grow	and	develop.	EEG	is	a	technology
that	tracks	and	records	brain	wave	patterns	via	a	cap	of	electrodes	placed	on	a
subject’s	scalp;	it	was	applied	in	a	study
	conducted	by	Patricia	Kuhl,	a
psychologist	at	the	University	of	Washington.	Kuhl	and	her	collaborators
observed	nine-month-old	infants	from	English-speaking	homes	as	they
interacted	with	a	Spanish-speaking	tutor,	counting	how	many	times	the	babies
shifted	their	gaze	between	the	tutor	and	the	toys	the	tutor	pointed	to	while
speaking	the	names	of	the	toys	in	Spanish.	Such	eye	movements,	Kuhl	explains,
provide	an	indication	of	the	degree	to	which	the	children	were	bringing	their
social	capacities	to	bear	on	their	learning	of	a	new	language.
After	twelve	of	these	tutoring	sessions,	the	researchers	obtained	a	neural
measure	of	the	babies’	second-language	learning,	using	EEG	to	gauge	how
strongly	their	brains	reacted	to	hearing	Spanish	spoken	aloud.	The	infants	who
had	engaged	in	the	most	social	interaction—frequently	looking	back	and	forth
between	the	tutor	and	the	toys	the	tutor	was	talking	about—also	showed	the
most	evidence	of	having	learned	Spanish,	as	indicated	by	their	brain	activity	in
response	to	Spanish	sounds.	Such	neuroscientific	findings	join	a	larger	body	of
evidence	generated	by	psychology	and	cognitive	science,	all	pointing	to	a
striking	conclusion:	we	think	
best
	when	we	think	
socially.
Yet	even	as	scientific	evidence	of	the	link	between	social	interaction	and
intelligent	thought	accumulates,	our	society	remains	mired	in	a	brainbound
approach	to	cognition;	our	activities	at	school	and	at	work	still	treat	thinking	as
the	manipulation	of	abstract	symbols	inside	individual	heads.	We	are	asked	to
produce	facts	(on	tests,	in	reports)	without	the	presence	of	a	person	to	edify.	We
make	arguments	(write	essays,	author	memos)	without	the	presence	of	a	person
to	debate.	We	are	asked	to	set	information	out	(log	entries	in	a	knowledge
--- Page 176 ---
to	debate.	We	are	asked	to	set	information	out	(log	entries	in	a	knowledge
management	system),	or	take	information	in	(read	manuals	and	instructions),
without	the	presence	of	a	person	with	whom	to	trade	stories.
We	are,	that	is,	continually	expected	to	think	about	abstract	symbols	for	the
benefit	of	an	abstract	audience,	an	expectation	that	overlooks	our	actual	strength.
Humans	are	not	especially	good	at	thinking	about	concepts;	our	ability	to	think
about	
people,
	however,	is	superlative.	Consider	the	Wason	Selection	Task,
	a	test
of	reasoning	widely	used	in	experimen
tal	psychology.	Introduced	by
psychologist	Peter	Wason	in	1966,	the	task	seems	straightforward	enough.	One
version	of	it	goes	something	like	this:	“Take	a	look	at	the	cards
	shown	here.
Each	card	has	a	vowel	or	a	consonant	on	one	side	and	an	even	or	an	odd	number
on	the	other.	Which	card	or	cards	must	be	turned	over	in	order	to	determine
whether	it	is	true	that	
If	a	card	has	a	vowel	on	one	side,	it	has	an	even	number
on	the	other?
”	Four	cards	are	displayed;	the	first	is	marked	with	an	“E,”	the
second	with	a	“K,”	the	third	with	the	number	3,	and	the	fourth	with	the	number
6.
People’s	performance	on	this	task
	is	abysmal.	Studies	by	many	researchers
over	many	years	have	shown	that	only	about	10	percent	of	subjects
	given	the
task	complete	it	correctly.	Even	when	the	language	of	the	task	is	rephrased
	to
pose	a	familiar-sounding	problem—like	which	train	a	subway	rider	should	take
to	get	to	her	destination—people’s	performance	remains	strikingly	poor.	Change
one	particular	aspect	of	the	task,
	however,	and	the	percentage	of	participants
getting	it	right	shoots	up	to	75	percent.	What	is	that	change?	
Make	it	
social.
In	the	social	version	of	the	task,
	participants	are	told:	“You	are	serving	at	a	bar
and	have	to	enforce	the	rule	that	if	a	person	is	drinking	beer,	they	must	be	21
years	of	age	or	older.	The	four	cards	shown	here	have	information	about	people
sitting	at	a	table.	One	side	of	the	card	tells	you	what	a	person	is	drinking,	and	the
other	side	tells	their	age.	Which	card	or	cards	must	you	turn	over	to	see	if	the
rule	is	being	broken?”	The	puzzle,	once	so	befuddling,	now	seems	easily	solved.
Some	evolutionary	psychologists	have	speculated
	that	people	do	so	much
better	on	the	social	version	of	the	Wason	Selection	Task	because	natural
selection	has	furnished	our	brains	with	a	dedicated	“cheater-detection	module,”
specialized	for	the	crucial	task	of	spotting	transgressors	who	are	breaking	the
rules	of	the	community.	It’s	more	likely,	however,	that	people	so	readily	succeed
at	solving	the	puzzle	in	this	form	simply	because	it	is	social	in	nature,
	and	we	are
past	masters	at	thinking	about	social	relations.
Indeed,	scientists	have	theorized	that	we	humans	developed	our	oversized
brains
	in	order	to	deal	with	the	complexity	of	our	own	social	groups.	As	a	result
of	evolutionary	pressures,	each	of	us	alive	today	possesses	a	specialized	“social
--- Page 177 ---
brain”
	that	is	immensely	powerful,	says	Matthew	Lie
berman,	a	psychologist	at
the	University	of	California,	Los	Angeles.	The	
social	brain	with	its
“superpowers,”
	as	Lieberman	calls	them,	starts	developing	in	early	childhood;	in
adolescence,	it	kicks	into	high	gear.
	
“H
ERE.	THIS	MAP
	is	going	to	be	your	guide	to	North	Shore.”
With	these	words,	Janis	Ian	thrusts	a	piece	of	paper	into	the	hands	of	a	wide-
eyed	Cady	Heron.	In	the	2004	film	
Mean	Girls,
	Cady	(played	by	Lindsay
Lohan)	is	the	new	girl	at	North	Shore	High	School.	The	first	person	she	meets
there	is	the	wisecracking	Janis,	played	by	Lizzy	Caplan.	Janis	takes	it	upon
herself	to	show	Cady	the	lay	of	the	land,	as	mapped	out	in	her	detailed	diagram
of	the	lunchroom.
“Now,	where	you	sit	in	the	cafeteria	is	crucial,”	Janis	explains,	jabbing	at	the
map	in	Cady’s	hand.	“Because	you’ve	got	
everybody
	there.”	The	camera	pans
over	the	groups	gathered	around	their	cafeteria	tables	as	Janis	catalogs	them,	in
not	quite	politically	correct	fashion:	“You’ve	got	your	freshmen	.
 
.
 
.	ROTC
guys	.
 
.
 
.	preps	.
 
.
 
.	JV	jocks	.
 
.
 
.	Asian	nerds	.
 
.
 
.	cool	Asians	.
 
.
 
.	varsity	jocks	.
 
.
 
.
unfriendly	black	hotties	.
 
.
 
.	girls	who	eat	their	feelings	.
 
.
 
.	girls	who	don’t	eat
anything	.
 
.
 
.
	desperate	wannabes	.
 
.
 
.	burnouts	.
 
.
 
.	sexually	active	band	geeks”—
and,	Janis	concludes	with	a	note	of	scorn,	the	well-groomed	girls	she	calls	“the
Plastics”:	“
Beware.	Of.	The	Plastics.
”
Almost	every	adolescent	maintains	a	mental	flowchart	like	the	one	Janis	put
down	on	paper.	Teens	may	not	remember	how	to	find	the	square	root	of	a
fraction	or	recall	all	the	elements	on	the	periodic	table,	but	they	can	effortlessly
explain	and	analyze	the	complicated	social	hierarchy	that	prevails	at	their	high
school.	Starting	with	the	launch	of	puberty,	young	people	become	powerfully
driven	to	form	bonds
	with,	and	establish	a	place	among,	their	peers—an	activity
that	entails	an	almost	obsessive	focus	on	the	intricacies	of	relationships.	They
can’t	help	it:	structural	and	hormonal	changes	taking	place	in	the	brains	of
teenagers	persistently	orient	them	toward	the	social	sphere.
During	adolescence,	teens’	brains	become	more	sensitive
	to	social	and
emotional	cues—responding	more	strongly	to	pictures	of	faces,	for	example,
than	do	the	brains	of	children	or	adults.	Teenagers’	brains	also	become	more
attuned	to	reward
	as	puberty	prompts	an	increase	in	the	activity	of	neural	circuits
involving	the	feel-good	chemical	dopamine.	And	the	sweetest	reward	for	a	teen
is	to	be	accepted	and	liked	by	her	peers.	In	the	service	of	navigating	a	newly
complex	and	valued	interpersonal	
ecosystem,	the	social	brain	appears	to	be
“turned	on”
	in	teenagers	nearly	all	the	time.	Says	Matthew	Lieberman	of	UCLA,
--- Page 178 ---
“What	the	brain	really	wants
	to	do,	particularly	during	adolescence,	is	explore
and	master	the	social	world.”
Yet	at	this	very	moment	in	their	development,	we	tell	teenagers	to	
turn	off
their	social	brains	when	they	arrive	at	school,	and	to	focus	instead	on	abstract
information	devoid	of	social	meaning	or	context.	Teachers,	parents,	and	other
adults	treat	social	life	as	an	unwelcome	diversion	from	the	real	work	at	hand,
and	in	so	doing,	they	set	up	a	struggle	for	students’	attention	and	effort.	The
results	are	predictable:	boredom,	distraction,	disengagement,	even	acting	out.	Of
course,	we	can’t	simply	allow	adolescents	to	attend	to	their	social	lives	all	day.
But	we	
can
	leverage	their	burgeoning	sociability
	in	the	service	of	learning	the
material	they	need	to	learn.	How	to	do	this?	One	effective	technique	is	to
involve	them	in	highly	social	relationships	in	which	academic	content	is	also
front	and	center:	that	is,	engage	them	in	
teaching	others.
Given	their	well-advertised	ambivalence	about	school,	deputizing	teenagers	to
act	as	teachers	may	seem	like	a	questionable	prescription.	But	that’s	just	it:
While	our	species	and	its	young	did	not	evolve	to	care
	about	the	Pythagorean
theorem	or	the	War	of	1812,	we	
did
	evolve	to	educate	others	about	the	vital
arcana	of	our	particular	tribe.	(Think	of	how	much	informal	“teaching”	of
adolescent	social	norms	goes	on	in	the	cafeteria	or	the	student	lounge.)	As
teachers,	human	beings	are	naturals;	we	are	born	to	instruct	others	and	to	learn
from	them.	Evidence	of	teaching	has	been	found
	in	the	archaeological	record
reaching	back	hundreds	of	thousands	of	years,	and	the	act	of	teaching	has	been
observed
	in	every	human	culture	around	the	world,	including	the	hunter-gatherer
tribes	that	live	today	in	a	fashion	similar	to	that	of	our	ancient	forebears.
The	“teaching	instinct”
	manifests	just	as	reliably	among	modern	people	like
us.	In	the	course	of	everyday	interactions,	we	unconsciously	offer	cues
	to	others
—eye	contact,	a	change	in	our	tone	of	voice—that	signal	our	intent	to	instruct;
these	cues	in	turn	induce	our	social	partners	to	become	more	receptive	to	the
information	we	have	to	convey.	Such	signaling	begins	at	birth:	mothers	and
fathers	of	newborn	babies	immediately	start	speaking	to	their	infants
	in
“parentese,”	a	distinctively	high-pitched,	slowed-down,	exaggerated	way	of
talking.	Research	has	found	that	hearing	parentese	helps	infants	and	toddlers
learn	new	words	more	
readily
	than	hearing	ordinary	speech.	Before	too	long,
children	themselves	are	engaging	in	instruction;	teaching	behavior	has	been
observed
	among	toddlers	as	young	as	three	and	a	half	years	of	age.
Across	the	lifespan,	engagement	with	other	people	orients	us	toward	taking	in
new	information—but	this	reflexive	adjustment	may	happen	only	if	we
encounter	those	people	in	the	flesh.	In	a	study	using	fNIRS	brain-scanning
technology,	a	team	of	researchers	at	Yale	University	found	that	an	area	of	the
--- Page 179 ---
social	brain	was	activated
	when	adult	participants	looked	directly	into	one
another’s	eyes,	but	not	when	they	gazed	at	the	eyes	of	others	recorded	on	video.
“Eye	contact	opens	the	gate
	between	the	perceptual	systems	of	two	individuals,
and	information	flows,”	says	Joy	Hirsch,	the	Yale	neuroscientist	who	led	the
study.	Another	factor	that	seems	to	“gate,”
	or	initiate,	the	process	of	learning	is
contingent
	communication:	social	exchanges	in	which	the	utterances	of	one
partner	are	directly	responsive	to	what	the	other	has	said.	When	contingent
communication	is	absent,	learning	may	simply	fail	to	occur.	A	particularly
striking	example:	toddlers	under	the	age	of	two	and	a	half	readily	learn	new
words	and	actions	from	a	responsive	adult	but	pick	up	almost	nothing
	from
prerecorded	instruction	delivered	on	a	screen—a	phenomenon	that	researchers
call	the	“video	deficit.”
Humans	learn	best	from	other	(live)	humans.	Perhaps	more	surprising,	people
learn	from	
teaching
	other	people—often	more	than	the	pupils	themselves	absorb.
Consider	this	finding:	firstborn	children	have	an	IQ
	that	is	on	average	2.3	points
higher	than	that	of	their	younger	brothers	and	sisters.	After	disconfirming	several
potential	explanations,	such	as	better	nutrition	or	differential	parental	treatment,
researchers	concluded	that	firstborn	children’s	higher	IQs	stem	from	a	simple
fact	of	family	life:	older	siblings	engage	in	teaching	younger	ones.	Outside	the
family,	laboratory	research	and	real-world	programs	consistently	show	that
engaging	students	in	tutoring	their	peers	has	benefits	for	all	involved,
	and
especially	for	the	ones	doing	the	teaching.	Why	would	the	act	of	teaching
produce	learning—for	the	teacher?	The	answer	is	that	teaching	is	a	deeply	social
act,	one	that	initiates	a	set	of	powerful	cognitive,	attentional,	and	motivational
processes	that	have	the	effect	of	changing	the	way	the	teacher	thinks.
One	such	process	kicks	in
	even	before	the	tutoring	session	begins:	students
who	learn	information	in	preparation	for	teaching	someone	else	
review	the
material	more	intensively	and	organize	it	more	thoroughly	in	their	own	minds
than	do	students	who	are	learning	the	same	information	in	order	to	take	a	test.
For	social	creatures	like	us,	the	prospect	of	engaging	in	an	interpersonal
interaction—with	all	of	its	potential	for	feeling	admired	or	embarrassed—is	far
more	motivating	than	the	relatively	anonymous	activity	of	supplying	written
answers	on	an	exam.	Likewise,	social	interactions	with	other	people	alter	our
physiological	state	in	ways	that	enhance	learning,	generating	a	state	of	energized
alertness	that	sharpens	attention	and	reinforces	memory.	Students	who	are
studying	on	their	own	experience	no	such	boost	in	physiological	arousal,	and	so
easily	become	bored	or	distracted;	they	may	turn	on	music	or	open	up	Instagram
to	give	themselves	a	dose	of	the	human	emotion	and	social	stimulation	they’re
missing.
--- Page 180 ---
More	learning	happens
	for	the	tutor	in	the	course	of	teaching.	When
explaining	academic	content,
	the	tutor	is	forced	to	make	explicit	the	details	she
might	herself	have	glossed	over;	the	gaps	in	her	own	knowledge	and
understanding	become	visible.	When	directing	the	tutee	to	the	most	important
aspects
	of	the	subject,	and	drawing	connections	among	these	features,	the	tutor	is
herself	led	to	engage	in	a	deeper	level	of	mental	processing.	When	fielding	the
pupil’s	questions,
	and	posing	questions	of	her	own,	the	tutor	is	obliged	to	adopt	a
“metacognitive”	stance	toward	the	material,	consciously	monitoring	what	her
pupil	knows	and	what	she	herself	knows.	Researchers	have	found	that	while
students	often	possess	the	mental	tools	required	to	understand	challenging
academic	content,	they	simply	don’t	apply	them	when	studying	on	their	own.
When	placed	in	the	role	of	teacher,	however,	students	are	compelled	to	put	those
tools	to	use,	with	previously	unrealized	benefits	for	their	own	learning.
So	powerful	is	the	teacher	role,	in	fact,	that	some	of	its	cognitive	effects	can
be	evoked	even	when	one’s	“students”	don’t	exist.	Vincent	Hooger
heide,	an
assistant	professor	of	education	at	Utrecht	University	in	the	Netherlands,	has
conducted	several	studies	in	which	participants	are	asked	to	explain	academic
content	on	camera,
	to	an	imagined	audience.	After	studying	the	material
themselves,	participants	create	a	short	video	lesson	(on	the	calculation	of
probability,	for	example,	or	on	syllogistic	reasoning,	among	other	subjects).	No
tutee	is	in	attendance,	and	there	is	no	tutor-tutee	interaction—and	yet,
Hoogerheide	has	found,	the	act	of	teaching	on	video	enhances	the	teacher’s	own
learning,	improves	her	test	per
formance,	and	enhances	her	ability	to	“transfer”
the	learned	information	to	new	situations.	Writing	out	an	explanation	of	the
same	material	for	an	imagined	tutee	does	not	generate	the	same	gains.
Hoogerheide	theorizes	that	teaching	on	camera	generates	persuasive	feelings	of
“social	presence”—the	sense	that	there	is	someone	watching	and	listening.
Explaining	oneself	while	being	recorded,	he	notes,	measurably	increases	the
explainers’	physiological	arousal
—a	state	that	is	associated	with	enhanced
memory,	attention,	and	alertness.
Face-to-face	interaction	between	teacher	and	student	remains	the	ideal,
however,	and	it	produces	benefits	that	go	beyond	academics.	The	act	of	teaching
can	positively	affect	students’	identity
	and	self-image,	as	demonstrated	by	a
number	of	real-world	peer-tutoring	programs—for	example,	a	nonprofit
initiative	called	the	Valued	Youth	Partnership.
	Though	we	might	imagine	that
tutors	should	be	drawn	from	the	ranks	of	the	most	accomplished	students,
Valued	Youth	does	just	the	opposite
:	it	deliberately	recruits	struggling	students
and	assigns	them	to	teach	younger	kids.	Evaluations	of	the	program
	show	that
students	who	engage	in	tutoring	earn	higher	grades,	attend	school	more
--- Page 181 ---
consistently,	and	stay	enrolled	at	higher	rates	than	similar	students	who	do	not
participate.	Such	outcomes	may	be	due,	in	part,	to	the	experience	of	what
psychologists	call	“productive	agency”
:	the	sense	that	one’s	own	actions	are
affecting	another	person	in	a	beneficial	way.	Actually	seeing	the	fruits	of	one’s
labor	is	especially	gratifying;	research	finds	that	tutors	learn	more,	and	derive
more	motivation,	from	a	tutoring	session	when	they	have	the	opportunity	to
watch	their	tutees	answer	questions	about	what	they’ve	learned.
The	experience	of	teaching	others	can	also	help	tutors	become	more	fully
integrated	into	an	academic	or	professional	community.	The	Summer	Premed
Program,	operated	out	of	the	medical	school	at	the	University	of	California,
Irvine,	enlists	African	American	and	Latino	medical	students	to	teach	college
students	who	are	themselves	members	of	minority	groups.	The	undergraduates,
in	turn,	teach	students	from	Irvine’s	predominantly	black	and	Latino	public	high
schools.	Started	in	2010,	the	program	has	been	shown
	to	enhance	the	self-
confidence	and	motivation	of	all	three	tiers	of	students.
This	“cascading	mentorship”	model,	in	which	participants	both	teach	and	are
taught,	shows	promise	in	many	settings,	including	the	workplace.	Just	as
students	benefit	from	teaching	their	classmates,	professionals	gain	
from	advising
their	colleagues.	Holly	Chiu,	an	associate	professor	of	business	management	at
Brooklyn	College,	reported	in	a	study	published	in	2018	that	employees	who
engage	in	sharing	job-related	knowledge
	with	their	co-workers	enlarge	their	own
expertise	in	the	bargain.	By	“systematically	going	through	the	knowledge,
examining	it,	understanding	it,	integrating	it	and	presenting	it,”	Chiu	notes,	these
workers	increased	the	depth	and	breadth	of	their	knowledge,	and	subsequently
turned	in	job	performances	that	were	rated	more	highly	by	their	supervisors.
Far	from	being	frivolous	or	unserious,	social	interaction	is	a	vital	complement
to	intellectual	activity,	activating	aptitudes	and	capabilities	that	might	otherwise
remain	unused.	But	because	the	brainbound	approach	to	cognition	regards
information	as	information,	no	matter	how	it	is	encountered,	the	social	element
of	thinking	is	often	sacrificed	in	the	name	of	efficiency	and	convenience.	The
spread	of	technology	into	education	and	the	workplace	has	reinforced	this
tendency,	as	students	are	asked	to	learn	mathematical	operations	from	Khan
Academy	videos	and	employees	are	expected	to	train	themselves	using	online
resources.	But	technology	could	be	used	in	another	fashion:	to	promote	the	kind
of	in-person	social	exchanges	
that	do	so	much	to	extend	our	mental	capacities.
For	example:	Family	Playlists,
	a	tool	developed	by	the	education	nonprofit
PowerMyLearning.	After	being	introduced	to	a	concept	at	school,	students	are
directed	to	take	their	new	knowledge	home	and	teach	it	to	their	parents	or	other
relatives	or	caregivers.	Family	Playlists	provides	support	by	sending	the	“family
--- Page 182 ---
partners”	a	link	via	a	text	message;	the	link	takes	them	to	a	Web	page	describing
the	“collaborative	learning	activity”	in	which	they	are	to	participate.	Family
members	use	this	same	platform	to	provide	feedback	to	their	child’s	teacher
about	how	well	the	child	understood	and	explained	the	lesson.
PowerMyLearning	has	now	implemented	Family	Playlists	in	more	than	one
hundred	schools	nationwide;	the	organization’s	CEO,	Elisabeth	Stock,	notes	that
an	internal	research	study	found	that	students	using	the	tool	made	gains	in	math
equivalent	to	four	months	of	additional	learning.	Even	more	important,	she	adds,
teachers	report	that	their	relationships	with	students’	families	have	improved,
and	students	themselves	are	more	engaged	and	enthusiastic	about	learning.
Teaching	is	a	mode	of	social	interaction	we	can	deliberately	deploy	in	order	to
think	more	intelligently.	There’s	another	form	of	social	exchange	that	we	can
use	to	our	advantage,	one	that	comes	just	as	naturally	to	the	human	animal:
arguing.
	
T
HE	STUDY
	was	positively	devilish	in	its	design.
Participants	were	asked,	first,	to	solve	a	series	of	logic	puzzles:	“A	produce
shop	sells	a	variety	of	fruits	and	vegetables,	some	of	which	are	organic	and	some
of	which	are	not.	The	apples	sold	by	this	shop	are	not	organic.	Which	of	the
following	statements	about	the	shop’s	wares	are	true?	Provide	a	reason	for	each
answer.	1)	All	the	fruits	are	organic;	2)	None	of	the	fruits	are	organic;	3)	Some
of	the	fruits	are	organic;	4)	Some	of	the	fruits	are	not	organic;	5)	We	cannot	tell
anything	for	sure	about	whether	the	fruits	in	this	shop	are	organic.”	After	solving
the	puzzles,	study	participants	were	then	asked	to	evaluate	the	responses
provided	by	
other
	participants—that	is,	to	judge	whether	the	reasons	given	by
others	seemed	valid	or	not.
The	trick:	one	of	the	answers	presented	in	this	second	round	did	
not
	issue
from	someone	else	but	rather	was	an	answer	the	participant	herself	had	supplied
in	the	first	round.	Some	participants	recognized	their	own	response,	but	many
others	did	not.	What	happened	next	was	fascinating.	More	than	half	of	those
who	believed	they	were	evaluating	someone	else’s	response	
rejected
	as	invalid
the	answer	they	themselves	had	put	forth!	They	were	especially	likely	to	reject
their	own	response	when	they	had,	in	fact,	offered	a	logically	invalid	answer
originally.	In	other	words,	they	applied	more	critical	analysis	to	(what	they
thought	were)	other	people’s	arguments	than	to	their	own—and	this	scrutiny
made	them	more	accurate.
There	was	a	purpose	behind	the	deviousness	of	the	researchers	who	designed
this	study.	Hugo	Mercier,	a	cognitive	scientist	at	the	National	Center	for
Scientific	Research	(CNRS)	in	Paris,	and	his	coauthors	were	out	to	expose	the
--- Page 183 ---
peculiar	nature	of	human	reason.	As	we’ve	seen,	people	often	perform	poorly
when	asked	to	think	in	a	logical	fashion.	Recall	that	fewer	than	10	percent	of
people	who	take	the	standard	(non-social)	form	of	the	Wason	Selection	Task
complete	it	correctly;	performance	on	other	standardized	measures	of	reasoning,
like	the	Thinking	Skills	Assessment
	and	the	Cognitive	Reflection	Test,
	is
similarly	mediocre,	even	among	people	who	are	generally	well	educated	and
even	among	people	who	have	been	expressly	trained	in	argumentation	and
rhetoric.
An	entire	academic	field	is	devoted	to	cataloguing	the	cognitive	biases	
and
other	mental	distortions	that	interfere	with	rational	thinking.	There	is	our	well-
documented	confirmation	bias,
	for	example—the	tendency	to	selectively	seek
out	and	believe	evidence	that	supports	our	prior	beliefs.	Originally	named	by
none	other	than	Peter	Wason,	confirmation	bias	has	been	further	elaborated	by
the	psychologist	Daniel	Kahneman.	In	his	2011	book	
Thinking,	Fast	and	Slow,
Kahneman	observed,	“Contrary	to	the	rules
	of	philosophers	of	science,	who
advise	testing	hypotheses	by	trying	to	refute	them,	people	(and	scientists,	quite
often)	seek	data	that	are	likely	to	be	compatible	with	the	beliefs	they	currently
hold.”	The	human	mind,	he	lamented,	is	“a	machine	for	jumping	to
conclusions.”
But	why	should	this	be	so?	Why	would	the	most	intelligent	creatures	on	the
planet	be	hobbled	by	these	built-in	mental	defects?	Kahneman	and	others	who
study	cognitive	biases	have	no	convincing	answer	to	this	question,	according	to
Hugo	Mercier;	they	treat	human	reason	as	if	it	were	a	“flawed	superpower,”
	at
once	impressively	capable	and	strangely	prone	to	breaking	down.	In	the	view	of
these	psychologists,	such	glitches	in	the	mind’s	ability	to	reason	are	inherent	and
unavoidable;	the	most	we	can	do,	they	say,	is	to	remain	alert	for	the	emergence
of	bias,	and	then	endeavor	to	correct	it.
Mercier	begs	to	differ.	With	his	collaborator	Dan	Sperber,	also	a	cognitive
scientist	at	CNRS,	he	has	proposed	a	provocative	alternative—different	in	its
explanation	for	reason’s	afflictions,	and	different	in	its	recommended	remedy.
We	did	not	evolve	to	solve
	tricky	logic	puzzles	on	our	own,	they	point	out,	and
so	we	shouldn’t	be	surprised	by	the	fact	that	we’re	no	good	at	it,	any	more	than
by	the	fact	that	we’re	no	good	at	breathing	underwater.	What	we	
did
	evolve	to
do	is	persuade	other	people	of	our	views,	and	to	guard	against	being	misled	by
others.	Reasoning	is	a	social	activity,	in	other	words,	and	should	be	practiced	as
such.
Mercier’s	and	Sperber’s	premise,	which	they	advanced	in	their	2017	book	
The
Enigma	of	Reason,
	makes	coherent	sense	of	the	very	aspects	of	human	thought
that	have	seemed	so	confounding:	the	fact	that	people	are	capable	of	stringently
--- Page 184 ---
evaluating	the	validity	of	arguments,	along	with	the	fact	that	they	so	often	fail	to
do	so	when	the	arguments	are	their	own.	Both	tendencies	are	fully	predicted	by
the	authors’	“argumentative	theory	of	reasoning.”
	We	have	every	incentive	to
closely	examine	the	arguments	of	others—who	might	be	out	to	exploit	or
manipulate	us	for	their	own	ends—but	few	inducements	to	scrutinize	the
arguments	we	
make	ourselves.	After	all,	being	completely	convinced	of	the
merits	of	our	case	can	only	make	us	more	credible	to	others.	And	expending	a	lot
of	effort	on	picking	apart	our	own	argument	isn’t	necessary,	not	when	we	can
rely	on	our	sparring	partner	to	conduct	the	audit	for	us.
The	argumentative	theory	also	makes	specific	predictions
	about	the	conditions
in	which	reason	will	function	best,	such	as:	the	weaknesses	of	our	reasoning
faculty	will	be	most	evident	when	we	use	it	outside	the	context	in	which	it
evolved.	That	context	is	raucously,	noisily	
social.
	When	we	reason	alone,	inside
our	own	heads,	we	will	be	dangerously	vulnerable	to	confirmation	bias—
constructing	the	strongest	case	for	our	own	point	of	view,	and	fooling	ourselves
in	the	process.	Of	course,	in	our	brainbound	culture,	thinking	alone	is	how
thinking	is	usually	done,
	with	predictably	disappointing	results.	Mercier	and
Sperber	urge	a	different	approach
:	
arguing	together,
	with	the	aim	of	arriving
jointly	at	something	close	to	the	truth.
Arguing	together	is	something	Brad	Bird	and	his	frequent	collaborator	John
Walker	have	turned	into	an	art	form.	Bird	is	the	Academy	Award–winning
director	of	Pixar	movies	like	
Ratatouille
	and	
The	Incredibles;
	Walker	is	the
producer	who	helped	to	manage	the	making	of	these	and	other	films.	The	two
are	“famous	for	fighting	openly,”
	Bird	has	acknowledged,	“because	he’s	got	to
get	it	done	and	I’ve	got	to	make	it	as	good	as	it	can	be	before	it	gets	done.”	Some
of	the	arguments	they	had	while	creating	
The	Incredibles
	were	so	epic	that	they
made	it	into	the	bonus	materials	included	on	the	movie’s	DVD.	“Look,	I’m	just
trying	to	get	us	across	the	line,”	yells	Walker	in	one	moment	captured	by	the
camera.	Bird	hollers	back,	“I’m	trying	to	get	us	across	the	line	
in	first	place!
”
In	an	interview	that	took	place	after	the	movie’s	release,	Bird	explained	that
he	counts	on	Walker	to	push	back	against	the	arguments	he	makes,	saying	of	his
producer:	“I	don’t	want	him	to	tell	me,	‘Whatever	you	want,	Brad’	.
 
.
 
.	I	love
working	with	John	because	he’ll	give	me	the	bad	news	straight	to	my	face.
Ultimately,	we	both	win.	If	you	ask	within	Pixar,	we	are	known	as	being
efficient.	Our	movies	aren’t	cheap,	but	the	money	gets	on	the	screen	because
we’re	open	in	our	conflict.”
Stanford	University	business	school	professor	Robert	Sutton	conducted	the
interview	with	Bird,	whom	he	calls	“a	vigorous	practitioner
	of	creative
abrasion.”	Bird	is	on	the	right	track	with	his	approach,	says	Sutton:	“A	pile	of
--- Page 185 ---
studies	show	that	when	people	fight	over	ideas,	and	do	
so	with	mutual	respect,
they	are	more	productive	and	creative.”	Indeed,	research	has	consistently	found
that	argument—when	conducted	in	the	right	way—produces	deeper	learning,
sounder	decisions,	and	more	innovative	solutions	(not	to	mention	better	movies).
Why	does	arguing	help	us	think	better?	Hugo	Mercier	and	Dan	Sperber	have
their	theory:	Engaging	in	active	debate	puts	us	in	the	position	of	evaluating
others’	arguments,	not	simply	constructing	(and	promoting)	our	own.	Such
objective	analysis,	unclouded	by	self-interested	confirmation	bias,	makes	the
most	of	humans’	discriminating	intelligence.	But	there	are	additional	reasons
why	confrontations	enhance	our	cognition,	reasons	that	are	likewise	rooted	deep
in	human	nature.
For	example,	there’s	the	simple	fact	that	conflict	irresistibly	seizes	our
attention	and	motivates	us	to	learn	more.	We	would	probably	put	down	a	novel
or	switch	off	a	movie	that	didn’t	introduce	conflict	early	on—whether	that
conflict	centers	on	a	resolute	hero	battling	the	odds,	two	lovers	separated	by	fate,
or	a	looming	disaster	that	might	yet	be	averted.	The	drama	inherent	in	conflict	is
what	keeps	us	reading	or	watching.	Yet	we	expect	students	and	employees	to
attend	to	information	that’s	been	drained	of	conflict,	blandly	presented	as	the
established	account	or	consensus	view.	In	fact,	almost	every	topic	can	be	cast	in
terms	that	highlight	opposing	perspectives—and	should	be,	according	to	David
Johnson,	a	psychologist	at	the	University	of	Minnesota.	It	is	“a	general	rule	of
teaching,”
	he	has	written,	“that	if	an	instructor	does	not	create	an	intellectual
conflict	within	the	first	few	minutes	of	class,	students	won’t	engage	with	the
lesson.”	Johnson	has	spent	decades	investigating	the	uses	of	what	he	calls
“constructive	controversy,”	or	the	open-minded	exploration	of	diverging	ideas
and	beliefs.	In	his	studies,	Johnson	has	found	that	students	who	are	drawn	into
an	intellectual	dispute	read	more	library	books,	review	more	classroom
materials,	and	seek	out	more	information	from	others	in	the	know.	Conflict
creates	uncertainty—who’s	wrong?	who’s	right?—an	ambiguity	that	we	feel
compelled	to	resolve	by	acquiring	more	facts.
Intellectual	clashes	can	also	generate	what	psychologists	call	“the
accountability	effect.”
	Just	as	students	prepare	more	assiduously	when	they
know	they’ll	be	teaching	the	material	to	others,	people	who	know	they’ll	be
called	upon	to	defend	their	views	marshal	stronger	points,	and	support	them	with
more	and	better	evidence,	than	people	who	anticipate	merely	presenting	their
opinions	in	writing.	Once	the	debate	has	begun,	
the	act	of	arguing	enhances
thinking	in	an	additional	way:	it	relieves	cognitive	load
	by	effectively
distributing	intellectual	positions	among	the	disputants.	While	an	individual
reasoning	alone	must	keep	in	mind	the	details	of	each	claim	she	contemplates,
--- Page 186 ---
the	person	who	argues	with	others	can	divide	that	task	among	her	fellow
debaters,	allowing	each	person	to	stand	in	for	a	particular	point	of	view.
Relieved	of	the	burden	of	carrying	on	a	debate	inside	her	own	head,	she	has
more	mental	resources	to	devote	to	evaluating	the	arguments	on	their	merits.
The	ability	to	argue	emerges	early	in	life,	as	any	parent	knows.	Children	as
young	as	two	or	three
	are	capable	of	producing	justifications	and	constructing
arguments	when	they	find	themselves	at	odds	with	their	parents	or	siblings.	“As
they	acquire	more	language,	cognitive	skills,	and	social	knowledge	about	rules
and	rights,”	children	become	increasingly	effective	advocates	for	their	own
points	of	view,	notes	Nancy	Stein,	a	psychologist	at	the	University	of	Chicago
who	studies	the	development	of	argumentative	thinking.	The	ability	to	critically
evaluate	
others’
	arguments
—to	distinguish	strong	claims	from	weak	ones—also
emerges	early	in	childhood.
We	are	“natural-born	arguers,”
	in	Hugo	Mercier’s	phrase—and	we	can
deliberately	deploy	that	innate	capacity	to	correct	our	mistakes,	clarify	our
thinking,	and	reach	sounder	decisions.	The	key	is	to	approach	the	act	of	arguing
with	the	aim	not	of	winning	at	all	costs	but	of	reaching	the	truth	through	a
vigorous	process	of	advancing	claims	and	evaluating	counter-claims.	We	use
argument	to	its	full	advantage	when	we	make	the	best	case	for	our	own	position
while	granting	the	points	lodged	against	it;	when	we	energetically	critique	our
partner’s	position	while	remaining	open	to	its	potential	virtues.	According	to
Robert	Sutton,	the	Stanford	business	school	professor,	we	should	endeavor	to
offer	“strong	opinions,	weakly	held”;
	put	another	way,	he	says,	“People	should
fight	as	if	they	are	right,	and	listen	as	if	they	are	wrong.”
Listening—and	telling—is	at	the	heart	of	one	more	way	we	can	use	social
interaction	to	enhance	our	thinking:	through	the	exchange	of	stories.
	
A
LL	OF	THE
	seventh-	and	eighth-grade	students	enrolled	in	a	2012	study	of
educational	methods
	were	learning	about	the	science	of	radioactive	elements.
The	manner	in	which	they	encountered	the	subject,	however,	was	strikingly
different.	One	group	was	given	an	account	written	in	
the	soporifically	dull	style
of	a	textbook:	“Elements	are	individual	pieces	of	matter	that	combine	with	each
other	and	make	up	everything	we	see	around	us.	Most	of	what	we	see	and	use	in
the	world,	like	air	and	water,	is	not	made	up	of	one	single	element.	For	example,
sodium	and	chlorine	are	two	different	elements	that	make	up	the	salt	that	we	use
for	cooking	.
 
.
 
.”—and	on	it	droned,	adding,	“We	now	know	of	92	elements	that
are	a	natural	part	of	the	Earth.”
A	second	group	of	students	learned	the	same	material,	but	with	a	twist.	Their
version	of	the	account	picked	up	the	thread	this	way:	“By	the	late	1800s,
scientists	had	already	found	most	of	these	elements,	but	some	were	yet	to	be
--- Page 187 ---
scientists	had	already	found	most	of	these	elements,	but	some	were	yet	to	be
discovered.	At	this	time,	Polish-born	Marie	Curie	and	her	French	husband,
Pierre,	were	two	chemists	living	in	France,	trying	to	find	all	of	Earth’s	natural
elements.	Although	it	was	very	hard	detective	work,	Marie	and	Pierre	loved
solving	the	mysteries	of	elements.	One	day,	a	fellow	scientist	named	Henri
Becquerel	showed	Marie	and	Pierre	a	special	kind	of	rock	called	pitchblende.
When	Henri	took	this	pitchblende	rock	into	a	dark	room,	Marie	could	see	that	it
gave	off	a	light	blue	glow.”
This	second	account	continued:	“Henri	explained	that	the	pitchblende	had	a
lot	of	the	element	called	uranium,	and	that	he	believed	that	the	glow	came	from
the	uranium.	Certainly,	this	was	one	of	the	strangest	rocks	that	Marie	and	Pierre
had	ever	seen,	which	is	why	they	wanted	to	learn	as	much	as	possible	about	the
mysterious	blue	glow	and	whether	it	came	from	the	uranium.”	The	second	group
of	students	went	on	to	hear	about	how	Marie	and	Pierre	crushed	the	rock	into
tiny	pieces,	how	they	burned	it	at	different	temperatures	and	added	different
kinds	of	acid	to	see	what	would	happen.	They	read	about	how	the	two	scientists
discovered	that	the	uranium	in	the	rock	was	emitting	energetic	particles,	a
property	they	named	“radioactivity.”	And,	the	students	were	told,	“while
working	with	excitement	and	hope	for	developing	a	brand	new	element,	Pierre
and	Marie	noticed	that	they	were	beginning	to	feel	tired	and	sick”—the	effects
of	radiation	poisoning.
Study	author	Diana	Arya,	an	assistant	professor	of	education	at	the	University
of	California,	Santa	Barbara,	wanted	to	see	whether	the	difference	in
presentation	would	produce	a	difference	in	learning.	It	did.	Students	understood
the	material	more	thoroughly,	and	remembered	it	more	accurately,	when	it	was
given	to	them	in	the	form	of	a	
story
—in	particular,	a	story	that	captured	the
human	motives	and	choices	that	lay	behind	
the	creation	of	what	is	now	well-
established	knowledge.	Arya	notes	that	it’s	not	the	case	that	the	second	version
was	artificially	imbued	with	narrative	drama;	rather,	it’s	the	conventional	text
that	has	been	stripped	of	“a	sense	of	the	feelings	of	importance	and	intrigue	that
originally	inspired	the	discovery.”
Alas,	such	conventional	texts—devoid	of	human	stories	and	human	sentiment
—make	up	the	bulk	of	the	information	students	encounter	in	school,	and,	for	that
matter,	of	the	information	employees	encounter	in	the	workplace.	This
“depersonalized”	approach,
	as	other	educational	psychologists	have	called	it,
fails	to	take	advantage	of	the	distinctive	power	wielded	by	narrative.
	Cognitive
scientists	refer	to	stories	as	“psychologically	privileged,”
	meaning	they	are
granted	special	treatment	by	our	brains.	Compared	to	other	informational
formats,	we	
attend
	to	stories	more	closely.
	We	
understand
	them	more	readily.
--- Page 188 ---
And	we	
remember
	them	more	accurately.	Research	has	found	that	we	recall	as
much	as	50	percent	more	information	from	stories	than	from	expository
passages.
Why	do	stories	exert	these	effects	on	us?	One	reason	is	that	stories	shape	the
way	information	is	shared	in	cognitively	congenial	ways.	The	human	brain	has
evolved	to	seek	out	evidence	of	causal	relationships
:	
this
	happened	because	of
that.
	Stories	are,	by	their	nature,	all	about	causal	relationships;	Event	A	leads	to
Event	B,	which	in	turn	causes	Event	C,	and	so	on.	If	a	speaker	were	to	relate	a
story	in	which	the	first	part	of	the	tale	had	no	bearing	on	the	second	part,
listeners	would	justifiably	protest	that	this	so-called	“story”	made	no	sense.	At
the	same	time,	stories	don’t	spell	everything	out	for	us	either.	If	a	storyteller
were	to	laboriously	connect	every	narrative	dot,	listeners	would	again	rightly
object:	
Okay,	we	get	it!
	When	stories	are	told	well,	only	the	highlights	are
included,	leaving	listeners	to	fill	in	the	causal	inferences	that	lend	the	story	its
full	meaning.	Such	inferences	require	some	mental	effort,	though	not	too	much,
making	stories	enjoyable	to	listen	to	and	think	about.	But	precisely	because	we
do
	have	to	think	about	stories	in	order	to	understand	them—do	have	to	maintain
a	mental	chain	of	events	that	links	beginning,	middle,	and	end—we’re	more
likely	to	remember	stories	than	to	remember	information	that	doesn’t	require
such	cognitive	processing.
There’s	another	reason	why	stories	affect	us	more	deeply	than	non-narrative
forms	of	information:	when	we	listen	to	a	story,	our	brains	experience	the	action
as	if	it	were	happening	to	us.	Brain-scanning	studies	
show	that	when	we	hear
about	characters	emoting,
	the	emotional	areas	of	our	brains	become	active;	when
we	hear	about	characters	moving	vigorously,
	the	motor	regions	of	our	brains	are
roused.	We	even	tend	to	remember
	what	characters	in	a	story	are	said	to
remember	and	forget	what	the	characters	forget.	On	the	basis	of	such	evidence,
researchers	have	concluded	that	we	understand	stories	by	running	a	simulation
of	them	in	our	minds.	Because	stories	by	their	nature	feature	human	actors
carrying	out	observable	actions,	our	brains	generate	a	mental	movie	of	the	events
—an	imaginary	film	strip	that	doesn’t	unfurl	when	we’re	reading	a	set	of	facts	or
instructions.	Such	simulations	offer	a	kind	of	practice	by	proxy;	the	experiences
we	hear	about	in	stories	didn’t	happen	to	us,	but	thanks	to	the	mental	dress
rehearsal	we	conduct	as	we	listen,	we’ll	be	better	prepared	when	they	do.
Christopher	Myers	witnessed	this	phenomenon	firsthand	in	the	course	of
conducting	an	unusual	form	of	academic	research.	Myers,	an	assistant	professor
of	management	and	organization	at	Johns	Hopkins	University’s	Carey	Business
School,	has	logged	many	hours	in	the	air,	watching	medical	transport	teams
	at
work.	These	nurses	and	paramedics	travel	by	helicopter	to	pick	up	patients	from
--- Page 189 ---
the	scene	of	an	accident,	or	from	small	community	hospitals,	ferrying	them	to
larger	facilities	for	advanced	care.	On	the	way,	they	administer	treatment	for	a
staggeringly	wide	range	of	illnesses	and	injuries.	No	single	member	of	the
medical	transport	team	could	possibly	claim	firsthand	experience	of	every
condition	for	which	the	team	must	provide	care—forcing	them	to	rely	on	the
accumulated	expertise	of	their	teammates.	And	the	way	this	expertise	is	shared,
Myers	discovered,	is	largely	through	narrative.
During	months	of	fly-alongs,	he	observed	that	much	of	the	knowledge	held	by
flight	nurses	was	acquired	not	in	formal	training	sessions,	nor	from	guidebooks
or	manuals,	but	through	informal	storytelling	in	the	downtime	between	missions.
“I	don’t	want	to	read
	about	Toxic	Shock	Syndrome	in	a	book,”	one	nurse	said	to
Myers.	“Tell	me	about	the	case	you’ve	just	flown.	What	symptoms	did	he
present?	What	did	it	look	like?	What	did	you	do	for	him?	We	have	protocols,	but
what	if	you	guys	added	something	that	wasn’t	in	the	protocol?	Tell	me	why.	Did
it	work?”	Team	members	regularly	related	stories	to	one	another	about	technical
problems	they	had	encountered	with	the	helicopter’s	equipment,	about
interpersonal	issues	they	had	confronted	in	taking	over	patient	care	from	the	
staff
at	various	hospitals—and,	of	course,	about	medical	procedures	they	had
performed	or	witnessed.
There	was,	for	example,	the	tale	of	a	patient	who	had	fallen	off	a	balcony	at	a
wedding	and	impaled	herself	on	the	wedding	singer’s	microphone	stand.	The
story	of	how	the	medical	transport	team	successfully	treated	her	injuries
reoccurred	to	a	flight	nurse	years	later	when	her	own	team	was	called	upon	to
help	a	bicyclist	whose	torso	was	impaled	on	one	of	his	handlebars.	“I	had	never
actually	seen
	something	like	that	before,”	the	nurse	told	Myers	about	the	bicycle
injury.	“But	I’d	heard	the	microphone-stand	story,	and	so	when	we	showed	up
on	the	scene	it	just	kind	of	kicked	in,	like—‘Well,	this	is	what	they	did	with	her,
so	this	is	a	good	place	to	start.’
 
”
As	Myers	points	out,	such	vicarious	learning	is	increasingly	necessary
	across
any	number	of	industries.	The	variety	of	unanticipated	scenarios	that	may	arise
at	a	given	moment	is	too	great	for	any	individual	to	have	had	direct	experience
with	them	all.	Pressed	by	unfamiliar	circumstances,	workers	may	have	no	time
to	page	through	a	procedural	manual,	or	even	to	search	for	answers	online;	a
trial-and-error	approach	is	also	too	time-consuming,	and	too	risky.	But	the
professional	who	is	in	the	habit	of	exchanging	stories	with	co-workers	has	a
deep	well	of	vicarious	experience	on	which	to	draw.	The	medical	transport
teams	studied	by	Myers	fly	more	than	sixteen	hundred	missions	a	year;	an
individual	nurse	typically	serves	on	a	small	fraction	of	these,	perhaps	two
hundred.	As	one	of	them	told	Myers,	listening	to	his	colleagues’	stories	gave
--- Page 190 ---
him	access	to	“fourteen	hundred	experiences	a	year
	that	I	don’t	have	personally.
The	more	you	know	about	those	other	patients,	the	more	you’re	ready	for	the
next	one.”
Narratives	emerge	organically	in	our	communications	with	others;	the	role	for
leaders	and	managers	lies	in	offering	supports	for,	and	removing	barriers	to,	the
storytelling	in	which	their	people	would	naturally	engage.	Two	of	the	most
important	allowances	that	higher-ups	can	provide	are	
time
	and	
space.
	In	his
research	with	transport	nurses,	Christopher	Myers	learned	that	stories	weren’t
usually	shared	during	the	crush	of	a	work	shift.	A	nurse	he	interviewed	told	him:
“There’s	too	much	going	on
	for	there	to	be	a	‘Hey,	listen	to	this	story’	or	‘This
happened,	and	this	.
 
.
 
.’	It	seems	to	be	a	more	informal	[thing	that	happens	when
you’re]	sitting	around	sharing	war	stories.”
Some	supervisors	may	look	askance	at	such	“sitting	around,”	but	re
search
shows	it’s	time	well	spent.	One	study	found,	for	example,	that	a	1	percent
reduction
	in	efficiency,	allowing	time	for	“unstructured	employee	interaction,”
produces	a	threefold	increase	in	group	performance	over	the	long	term.	During
such	interaction,	it	may	seem	as	though	employees	are	simply	exchanging
gossip.	“But	what	is	gossip?”
	asks	Sandy	Pentland,	a	computational	scientist	and
MIT	professor	who	has	conducted	many	studies	demonstrating	the	benefits	of
workplace	interaction.	“Gossip	is	stories	about	what	happened	and	what	you
did”	in	response.	He	adds:	“If	you	think	about	what	needs	to	happen	for	a
healthy	organization,	people	need	to	know	the	rules	of	the	road.	They	need	to
know	how	things	are	done.	Which	means	they	have	to	hear	the	stories.”
The	space	where	such	interactions	unfold	is	also	important.	In	the	case	of	the
medical	transport	teams	Myers	studied,	the	designated	storytelling	locale	was	a
ten-by-fifteen-foot	area
	near	the	door	to	the	helipad,	just	outside	a	supply	room.
Over	time,	this	unassuming	spot	became	the	unofficial	site	for	trading	job-
related	anecdotes.	The	informality	of	the	space	was	part	of	its	appeal	and	part	of
its	value.	Myers	notes	that	there	was	another,	more	formal	space	set	aside	for	the
transport	nurses	to	share	stories:	the	weekly	doctor-supervised	meetings	known
as	“grand	rounds.”	The	patient	case	studies	presented	at	these	meetings	were
“cleaner,”	he	reports
—more	focused	and	concise—than	the	stories	recounted
outside	the	supply	room.	But	in	polishing	up	their	narratives,	the	nurses	often
omitted	just	those	details	that	would	be	most	useful	to	their	colleagues	should
they	encounter	a	similar	situation	in	the	future.
Such	nitty-gritty	details	constitute	what	psychologists	call	“tacit	knowledge”
:
information	about	how	things	are	done,	when,	and	under	which	circumstances.
It’s	what	gets	left	out	of	the	depersonalized	information	employees	encounter	in
more	formal	meetings	and	training	sessions.	It’s	also	where	the	“knowledge
--- Page 191 ---
management	systems”	in	which	so	many	firms	have	invested	go	wrong:	the
information	such	systems	make	available	is	devoid	of	context,	stripped	of	detail,
and	thereby	rendered	all	but	useless.	“Much	of	the	knowledge	needed
	for
employees	to	learn	and	thrive	at	work	is	not	the	kind	of	formal,	codified
information	that	is	typically	documented	in	online	repositories	or	knowledge
management	systems,”	Myers	notes.	“Instead,	what	is	often	critical	for	success	is
mastery	of	the	tacit	knowledge	of	the	organization—the	complex,	often	subtle
interpretive	knowledge	that	is	difficult	to	capture	or	write	down.”
The	disappointing	track	record	of	such	repositories	makes	Myers	think	of
another	interview	he	conducted,	this	one	with	a	professional	at	a	large	tech
company.	This	employee’s	organization	had	invested	millions	of	dollars	in	a
sophisticated	knowledge	management	system,	intended	to	codify	the	expertise
held	inside	the	heads	of	the	company’s	workforce.	“I	use	the	knowledge
management	system
	all	the	time,”	he	assured	Myers—but	not	in	the	way	the
company’s	leaders	intended:	“I	just	scroll	down	to	the	bottom	of	the	entry	to	see
who	wrote	it,	and	then	I	call	them	on	the	phone.”	What	this	individual	is	seeking
is	richly	contextualized	information,	full	of	detail	and	nuance;	what	he’s	looking
for,	in	short,	is	a	story.
--- Page 192 ---
9
Thinking	with	Groups
A
FTER	SEVERAL	DAYS
	
conducting	military	drills	off	the	coast	of	California,	the
USS	Palau	was	headed	home.	The	massive	aircraft	carrier,	large	enough	to
transport	twenty-five	helicopters,	was	steaming	into	San	Diego	Harbor	at	a	brisk
clip.	Inside	the	pilothouse—located	on	the	navigation	bridge,	two	levels	up	from
the	flight	deck—the	mood	was	buoyant.	Members	of	the	crew	would	soon	be
disembarking	and	enjoying	themselves	on	shore.	Conversation	turned	to	where
they	would	go	for	dinner	that	night.	Then,	suddenly,	the	intercom	erupted	with
the	voice	of	the	ship’s	engineer.
“Bridge,	Main	Control,”	he	barked.	“I	am	losing	steam	drum	pressure.	No
apparent	cause.	I’m	shutting	my	throttles.”
A	junior	officer,	working	under	the	supervision	of	the	ship’s	navigator,	moved
quickly	to	the	intercom	and	spoke	into	it,	acknowledging,	
“Shutting	throttles,
aye.”	The	navigator	himself	turned	to	the	captain,	seated	on	the	port	side	of	the
pilothouse.	
“Captain,	the	engineer	is	losing	steam	on	the	boiler	for	no	apparent
cause,”	he	repeated.
Everyone	present	knew	the	message	was	urgent.	Losing	steam	pressure
effectively	meant	losing	power	throughout	the	ship.	The	consequences	of	this
unexpected	development	soon	made	themselves	evident.	Just	forty	seconds	after
the	engineer’s	report,	the	steam	drum	had	emptied,	and	all	steam-operated
systems	ground	to	a	halt.	A	high-pitched	alarm	sounded	for	a	few	seconds;	then
the	bridge	fell	eerily	quiet,	as	the	electric	motors	in	the	radars	and	other	devices
spun	down	and	stopped.
But	losing	electrical	power	was	not	the	full	extent	of	the	emergency.	
A	lack	of
steam	meant	the	crew	had	no	ability	to	slow	the	ship’s	rate	of	speed.	The	ship
was	moving	too	fast	to	drop	anchor.	The	only	way	to	reduce	its	momentum
would	have	been	to	reverse	the	ship’s	propeller—operated,	of	course,	by	steam.
On	top	of	that,	loss	of	steam	hobbled	the	crew’s	ability	to	steer	the	ship,	another
--- Page 193 ---
consequence	that	soon	became	painfully	evident.	Gazing	anxiously	out	over	the
bow	of	the	ship,	the	navigator	told	the	helmsman	to	turn	the	rudder	to	the	right
ten	degrees.	The	helmsman	spun	the	wheel,	but	to	no	effect.
“Sir,	I	have	no	helm,	sir!”	he	exclaimed.
The	helm	did	have	a	manual	backup	system:	two	men	sweating	in	a
compartment	in	the	stern	of	the	ship,	exerting	all	their	might	to	move	the
unyielding	rudder	even	an	inch.	The	navigator,	still	gazing	out	over	the	bow,
whispered,	
“Come	on,	damn	it,	swing!”	But	the	seventeen-thousand-ton	ship
sailed	on—now	veering	far	off	its	original	course	and	headed	for	the	crowded
San	Diego	Harbor.
Watching	all	of	this	unfold	in	real	time	was	Edwin	Hutchins.	Hutchins	was	a
psychologist	employed	by	the	Naval	Personnel	Research	and	Development
Center	in	San	Diego.	He	had	boarded	the	Palau	as	an	observer	conducting	a
study,	taking	notes	and	tape-recording	conversations.	Now	the	ship	was	roiled
by	a	crisis—
a	“casualty,”	in	the	crew’s	lingo—and	Hutchins	was	along	for	the
ride.
From	his	corner	of	the	pilothouse,	Hutchins	looked	over	at	the	crew’s	leader.
The	captain,	he	noted,	was	acting	calm,	as	if	all	this	were	routine.	In	fact,
Hutchins	knew,	“the	situation	was	
anything	but	routine”:	“The	occasional
cracking	voice,	a	muttered	curse,	the	removal	of	a	jacket	that	revealed	a
perspiration-soaked	shirt	on	this	cool	spring	afternoon,	told	the	real	story:	the
Palau	was	not	fully	under	control,	and	careers,	and	possibly	lives,	were	in
jeopardy.”
Hutchins	used	his	time	aboard	the	ship	to	study	a	phenomenon	he	calls
“socially	distributed	cognition,”	or	the	way	people	think	with	the	minds	of
others.	His	aim,	he	later	wrote,	was	to	
“move	the	boundaries	of	the	cognitive
unit	of	analysis	out	beyond	the	skin	of	the	individual	person	and	treat	the
navigation	team	as	a	cognitive	and	computational	system.”	Such	systems,
Hutchins	added,	
“may	have	interesting	cognitive	properties	of	their	own.”	Faced
with	a	predicament	that	no	single	mind	could	resolve,	the	socially	distributed
cognition	of	the	Palau’s	crew	was	about	to	be	put	to	the	test.
Among	the	downstream	effects	of	the	steam-engine	malfunction	was	the
failure	of	the	gyrocompass,	the	principal	tool	relied	upon	by	the	Palau’s
navigation	team.	Without	the	gyrocompass,	the	team	had	to	manually	ascertain
the	position	of	the	ship,	calculating	the	relationship	among	bearings	taken	from
multiple	landmarks	on	shore.	And	because	the	Palau’s	position	was	a	moving
target,	this	calculation	had	to	be	generated	once	every	minute.	The	ship’s
quartermaster	chief,	a	man	named	Richards,	got	down	to	work	at	the	chart	table
in	the	pilothouse—but	it	soon	became	clear	that	the	job	was	too	much	for	one
brain	to	handle.
--- Page 194 ---
brain	to	handle.
At	first,	Hutchins	observed,	Richards	reached	for	ways	to	spread	the	burden	of
the	task	across	his	own	body	and	across	the	tools	he	had	at	hand.	He	
“subvocally
rehearsed”	the	numbers	he	was	computing,	repeating	the	digits	under	his	breath
—using	his	voice	and	his	auditory	sense	to	expand	the	capacity	of	his	working
memory.	He	traced	the	columns	of	numbers	being	added	with	his	fingertip,	using
his	hand	to	help	keep	track	of	the	masses	of	information	he	was	managing.	With
a	pencil,	he	jotted	down	intermediate	sums	in	the	margin	of	the	navigation	chart,
fixing	in	place	a	kind	of	
“external	memory,”	in	Hutchins’s	phrase.	And	he	pulled
out	a	calculator,	using	it	to	relieve	his	brain	of	the	burden	of	carrying	out
mathematical	operations.	Still,	laboring	on	his	own,	Richards	began	to	fall
behind.	He	recruited	yet	one	more	resource:	the	mental	ability	of	his	teammate,
Quartermaster	Second	Class	Silver.	The	addition	of	another	mind	created	a	new
challenge,	however:	how	to	figure	out,	on	the	fly,	the	best	way	to	divide	up	the
complex	and	fast-paced	task.
All	the	while,	the	ship	kept	moving,	and	now	a	new	emergency	arose:	the
Palau	was	bearing	down	on	a	sailboat,	a	small	craft	whose	occupants	were
oblivious	to	the	bigger	ship’s	dire	condition.
“Normally	the	Palau	would	have	sounded	five	blasts	with	its	enormous	horn,”
Hutchins	noted.	But	the	Palau’s	whistle	was	a	steam	whistle,	and	without	steam
pressure	it	was	mute.	Onboard	the	ship	was	a	small	manual	foghorn,	
“basically	a
bicycle	pump	with	a	reed	and	a	bell,”	in	Hutchins’s	description.	A	junior	officer
—the	keeper	of	the	deck	log—was	sent	running	to	find	the	foghorn,	take	it	out	to
the	bow,	and	let	it	sound.	Meanwhile,	the	captain	gripped	the	microphone	for	the
flight	deck’s	public-address	system	and	spoke	into	it:	
“Sailboat	crossing	Palau’s
bow,	be	advised	that	I	have	no	power.	You	cross	at	your	own	risk.	I	have	no
power.”
By	this	time,	the	sailboat	had	disappeared	under	the	Palau’s	bow;	only	the	tip
of	its	sail	was	visible	from	the	pilothouse.	The	crew	braced	for	the	impending
collision.	The	keeper	of	the	deck	log	reached	the	bow	at	last	and	let	out	five
feeble	honks,	surely	too	late	to	do	any	good.	But	a	few	seconds	later,	the	sailboat
emerged,	still	sailing,	from	under	the	starboard	bow—one	casualty,	at	least,
averted.
Back	inside	the	pilothouse,	Richards	and	Silver	were	still	huddled	over	the
chart	table,	struggling	to	apportion	the	task	between	them.	According	to
Hutchins’s	scrupulous	observations,	the	pair	made	thirty-two	attempts	before	
“a
consistent	pattern	of	action	appeared”	and	an	effective	division	of	labor	between
the	two	men	was	established.	On	try	thirty-three,	he	noted,	
“they	perform	what
will	be	the	stable	configuration	for	the	first	time.”
--- Page 195 ---
Once	this	configuration	was	in	place,	the	teammates	settled	into	a	rhythm,
taking	in	new	bearing	data	and	churning	out	new	position	calculations.	With
their	coordinated	efforts,	and	those	of	the	rest	of	the	crew,	the	huge	ship	was
guided	to	safety.	
“Twenty-five	minutes	after	the	engineering	casualty	and	more
than	two	miles	from	where	the	wild	ride	had	begun,	the	Palau	was	brought	to
anchor	at	the	intended	location	in	ample	water	just	outside	the	bounds	of	the
navigation	channel,”	Hutchins	reported.
“The	safe	arrival	of	the	Palau	at	anchor	was	due	in	large	part	to	the
exceptional	seamanship	of	the	bridge	crew,”	he	continued.	“But	no	single
individual	in	the	bridge	acting	alone—neither	the	captain	nor	the	navigator	nor
the	quartermaster	chief	supervising	the	navigation	team—could	have	kept
control	of	the	ship	and	brought	it	safely	to	anchor.”
A	psychologist	on	the	lookout	for	“socially	distributed	cognition”	could
hardly	have	chanced	upon	a	better	example.	Too	often,	however,	we’re	not	alert
to	such	instances	of	collective	thought.	Our	culture	and	our	institutions	tend	to
fixate	on	the	individual—on	his	uniqueness,	his	distinctiveness,	his
independence	from	others.	In	business	and	education,	in	public	and	private	life,
we	emphasize	individual	competition	over	joint	cooperation.	We	resist	what	we
consider	conformity	(at	least	in	its	overt,	organized	form),	and	we	look	with
suspicion	on	what	we	call	“groupthink.”
In	some	measure,	this	wariness	may	be	justified.	Uncritical	group	thinking	can
lead	to	foolish	and	even	disastrous	decisions.	But	the	limi
tations	of	excessive
“cognitive	individualism”
	are	becoming	increasingly	clear	as	well.	Individual
cognition	is	simply	not	sufficient	to	meet	the	challenges	of	a	world	in	which
information	is	so	abundant,	expertise	is	so	specialized,	and	issues	are	so
complex.	In	this	milieu,	a	single	mind	laboring	on	its	own	is	at	a	distinct
disadvantage	in	solving	problems	or	generating	new	ideas.	Something	beyond
solo	thinking	is	required—the	generation	of	a	state	that	is	entirely	natural	to	us
as	a	species,	and	yet	one	that	has	come	to	seem	quite	strange	and	exotic:	the
group	mind.
	
H
OW	DOES	A
	group	of	minds	think	as	one?	It	can	seem	mysterious	or	even
magical.	Indeed,	the	study	of	the	group	mind	by	Western	science	got	off	to	a
dubious	start	in	this	regard—a	relatively	recent	historical	interlude	that,	on	top	of
our	culture’s	long-standing	ideological	commitment	to	individualism,	helps	to
explain	the	unease	with	which	the	group	mind	is	often	regarded.	The	episode	in
question	got	under	way	in	the	late	nineteenth	and	early	twentieth	centuries,	a
period	in	which	the	day’s	intellectuals—such	as	the	French	physician	Gustave
Le	Bon	and	the	British	psychologist	William	McDougall—conceived	a
--- Page 196 ---
fascination	with	the	way	crowds	of	people	seemed	to	have	minds	of	their	own.
The	group	mind	was	believed	to	be	powerful	but	also	dangerous:	primitive,
irrational,	incipiently	violent.	Significantly,	it	was	also	assumed	that	the	group
was	
less	intelligent
	than	the	individual.	Complex	ideas	are	“only	accessible	to
crowds
	after	having	assumed	a	very	simple	shape,”	asserted	Le	Bon	in	
The
Crowd:	A	Study	of	the	Popular	Mind,
	first	published	in	1895.	“It	is	especially
when	we	are	dealing	with	somewhat	lofty	philosophic	or	scientific	ideas	that	we
see	how	far-reaching	are	the	modifications	they	require	in	order	to	lower	them	to
the	level	of	the	intelligence	of	crowds,”	he	wrote.	McDougall	sounded	a	similar
note	in	
The	Group	Mind:	A	Sketch	of	the	Principles	of	Collective	Psychology,
published	in	1920.	“Not	only	mobs
	or	simple	crowds,	but	such	bodies	as	juries,
committees,	corporations	of	all	sorts,	which	are	partially	organized	groups,	are
notoriously	liable	to	pass	judgments,	to	form	decisions,	to	enact	rules	or	laws,	so
obviously	erroneous,	unwise,	or	defective	that	anyone,	even	the	least	intelligent
member	of	the	group	concerned,	might	have	been	expected	to	produce	a	better
result,”	he	averred.
This	conception	of	the	group	mind
	was	hugely	influential;	its	echoes	linger
today	in	our	prevailing	distrust	and	even	disparagement	of	group	
thinking.	But
the	field	rested	on	shaky	empirical	foundations.	Without	a	way	to	explain	how
the	group	mind	operated,	its	theorists	turned	to	vague,	unscientific,	and	even
supernatural	speculation.	Le	Bon	conjectured	about	a	“magnetic	influence”
	at
work	within	crowds.	McDougall	mused	about	the	possibility	of	“telepathic
communication.”
	Even	the	psychoanalyst	Carl	Jung	got	into	the	act,	advancing
the	notion	of	a	shared	“genetic	ectoplasm”
	that	bound	a	group	of	people	as	one.
Ultimately	the	entire	field	collapsed	under	its	own	imprecision	and	incoherence.
The	notion	of	a	group	mind	
“slipped	ignominiously	into	the	history	of	social
psychology,”	writes	one	observer.	It	was	“banished	from	the	realm
	of
respectable	scientific	discourse,”	notes	another.	Social	scientists	took	as	their
near	exclusive	focus	the	individual,	thinking	and	acting	on	his	own.
But	the	serious	study	of	the	group	mind	is	now	staging	a	surprising	comeback.
It	owes	its	resurgence	to	sheer	necessity:	contemporary	conditions	demand	it.
Knowledge	is	more	abundant;	expertise	is	more	specialized;	problems	are	more
complex.	The	activation	of	the	group	mind—in	which	factual	knowledge,	skilled
expertise,	and	mental	effort	are	distributed	across	multiple	individuals—is	the
only	adequate	response	to	these	developments.	As	group	thinking	has	become
more	imperative,	interest	has	grown	in	learning	how	to	do	it	well.	At	the	same
time,	reimagined	theories	and	novel	investigative	methods	have	granted
researchers	new	insight	into	how	the	group	mind	actually	operates,	placing	the
field	on	a	genuinely	scientific	footing.	Neither	senseless	nor	supernatural,	group
--- Page 197 ---
thinking	is	a	sophisticated	human	ability	based	on	a	few	fundamental
mechanisms.	We’ll	begin	with	this	one:	
synchrony.
	
E
VERY	MORNING	AT
	6:30,	the	program	starts	up
	with	the	jaunty	plinking	of	a
piano.
“Nobinobi	to	senobi	no	undoo	kara!”
	announces	the	narrator	of	
Radio	Taiso,
a	three-minute	calisthenics	routine	broadcast	daily	in	Japan
	for	decades:	“Stand
tall	and	stretch	your	whole	body!”	On	cue,	millions	of	Japanese—gathered	in
office	buildings,	factories,	construction	sites,	community	centers,	and	public
parks—begin	working	through	a	series	of	exercises	they’ve	known	by	heart
since	childhood.
“Ichi,	ni,	ushiro	ni	sorasete;	tsugi	wa	ude,	to	ashi	no	undoo!”
—“One,	two,
and	back	down;	stretch	your	back,	next	arms	and	legs!”	Classmates,	co-workers,
groups	of	young	mothers	and	senior	citizens	reach,	flex,	twist,	
and	hop	in
unison.	“Now,	forward	bends,	with	rhythmic	bounces!	Bend	three	times,	then
hands	on	your	hips,	bend	backwards.”	Arms	swinging,	knees	dipping,	they	move
as	if	one	body,	right	up	to	the	program’s	closing	lines:	
“Fukaku	iki	o	suimasuu,
yukkuri	sutte	yukkuri	haite;	go,	roku,	moo	ikkai!”
—“And	we	end	with	deep
breaths,	slowly	in	and	slowly	out;	five,	six,	and	one	more	time!”
The	benefits	of	this	activity—practiced	by	everyone	from	the	youngest
schoolchildren	to	top	executives	at	Sony	and	Toyota—may	go	well	beyond
fitness	and	flexibility	for	those	who	take	part.	A	substantial	body	of	research
shows	that	
behavioral
	synchrony—coordinating	our	actions,	including	our
physical	movements,	so	that	they	are	like	the	actions	of	others—primes	us	for
what	we	might	call	
cognitive
	synchrony:	multiple	people	thinking	together
efficiently	and	effectively.
A	study	by	psychologists	at	the	University	of	Washington,	for	example,	asked
pairs	of	four-year-old	children
	to	play	on	a	swing	set	apparatus	installed	in	their
lab;	the	researchers	then	discreetly	manipulated	whether	the	kids	swung	in
unison	or	out	of	sync.	After	getting	down	from	the	swings,	the	preschoolers	who
had	swung	in	time	with	their	partners	were	more	likely	to	cooperate	with	those
same	partners	on	a	subsequent	set	of	tasks.	Comparable	results	were	found
among	eight-year-olds	who	experienced	synchronized	play	on	a	computer	game;
afterwards	they	reported	feeling	a	greater	sense	of	similarity	and	closeness	to
their	partners	than	did	participants	who	also	played	the	game	but	did	so	out	of
sync	with	their	peers.	Studies	conducted	with	adults	show	the	same:	moving	in
sync	makes	us	better	collaborators.
Why	would	this	be?	On	the	most	basic	level,	synchrony	sends	a	tangible
signal
	to	others	that	we	are	
open
	to	cooperation,	as	well	as	
capable
	of
--- Page 198 ---
cooperation.	Synchronized	movement	acts	as	an	invitation	to	work	together,
along	with	an	assurance	that	such	work	will	be	productive.	In	addition	to	this
signaling	function,	synchrony	appears	to	initiate	a	cascade	of	changes	in	the	way
we	view	ourselves	and	others.	The	recognition	that	we’re	moving
	in	the	same
way	at	the	same	time	as	other	people	heightens	our	awareness	of	being	part	of	a
group,	leading	us	to	focus	less	on	ourselves	as	individuals.	Because	these	others
are	making	motions
	similar	to	our	own,	we’re	able	to	interpret	and	predict	their
actions	more	easily.	Research	shows	that	we	are	more	apt	to	“mentalize”
	about
them,	forming	a	notion	of	what’s	going	on	in	their	heads.	Synchrony	even	alters
the	nature	
of	our	perception,
	making	our	visual	system	more	sensitive	to	the
occurrence	of	movement.	As	a	result	of	such	changes,	we	form	more	accurate
memories
	of	people	we	have	synchronized	with,	including	the	way	they	look,	the
moves	they	make,	and	the	words	they	say.	We	learn	from	them
	more	readily.	We
communicate	with	them
	more	fluidly.	And	we	pursue	shared	goals
	with	them
more	effectively.
On	an	emotional	level,	synchrony	has	the	effect	of	making	others,	even
strangers,	seem	a	bit	like	friends
	and	family.	We	feel	more	warmly
	toward	those
with	whom	we	have	experienced	synchrony;	we’re	more	willing	to	help	them
out,
	and	to	make	sacrifices	on	their	behalf.	We	may	experience	a	blurring	of	the
boundaries
	between	ourselves	and	others—but	rather	than	feeling	that	our
individual	selves	have	shrunk,	we	feel	personally	enlarged	and	empowered,	as	if
all	the	resources	of	the	group	are	now	at	our	disposal.	Studies	of	athletes	and
dancers	have	even	found	that	moving	in	unison	increases	endurance	and	reduces
the	perception	of	physical	pain.
	Synchronization	sweeps	us	up	into	what	one
researcher	calls	a	“social	eddy,”
	in	which	the	press	of	our	individual	interests	is
diminished	and	the	performance	of	the	group	becomes	paramount.	When	we	are
carried	along	by	the	social	eddy,	cooperation	with	others	feels	smooth,	almost
effortless.
The	popularity	of	synchronized	exercises	in	Japan—a	society	famous	for	its
communal	spirit	and	internal	cohesion—would	appear	to	be	firmly	grounded	in
research	and	in	the	workings	of	human	nature.	In	every	culture
	and	every	era,
armies,	churches,	and	other	institutions	have	used	synchronous	movement	to
bond	disparate	individuals	into	a	unified	whole.	Picture	a	group	of	American
citizens	placing	their	right	hands	over	their	hearts	and	reciting	the	Pledge	of
Allegiance,	for	example,	or	a	Catholic	congregation	kneeling	and	bowing	their
heads,	speaking	aloud	the	same	words	at	the	same	time	from	the	missal.
Synchrony	is	a	highly	effective	“biotechnology	of	group	formation,”
	as
neuroscientist	Walter	Freeman	put	it—but	why	would	such	a	technology	be
necessary?
--- Page 199 ---
Because,	says	Jonathan	Haidt,	“human	nature	is	90	percent	chimp
	and	10
percent	bee.”	Haidt,	a	psychologist	at	NYU’s	Stern	School	of	Business,	notes
that	in	the	main,	we	are	competitive,	self-interested	animals	intent	on	pursuing
our	own	ends.	That’s	the	chimp	part.	But	we	can	also	be	like	bees—“ultrasocial”
creatures	who	are	able	to	think	and	act	as	one	for	the	good	of	the	group.	Haidt
argues	for	the	existence	in	humans	of	a	
psychological	trigger	he	calls	the	“hive
switch.”	When	the	hive	switch	is	flipped,	our	minds	shift	from	an	individual
focus	to	a	group	focus—from	“I”	mode	to	“we”	mode.
	Getting	this	switch	to
turn	on	is	the	key	to	thinking	together	to	get	things	done,	to	extending	our
individual	minds	with	the	groups	to	which	we	belong.
Synchronous	movement	is	one	way	of	flipping	this	switch;	it	reliably
produces	what	the	late	historian	William	McNeill	called	“muscular	bonding.”
	He
maintained	that	the	long-standing	dominance	of	European	armies	over	other
fighting	forces	was	due	in	part	to	the	psychological	effect	of	close-order	drill,	a
practice	that	took	root	in	the	Netherlands	in	the	sixteenth	century	before
spreading	to	other	European	nations.	Soldiers	spent	hours	marching	in
formation,	their	movements	tightly	coordinated—thereby	creating	a	mental	and
emotional	bond	that	elevated	their	performance	on	the	battlefield.
McNeill,	a	distinguished	military	scholar,	wrote	about	the	transformative
effect	of	martial	drills	not	only	from	his	erudition	but	from	his	personal
experience	as	well.	As	a	young	man,	he	was	drafted	into	the	US	Army	and	sent
to	basic	training	in	Texas.	There	he	and	his	fellow	recruits	were	ordered	to
march,	“hour	after	hour,	moving	in	unison	and	by	the	numbers	in	response	to
shouted	commands,	sweating	in	the	hot	sun,	and,	every	so	often,	counting	out
the	cadence	as	we	marched:	Hut!	Hup!	Hip!	Four!”	McNeill	recounted.	“A	more
useless	exercise	would	be	hard	to	imagine,”	he	notes	wryly,	and	yet	as	the	hours
wore	on,	he	found	himself	entering	“a	state	of	generalized	emotional	exaltation.”
“Words	are	inadequate	to	describe	the	emotion	aroused	by	the	prolonged
movement	in	unison	that	drilling	involved,”	he	wrote.	“A	sense	of	pervasive
well-being	is	what	I	recall;	more	specifically,	a	strange	sense	of	personal
enlargement;	a	sort	of	swelling	out,	becoming	bigger	than	life,	thanks	to
participation	in	collective	ritual.”	McNeill	continued,	“Obviously,	something
visceral	was	at	work;	something,	I	later	concluded,	far	older	than	language	and
critically	important	in	human	history,	because	the	emotion	it	arouses	constitutes
an	indefinitely	expansible	basis	for	social	cohesion	among	any	and	every	group
that	keeps	together	in	time,	moving	big	muscles	together	and	chanting,	singing,
or	shouting	rhythmically.”
What	happened	to	McNeill	and	his	comrades	on	that	“dusty,	graveled	patch	of
the	Texas	plain”	was	surely	the	product	of	behavioral	synchrony,	of	moving
--- Page 200 ---
together	in	a	coordinated	manner.	But	there	was	likely	another	
factor	affecting
them	as	well:	not	just	shared	
movement
	but	shared	
arousal.
	Their	bodies’
common	response	to	the	physical	exertion	of	marching,	the	heat	of	the	sun,	the
shouted	commands	of	their	superiors—this	too	supported	the	emergence	of	a
group	mind.
The	significance	of	shared	arousal	was	demonstrated	in	an	ingenious
experiment	designed	by	researcher	Joshua	Conrad	Jackson	and	published	in	the
journal	
Scientific	Reports
	in	2018.	Jackson	and	his	colleagues	set	out	“to
simulate	conditions
	found	in	actual	marching	rituals”—which,	they	noted,
“required	the	use	of	a	larger	venue	than	a	traditional	psychology	laboratory.”
They	chose	as	the	setting	for	their	study	a	professional	sports	stadium,	with	a
high-definition	camera	mounted	twenty-five	meters	above	the	action.	After
gathering	172	participants	in	the	stadium	and	dividing	them	into	groups,	the
experimenters	manipulated	their	experience	of	both	synchrony	and	arousal:	one
group	was	directed	to	walk	with	their	fellow	members	in	rank	formation,	while	a
second	group	walked	in	a	loose	and	uncoordinated	fashion;	a	third	group	speed-
walked	around	the	stadium,	boosting	their	physiological	arousal,	while	a	fourth
group	strolled	at	a	leisurely	pace.	Jackson	and	his	collaborators	then	had	each
group	engage	in	the	same	set	of	activities,	asking	them	to	gather	themselves	into
cliques,	to	disperse	themselves	as	they	wished	across	the	stadium’s	playing	field,
and	finally	to	cooperate	in	a	joint	task	(collecting	five	hundred	metal	washers
scattered	across	the	field).
The	result:	when	participants	had	synchronized	with	one	another,	
and
	when
they	had	experienced	arousal	together,	they	then	behaved	in	a	distinctive	way—
forming	more	inclusive	groups,	standing	closer	to	one	another,	and	working
together	more	efficiently	(observations	made	possible	by	analyzing	footage
recorded	by	the	roof-mounted	camera).	The	findings	suggest	that	“behavioral
synchrony	and	shared	physiological	arousal	in	small	groups	independently
increase	social	cohesion	and	cooperation,”	the	researchers	write;	they	help	us
understand	“why	synchrony	and	arousal	often	co-occur	in	rituals	around	the
world.”
As	demonstrated	in	this	study,	physical	exertion	is	a	dependable	method	of
producing	physiological	arousal—but	it’s	not	the	only	one.	An	experience	of
heightened	emotion
	will	also	do	the	trick.	Whether	hearts	are	racing	as	a	result
of	running	laps	or	because	of	hearing	an	exciting	story,	such	shared	arousal	is
another	way	of	getting	a	group	of	individuals	to	cohere.
	In	behavioral	synchrony,
group	members	are	moving	their	
arms	and	legs	as	if	they	were	one	being;	in
physiological	synchrony,	their	hearts	are	beating	and	their	skin	is	perspiring	as	if
they	were	one	body.	Both	behavioral	and	physiological	synchrony,	in	turn,
--- Page 201 ---
generate	greater	cognitive	synchrony.
	Emerging	research	even	points	to	the
existence	of	“neural	synchrony”
—the	intriguing	finding	that	when	a	group	of
individuals	are	thinking	well	together,	their	patterns	of	brain	activity	come	to
resemble	one	other’s.	Though	we	may	imagine	ourselves	as	separate	beings,	our
minds	and	bodies	have	many	ways	of	bridging	the	gaps.
	
A	
HOST	OF	LABORATORY
	experiments,	as	well	as	countless	instances	of	real-world
rituals,	show	that	it’s	possible	to	activate	the	group	mind—to	flip	the	hive
switch,	as	it	were—by	“hacking”	behavioral	synchrony	and	physiological
arousal.	The	key	lies	in	creating	a	certain	kind	of	group	experience
:	real-time
encounters	in	which	people	act	and	feel	together	in	close	physical	proximity.	Yet
our	schools	and	companies	are	increasingly	doing	just	the	opposite.	Aided	by
technology,	we	are	creating	individual,	asynchronous,	atomized	experiences	for
students	and	employees—from	personalized	“playlists”	of	academic	lessons	to
go-at-your-own-pace	online	training	modules.	Then	we	wonder	why	our	groups
don’t	cohere,	why	group	work	is	often	frustrating	and	disappointing,	and	why
thinking	with	groups	doesn’t	extend	our	intelligence.
Why	is	our	current	approach	so	wrongheaded?	It	assumes	that	information	is
information,	however	it	is	encountered;	that	tasks	are	tasks,	no	matter	how	we
take	them	on.	But	in	fact,	the	new	science	of	the	group	mind	is	demonstrating
that	we	think	differently—and	often	better—when	we	think	as	part	of	a	close-
knit	group	rather	than	as	individuals.	This	is	particularly	the	case	regarding	our
attention
	and	our	
motivation.
	The	nature	of	these	two	states	is	altered	in
meaningful	ways	when	we	enter	them	collectively	instead	of	alone.
First,	attention:	the	phenomenon	that	psychologists	call	“shared	attention”
occurs	when	we	focus	on	the	same	objects	or	information	at	the	same	time	as
others.	The	awareness	that	we	are	focusing	on	a	particular	stimulus	along	with
other	people
	leads	our	brains	to	endow	that	stimulus	with	special	significance,
tagging	it	as	especially	important.	We	then	allocate	more	mental	bandwidth	to
that	material,	processing	it	more	deeply;	in	scientists’	terms,	we	award	it
“cognitive	prioritization.”
	In	a	world	of	too	much	information,	we	use	shared
attention
	to	help	us	figure	out	what	
to	focus	on,	then	direct	our	mental	resources
toward	the	object	that	the	spotlight	of	shared	attention	has	illuminated.	As	a
result	of	these	(mostly	automatic)	processes,	we	
learn
	things	better
	when	we
attend	to	them	with	other	people.	We	
remember
	things	better
	when	we	attend	to
them	with	other	people.	And	we’re	more	likely	to	
act
	
upon
	information	that	has
been	attended	to	along	with	other	people.
The	practice	of	engaging	in	shared	attention	starts	in	infancy.
	By	nine	months,
a	baby	begins	to	look
	in	the	direction	in	which	an	adult	turns	her	head.	Infants
--- Page 202 ---
will	gaze	longer
	at	what	the	grownups	around	them	appear	to	be	looking	at,	and
they	are	more	likely	to	recognize
	objects	that	they	earlier	jointly	attended	to	with
a	caregiver	than	objects	they	attended	to	alone.	In	this	subtle	and	mostly
unconscious	way,	parents	are	continually	instructing	their	offspring
	on	what	is
important,	what	merits	attention,	and	what	can	be	safely	ignored.
By	one	year	of	age,	a	baby	will	reliably	look
	in	the	direction	of	an	adult’s
gaze,	even	absent	the	turning	of	the	adult’s	head.	Such	gaze-following	is	made
easier	by	the	fact	that	people	have	visible	whites	of	the	eyes.
	Humans	are	the
only	primates	so	outfitted,	an	exceptional	status	that	has	led	scientists	to	propose
the	“cooperative	eye	hypothesis”
—the	theory	that	our	eyes	evolved	to	support
cooperative	social	interactions.	“Our	eyes	see,
	but	they	are	also	meant	to	be
seen,”	notes	science	writer	Ker	Than.
The	ability	to	experience	the	world	from	a	shared	perspective	is	an	evolved
adaptation	that	grants	humans	an	unequalled	capacity	for	coordinating	thought
and	behavior	with	other	members	of	their	species.	Shared	attention,	and	the
increased	cognitive	resources	devoted	to	information	that	is	mutually	attended
to,	produces	greater	overlap	in	group	members’	“mental	models”	of	a	problem,
and	therefore	smoother	cooperation	while	solving	it.	It	is,	in	a	sense,	what	makes
all	human	achievements	possible
—from	jointly	maneuvering	a	piece	of	furniture
through	a	narrow	doorway	to	collaboratively	designing	and	launching	a	rocket
sent	to	the	moon.	And	it	starts	with	babies	following	the	direction	of	our	eyes.
Shared	attention	remains	important	among	adults,
	though	it	plays	a	different
role	than	in	the	interactions	of	caregivers	and	children.	Here	the	function	of
shared	attention	is	not	so	much	the	expert	instruction	of	a	novice	but	rather	the
maintenance	of	a	mutual	store	of	information	and	impressions.	We	feel
compelled	to	continuously	monitor	what	our	peers	
are	paying	attention	to,	and	to
direct	our	own	attention	to	those	same	objects.	(When	the	face	of	everyone	on
the	street	is	turned	skyward,	we	look	up	too.)	In	this	way,	our	mental	models	of
the	world
	remain	in	sync	with	those	of	the	people	around	us.
The	common	ground	established	by	shared	attention	is	especially	crucial	for
teams	working	together	to	solve	a	problem.	Studies	of	groups	laboring	on	a
shared	task
—from	students	programming	a	robot	to	surgeons	performing	an
operation—show	that	the	members	of	effective	teams	tend	to	synchronize	their
gaze,	looking	at	the	same	areas	at	the	same	time.	More	of	these	“moments	of
joint	attention”	are	associated	with	more	successful	outcomes.	Research	suggests
that	the	ability	to	coordinate	such	moments	can	be	acquired	with	practice.	One
study	of	physician	teams	performing	surgery	on	a	simulator	found	that	the	gaze
of	experienced	surgeons
	overlapped	at	a	rate	of	about	70	percent,	while	the	gaze
of	novices	overlapped	only	about	30	percent	of	the	time.	But	effective
--- Page 203 ---
collaborators	aren’t	
always
	looking	at	the	same	place
	at	the	same	time;	rather,
they	cycle	between	looking	on	their	own,	then	looking	together.
If	attention	is	different	when	we	experience	it	as	a	member	of	a	group,	so	too
is	
motivation.
	Common	conceptualizations	of	motivation
—such	as	“grit,”	the
notion	popularized	by	University	of	Pennsylvania	psychologist	Angela
Duckworth—are	based	on	the	assumption	that	engagement	and	persistence	are
individual	matters,	individually	willed.	What	this	understanding	omits	is	that	our
willingness	to	persevere	can	be	enhanced	when	our	efforts	are	made	on	behalf	of
a	group	we	care	about.	Membership	in	a	group	can	be	a	potent	source	of
motivation
—if	we	feel	a	genuine	sense	of	belonging	to	the	group,	and	if	our
personal	identity	feels	firmly	tied	to	the	group	and	its	success.	When	these
conditions	are	met,	group	membership	acts	as	a	form	of	
intrinsic
	motivation
:	that
is,	our	behavior	becomes	driven	by	factors	internal	to	the	task,	such	as	the
satisfaction	we	get	from	contributing	to	a	collective	effort,	rather	than	by
external	rewards	such	as	money	or	public	recognition.	And	as	psychologists
have	amply	documented,	intrinsic	motivation	is	more	powerful,	more	enduring,
and	more	easily	maintained
	than	the	extrinsic	sort;	it	leads	us	to	experience	the
work	as	more	enjoyable,	and	to	perform	it	more	capably.
Experiencing	ourselves	as	part	of	a	collective	“we,”	rather	than	as	a	singular
“I,”	changes	the	way	we	direct	our	focus	and	the	way	we	allocate	our	energies—
often	in	felicitous	fashion.	Yet	so	much	in	our	every-man-
for-himself	society
conspires	against	the	creation	of	a	robust	sense	of	“we.”	Our	emphasis	on
individual	achievement,	and	our	neglect	of	group	cohesion,	means	that	we	are
failing	to	reap	the	rich	benefits	of	shared	attention	and	shared	motivation.	Even
when	groups	do	exist	in	name,	they	are	often	weak	and	dilute	in	their	bonds.
Psychologists	have	found	that	groups	differ	widely	on	what	they	call
“entitativity”
—or,	in	a	catchier	formulation,	their	“groupiness.”	Some	portion	of
the	time	and	effort	we	devote	to	cultivating	our	individual	talents	could	more
productively	be	spent	on	forming	teams	that	are	genuinely	groupy.
In	order	to	foster	a	sense	of	groupiness,	there	are	a	few	deliberate	steps	we	can
take.	First,	people	who	need	to	think	together	should	
learn
	together—in	person,
at	the	same	time.	The	omnipresence	of	our	digital	devices	can	make	it	difficult	to
ensure	that	shared	learning	takes	place,	even	among	students	gathered	in	a	single
classroom.	Some	years	back,	high	school	teacher	Paul	Barnwell	realized	that
many	of	his	students	were	physically	present,	but	mentally	absent,	during	class.
“They	were	pecking	away
	at	their	smartphones	under	their	desks,	checking	their
Facebook	feeds	and	texts,”	recalls	Barnwell,	who	teaches	English	at	Fern	Creek
Traditional	High	School	in	Louisville,	Kentucky.
--- Page 204 ---
Moreover,	once	he	got	their	attention	and	directed	them	to	engage	in	a	group
assignment,	he	discovered	that	his	students	didn’t	know	how	to	carry	on	an
academic	discussion.	They	were	so	used	to	the	stutter-stop	rhythm	of
asynchronous	text	exchanges	that	holding	a	substantive	conversation	in	real	time
was	an	unfamiliar	and	unpracticed	activity.	(Notably,	research	has	found	that
asynchronous	communication
—of	the	kind	that	is	now	common	not	only	among
teenagers	but	among	adult	professionals	as	well—reduces	the	efficiency	and
effectiveness	of	group	work.)	In	a	clever	jujitsu	move,	Barnwell	redirected	his
students’	use	of	technology:	he	asked	them	to	record	one	another	with	their
smartphones	and	then	analyze	their	own	and	their	partners’	conversational
patterns.	Before	long,	his	students	were	holding	lively	class-wide	conversations
—thinking	and	acting	more	like	a	group,	and	reaping	the	cognitive	benefits	that
only	a	group	can	generate.
A	second	principle	for	engendering	groupiness	would	go	like	this:	people	who
need	to	think	together	should	
train
	together—in	person,	at	the	same	time.
Research	shows	that	teams	that	trained	as	a	group
	collaborate	more	effectively,
commit	fewer	errors,	and	perform	at	a	higher	
level	than	teams	made	up	of	people
who	were	trained	separately.	Training	together	can	also	reduce	the	“silo	effect,”
a	common	phenomenon	in	which	co-workers	fail	to	communicate	or	collaborate
across	different	departments	and	disciplines.	Yet	training	together	is	not	the
norm
	in	many	industries.	In	medicine,	for	example,	health	care	providers
representing	various	specialties—surgeons,	nurses,	anesthesiologists,
pharmacists—must	collaborate	closely	when	caring	for	patients.	But
traditionally,	their	training	occurs	in	isolation	from	one	another,	in	different
departments	and	even	different	institutions.
Some	medical	schools	and	hospitals	are	now	experimenting	with	group
training	across	disciplinary	lines.
	The	University	of	Minnesota	has	found	an
especially	engaging	way	to	do	so:	creating	an	“escape	room.”
	In	this	activity
(modeled	on	an	adventure	game),	UMN	students	studying	nursing,	pharmacy,
physical	therapy,	and	social	work,	among	other	disciplines,	are	invited	into	a
simulated	hospital	room.	There	they	are	given	the	case	study	of	a	fictional
patient
—for	example:	“A	55-year-old	male	with	a	past	medical	history	of
bipolar	disorder	and	type	I	diabetes	presents	to	the	emergency	room	with
diabetic	ketoacidosis,	triggered	by	a	recent	manic	episode.”	Acting	under	the
pressure	of	a	one-hour	time	limit,	the	students	must	work	together	to	develop	a
discharge	plan	for	the	patient	by	solving	a	series	of	puzzles,	making	use	of	the
objects	and	information	available	in	the	room—and	drawing	on	the	participants’
varied	areas	of	expertise.	The	game	is	followed	by	a	guided	debriefing	session	in
which	students	reflect	on	the	challenges	of	collaborating	across	fields.	The
--- Page 205 ---
“interprofessional	escape	room”	is	now	part	of	the	formal	curriculum	for
students	studying	the	health	sciences	at	the	University	of	Minnesota;	similar
activities	have	been	introduced	at	hospitals	and	medical	schools	located	in
Philadelphia,	Pennsylvania;	Buffalo,	New	York;	Tucson,	Arizona;	and	Lubbock,
Texas.
A	third	principle	for	generating	groupiness	would	hold	that	people	who	need
to	think	together	should	
feel
	together—in	person,	at	the	same	time.	Laboratory
research,	as	well	as	research	conducted	with	survivors	of	battlefield	conflicts	and
natural	disasters,	has	found	that	emotionally	distressing	or	physically	painful
events	can	act	as	a	kind	of	“social	glue”
	that	bonds	the	people	who	experienced
them	together.	But	the	emotions	that	unite	a	group	need	not	be	so	harrowing.
Studies	have	also	determined	that	simply	asking	members	to	candidly	share	their
thoughts	and	
feelings
	with	one	another	leads	to	improvements	in	group	cohesion
and	performance.
The	Energy	Project,	a	training	and	consulting	firm	based	in	New	York,	holds
a	companywide	“community	meeting”	every	Wednesday.	Each	of	the
organization’s	employees	is	asked	a	series	of	simple	questions,	starting	with
“How	are	you	feeling?”	“That’s	a	very	different	question
	than	the	standard	‘How
are	you?’	we	all	ask	each	other	every	day,”	notes	Tony	Schwartz,	the	company’s
founder	and	CEO.	“When	people	stop	and	reflect,	and	then	say,	one	at	a	time,
how	each	of	them	are	really	feeling,	it	opens	up	a	deeper	level	of	dialogue.”	At
times,	he	recounts,	his	colleagues’	answers	have	been	searching	or	even
wrenching,
	reflecting	a	personal	crisis	or	family	tragedy.	But	even	when
responses	are	more	run-of-the-mill,	the	members	of	his	close-knit	staff	have
shared	an	emotional	experience	with	one	another,	one	that	is	fleshed	out	by	the
remaining	questions	in	the	series:	“What’s	the	most	important	thing
	you	learned
last	week?”	“What’s	your	goal	for	this	week?”	“What	are	you	feeling	most
grateful	for?”
The	fourth	and	final	mandate	for	eliciting	groupiness	is	this:	people	who	need
to	think	together	should	
engage	in	rituals
	together
—in	person,	at	the	same	time.
For	this	purpose,	a	ritual	can	be	any	meaningful	organized	activity	in	which
members	of	a	group	take	part	together.	If	the	rituals	involve	synchronized
movement	or	shared	physiological	arousal,
	all	the	better.	Both	of	these	switches
are	flipped	at	Clearview	Elementary	School	in	Sherburne	County,	Minnesota,
where	each	weekday	starts	with	the	“Morning	Mile.”
	Students	in	every	grade
spend	twenty	minutes	walking	briskly	before	class,	usually	outside.	The	physical
exertion	involved	means	that	shared	physiological	arousal	is	a	given;	teachers
report	that	students	arrive	at	their	desks	with	cheeks	flushed	(especially	during
the	cold	Minnesota	winters).	But	the	Morning	Mile	generates	synchronous
--- Page 206 ---
movement	as	well.	Research	shows	that	when	people	walk	or	run	together,	they
automatically	and	unconsciously	match	up	their	bodily	movements.
Even	so	ordinary	a	ritual	as	sharing	a	meal	can	make	a	difference	in	how	well
a	group	thinks	together.	Lakshmi	Balachandra,	an	assistant	professor	of
entrepreneurship	at	Babson	College	in	Massachusetts,	asked	132	MBA	students
to	role-play	executives
	negotiating	a	complex	joint	venture	agreement	between
two	companies.	In	the	simulation	she	arranged,	the	greatest	possible	profits
would	be	created	by	parties	who	were	able	to	dis
cern	the	other	side’s	preferences
and	then	work	collectively	to	maximize	profits	for	the	venture	as	a	whole,	rather
than	merely	considering	their	own	company’s	interests.	Balachandra	found	that
participants	who	dined	together	while	negotiating—at	a	restaurant,	or	over	food
brought	into	a	conference	room—generated	12	percent	higher	profits,	on
average,	than	those	who	bargained	while	not	eating.
The	explanation	may	go	back,	again,	to	synchrony.	Balachandra	notes	that
when	we	eat	together,	we	end	up	mirroring	one	another’s	movements:	lifting	the
food	to	our	mouths,	chewing,	swallowing.	“This	unconscious	mimicking	of	each
other	may	induce	positive	feelings	towards	both	the	other	party	and	the	matter
under	discussion,”	she	writes.	Other	research	has	found	that	the	positive	effect	of
shared	meals	on	cooperation	is	heightened	if	participants	dine	“family	style”
—
eating	the	same	food,	served	from	communal	dishes.	It	may	also	be	enhanced	if
very	spicy	entrees	are	on	the	menu,	since	consuming	such	food
	increases	body
temperature	and	perspiration,	raises	blood	pressure,	speeds	up	heart	rate,	and
prompts	the	release	of	adrenaline,	all	hallmarks	of	physiological	arousal.	A
group	of	Australian	researchers	reported	greater	economic	cooperation
	among
people	who	together	had	eaten	bird’s	eye	chilies,	a	painfully	hot	pepper.
In	addition	to	incorporating	the	now	familiar	factors	of	behavioral	synchrony
and	physiological	arousal,	consuming	food	with	others	is	in	itself	uniquely
meaningful:	our	very	survival	depends	on	this	elemental	sharing	of	resources.
“Eating	together	is	a	more	intimate	act
	than	looking	over	an	Excel	spreadsheet
together,”	observes	Kevin	Kniffin,	an	assistant	professor	of	management	at
Cornell	University.	“That	intimacy	spills	back	over	into	work.”	In	a	study
published	in	the	journal	
Human	Performance,
	Kniffin	and	his	coauthors	reported
that	teams	of	firefighters
	who	eat	their	meals	together	perform	better	than
firefighters	who	dine	on	their	own.	He	believes	that	our	focus	on	individual
achievement—and	individual	rewards—leads	us	to	overlook	the	performance-
enhancing	effects	of	group	rituals.	“Coworkers	who	eat	together
	tend	to	perform
at	a	higher	level	than	their	peers,	yet	cafeterias	are	often	undervalued	by
companies,”	he	notes.	And	those	tech	companies	that	do	offer	luxurious
cafeterias	as	a	perk	to	their	employees?	The	key	may	not	be	the	freshness	of	the
--- Page 207 ---
sushi	or	the	deliciousness	of	the	vegan	grain	bowls	but	whether	the	firm’s
workers	consume	such	delicacies	
together.
All	of	these	approaches	to	generating	groupiness	are	firmly	grounded	in	our
nature	as	embodied,	situated,	social	beings;	their	effectiveness	depends	on
people	moving,	talking,	and	working	together,	so	closely	that	their	brains	and
bodies	fall	into	a	joint	rhythm.	This	marks	a	difference	from	notions	such	as
“crowdsourcing”	and	the	“hive	mind,”	which	have	enjoyed	a	sustained	surge	of
popularity.	In	theory	and	in	practice,	these	concepts	are	highly	brainbound:	a
bunch	of	disembodied	minds	bouncing	ideas	around,	usually	online.	Technology
more	generally	has	often	served	to	isolate	us	from	one	another,	sealing	us	within
our	individual	digital	bubbles.	But	this	need	not	be	the	case;	promising	models
of	extended	technology—that	is,	extended	by	the	age-old	resource	of	the	human
group—are	now	emerging.
For	example:	scientists	at	Germany’s	Max	Planck	Institute	and	elsewhere	are
experimenting	with	automatic	“rapport	detection”
	within	groups.	Sensors
embedded	in	a	conference	room	or	in	video-conferencing	equipment
unobtrusively	monitor	group	members’	nonverbal	behavior	(their	facial
expressions,	hand	motions,	gaze	direction,	and	so	on);	these	data	are	analyzed	in
real	time	to	yield	a	measure	of	how	well	a	group	is	cooperating.	When	rapport
falls
	below	a	critical	level,	nudges	can	be	applied	to	move	the	group	toward
greater	cohesion:	the	system	might	alert	the	group’s	leader	that	a	shared	coffee
break	is	in	order,	or	it	might	suggest	to	him,	via	a	pop-up	message,	that	he
engage	in	more	mirroring	of	his	co-workers.	Inside	wired-up	“smart	meeting
rooms,”
	it	may	even	elect	to	raise	the	temperature	by	a	few	degrees,	or	introduce
some	soothing	white	noise.
Another	technology-assisted	tactic	for	generating	groupiness	are	activities	in
which	members	of	a	group	are	challenged	to	synchronize	their	movements	while
dancing	with	one	another	or	moving	in	time	to	music.	Body-worn	sensors
compute	the	degree	of	synchrony	group	members	achieve,	and	real-time
feedback	allows	participants	to	fine-tune	their	movements	such	that	they	become
ever	more	closely	matched	to	those	of	their	peers.	“We	set	out	to	design
	a
mobile-based	play	experience	that	enhanced	in-person	social	interaction	and
connection,”	explains	Katherine	Isbister,	a	professor	of	computational	media	at
the	University	of	California,	Santa	Cruz,	who	says	she	was	inspired	by	research
that	shows	“how	being	physically	‘in	sync’
	brings	people	together	emotionally
and	builds	trust.”	Isbister	notes	that	her	game,	called	Yamove!,
	encourages
looking	
not	at	a	screen	but	at	the	other	players.	“The	more	players	look	at	each
other,
	the	better	results	they	achieve	in	coordination	and	the	stronger	the
lingering	positive	social	effects,”	she	says.	Used	as	an	icebreaker	or	team-
--- Page 208 ---
building	activity,	games	such	as	Yamove!
	may	strike	some	as	embarrassing	or
ridiculous.	But	unlike	those	we	typically	endure,	these	digital	nudges	in	the
direction	of	greater	synchrony	might	actually	work.
And—potential	embarrassment	aside—what’s	striking	about	the	group
experiences	explored	here	is	how	very	
positive
	they	are.	Military	historian
William	McNeill	entered	“a	state	of	generalized	emotional	exaltation”	while
marching	with	his	fellow	recruits	in	basic	training.	Tony	Schwartz,	the	founder
of	the	consulting	company	The	Energy	Project,	says	that	he	and	his	staff
members	find	their	weekly	community	meetings	“powerful”	and	“liberating,”
even	“transformational.”	On	surveys,	participants	in	educational	escape	room
activities	describe	the	experience	as	“engaging,”	“motivating,”	and	even	“fun.”
This	is,	to	put	it	mildly,	not	the	perspective	most	of	us	bring	to	group	projects.
Group	work	is	widely	disliked,	even	despised,	in	both	educational	and
professional	settings;	it	is	commonly	viewed	as	inefficient,	unfair,	and	just	plain
annoying.	The	research	literature	has	even	given	this	phenomenon	a	name:
“grouphate,”
	defined	as	“a	feeling	of	dread	that	arises	when	facing	the
possibility	of	having	to	work	in	a	group.”	What	explains	the	disparity	between
the	productive,	invigorating,	even	ecstatic	ideal	of	group	thought	and	action—
which,	as	we’ve	seen,	human	beings	
evolved
	to	do	well—and	the	dispiriting
reality	as	most	of	us	experience	it?	The	answer	may	lie	in	a	profound	mismatch
between	the	present-day	demands	of	knowledge	work	and	a	set	of	ideas	about
such	endeavors	that	is	rooted	deep	in	the	past.
	
T
HE	LETTER	TO
	Albert	Einstein,	dated	June	4,	1924,	began	on	a	deferential	note.
“Respected	Sir
:	I	have	ventured	to	send	you	the	accompanying	article	for	your
perusal	and	opinion.	I	am	anxious	to	know	what	you	think	of	it.”	The	author	of
the	letter,	Satyendra	Nath	Bose,	was	an	obscure	academic	at	a	university	in	East
Bengal.	The	paper	he	was	sending
	to	Einstein	had	already	been	submitted	to—
and	rejected	by—a	professional	journal.	And	the	letter’s	addressee	“was	not	just
the	most	famous	scientist	of	his	time;	he	was	one	of	the	best-known	individuals
on	the	entire	planet,”	notes	Yale	University	physics	professor	A.	Douglas	Stone.
But	
Bose	felt	at	ease	reaching	out	to	Einstein,	he	explained	in	the	letter,	“because
we	are	all	your	pupils.”	And	so,	with	“some	combination	of	veneration	and
chutzpah,”
	in	Stone’s	words,	Bose	went	on	to	make	an	astonishing	request.
“I	do	not	know	sufficient	German	to	translate	the	paper.	If	you	think	the	paper
worth	publication,	I	shall	be	grateful	if	you	arrange	for	its	publication	in
Zeitschrift	für
	
Physik,
”	he	wrote,	naming	Germany’s	leading	physics	journal.
Even	more	surprising,	Einstein	agreed	to	his	entreaty.	Reading	the	paper,	he	saw
that	Bose	had	solved	a	problem
	that	Einstein	had	labored	on	without	success:
--- Page 209 ---
how	a	law	of	radiation,	formulated	by	German	physicist	Max	Planck	some
twenty-four	years	earlier,	could	be	deduced	from	the	theory	that	light	is	a
particle	as	well	as	a	wave	(a	theory	that	Einstein	himself	had	proposed	in	1905).
It	was,	as	Einstein	wrote	to	Bose,	“a	beautiful	step	forward.”
	Bose	took	this	step
on	his	own,	powered	only	by	his	own	curiosity.	It	was	simple,	he	later	explained:
“I	wanted	to	know	how	to	grapple
	with	the	difficulty	in	my	own	way.”	In	1925
Bose’s	paper	was	published	in	the	journal	he	had	specified,	
Zeitschrift	für
Physik,
	along	with	a	commentary	from	Einstein.	It	is	not	an	exaggeration	to	say
that	the	course	of	scientific	history
	was	altered	by	one	man	thinking	alone.
Ninety	years	later,	another	paper	was	published.	It	documented	a	successive
step	forward	in	the	discovery	process	to	which	Bose	had	made	a	signal
contribution,	reporting	a	newly	precise	measurement
	of	the	Higgs	boson	mass.
(Bosons,	which	were	named	in	honor	of	Bose,	are	a	type	of	particle	that	obeys
the	rule	of	what	is	called,	in	physics,	“Bose-Einstein	statistics”;	their	mass	is
measured	by	means	of	a	particle	accelerator,	a	gargantuan	machine	that	propels
charged	particles	to	extremely	high	speeds.)	The	author	of	
this
	paper	was
Georges	Aad—and	Brad	Abbott,	and	Jalal	Abdallah,	and	Ovsat	Abdinov,	and
Rosemarie	Aben,	and	Maris	Abolins,	and	Ossama	AbouZeid,	and	Halina
Abromowicz,	and	Henso	Abreu	.
 
.
 
.	on	and	on,	for	a	total	of	5,154	authors.	The
publication,	in	the	journal	
Physical	Review	Letters,
	is	but	an	extreme	example	of
a	trend	now	ascendant	in	every	industry	and	occupation:	in	order	to	carry	out	the
intensely	complex	work	demanded	by	the	modern	world,	people	must	think
together	in	groups.
The	shift	is	easiest	to	see
—and	to	measure—in	the	social	and	physical
sciences,	where	contributions	by	single	individuals	were	once	the	norm.	Today,
fewer	than	10	percent
	of	journal	articles	in	science	and	technology	
are	authored
by	just	one	person.	An	analysis	of	book	chapters	and	journal	articles	written
across	the	social	sciences	likewise	found	“a	sharp	decline
	in	single-author
publishing.”	In	economics,	solo-authored	articles
	once	predominated;	now	they
account	for	only	about	25	percent	of	publications	in	the	discipline.	In	the	legal
field,	a	2014	survey	of	law	reviews	concluded	that	nowadays,	“team	authors
dominate
	solo	authors	in	the	production	of	legal	knowledge.”	Even	the	familiar
archetype	of	the	solo	inventor	(think	Thomas	Edison	or	Alexander	Graham	Bell)
is	no	longer	representative.	A	2011	report	found	that	over	the	previous	forty
years,	the	number	of	individuals	listed	on	each	US	patent	application
	had
steadily	increased;	nearly	70	percent	of	applications	now	named	multiple
inventors.
This	development	is	more	than	an	academic	fad,	says	Brian	Uzzi,	a	professor
of	management	at	Northwestern	University	who	conducted	some	of	this
--- Page 210 ---
research:	“It	suggests	that	the	process	of	knowledge	creation
	has	fundamentally
changed.”	More	broadly,	Uzzi	notes,	“almost	everything	that	human	beings	do
today,
	in	terms	of	generation	of	value,	is	no	longer	done	by	individuals.	It’s	done
by	teams.”	What	has	
not
	changed	is	our	model	of	how	intelligent	thinking
happens.	We’re	still	convinced	that	good	ideas	and	new	insights	and	ingenious
solutions	come	from	a	single	brain;	we’re	a	bunch	of	pencil-wielding	Satyendra
Boses	in	an	era	of	particle	accelerators	and	mega-collaborations.	This
fundamental	mismatch	lies	at	the	root	of	many	of	our	struggles	with	group	work.
It’s	time	we	tossed	out	that	individual	model	and	replaced	it	with	one	better
suited	to	the	world	in	which	we	actually	live.	We	can	begin	by	identifying	those
ways	in	which	thinking	with	a	group	is	different	from	thinking	on	our	own,	and
by	instituting	new	practices	that	support	the	smooth	operation	of	the	group	mind.
Once	these	practices	are	put	into	place,	research	shows,	a	group	can	think	more
efficiently	and	more	effectively	than	any	one	of	its	members—a	phenomenon
that	psychologists	call	“collective	intelligence.”
The	ways	in	which	group	thinking	differs	from	individual	thinking	are
obvious	and	yet	almost	always	overlooked.	The	first	of	these:	When	we	think	on
our	own,	all	of	our	thoughts	get	a	hearing.	But	when	we	think	as	part	of	a	team,
it	takes	intentional	effort	to	ensure	that	everyone	speaks	up	and	that	everyone
shares	what	they	know.	Research	on	group	dynamics	reveals	that	this	rarely
happens.	Instead,	very	few	people—and	some
times	just	one—dominate	the
conversation;	in	addition,	group	members	often	neglect	to	contribute	their
“uniquely-held	information,”
	gravitating	instead	to	discussion	of	information
that	everyone	present	already	knows.	Thus	do	less	than	optimal	patterns	of
communication	produce	the	inefficiency	and	ill	will	associated	with	group	work,
without	generating	any	of	the	potential	benefits.
This	outcome	isn’t	inevitable,	however;	simple	changes	in	the	way
communication	is	carried	out	can	steer	teams	toward	the	group	mind.	Steven
Rogelberg,	a	professor	of	management	at	the	University	of	North	Carolina	at
Charlotte,	notes	that	group	members	“often	hold	back	in	meetings,
	waiting	to
hear	what	others	say	and	what	their	boss	might	say	out	of	fear	of	being	perceived
as	difficult,	out	of	touch,	or	off	the	mark.”	Asking	attendees	to	write	out	their
contributions	instead	of	speaking	them,	he	says,	“can	be	a	solution	to	this
problem,	allowing	space	for	unique	knowledge	and	novel	ideas	to	emerge.”
Participants	jot	down	their	thoughts	on	index	cards,	which	the	group’s	leader
then	reads	aloud.	Or	they	write	them	on	sheets	of	paper	posted	around	the	room,
after	which	participants	circulate	again—this	time	marking	down	comments	on
their	colleagues’	ideas,	which	the	group	as	a	whole	then	discusses.
--- Page 211 ---
Another	potential	change	to	communication	patterns	centers	on	the	behavior
of	group	leaders.	Cass	Sunstein	is	a	professor	at	Harvard	Law	School	who	also
served	as	administrator	of	the	White	House	Office	of	Information	and
Regulatory	Affairs	under	Barack	Obama.	Upon	assuming	this	role,	Sunstein
learned	a	valuable	lesson	in	group	leadership:	if	he	began	a	meeting	by	stating
his	own	views,	he	discovered,	the	ensuing	discussion	was	far	less	expansive	and
open	than	if	he	started	out	by	saying,	“What	do	you	all	think?
	This	is	a	tough
one.”	As	soon	as	a	leader	makes	his	preferences	known,	says	Sunstein,	many
who	work	for	him	will	choose	to	engage	in	“self-silencing”
	rather	than	rock	the
boat	with	a	dissenting	view.	And,	he	notes,	“some	people	are	more	likely	to
silence	themselves
	than	others”;	these	may	include	women	and	members	of
minority	groups,	as	well	as	individuals	with	less	status,	less	experience,	or	less
education.	Yet	it’s	just	this	range	of	voices	that	must	be	heard	if	the	group	mind
is	to	exert	its	unique	power.	One	solution,	says	Sunstein,	is	for	leaders	to	silence
themselves;
	the	manager	or	administrator	who	adopts	an	“inquisitive	and	self-
silencing”
	stance,	he	maintains,	has	the	best	chance	of	hearing	more	than	his
own	views	reflected	back	to	him.
The	second	way	in	which	group	thinking	differs	from	individual	thinking	is
this:	when	thinking	as	part	of	a	collective,	we	need	to	make	our	thought
processes	
visible
	to	others	on	our	team.	While	we	do	leave	“traces”	for	ourselves
when	engaging	in	private	thought—underlining,	jotting	notes	in	margins,
moving	papers	from	the	“unread”	pile	to	the	“have	gone	through”	pile—these
traces	must	be	far	more	specific	and	explicit	if	they	are	to	be	used	productively
by	others.	Philosopher	Andy	Clark,	observing	the	progressive	delegation	of	our
mental	operations	to	our	devices,	has	noted	that	“the	mind	is	just	less	and	less
	in
the	head”	these	days.	More	than	that,	the	mind	
must
	be	less	and	less	in	the	head,
and	more	and	more	emblazoned	on	the	world,	if	we	are	to	extend	our	minds	with
the	minds	of	others.
Once	again,	verbal	communication	is	key—but	not	of	the	unstructured	type
that	too	often	conforms	to	and	confirms	our	individual-oriented	model	of
thinking.	Rather,	researchers	recommend	that	we	implement	a	specific	sequence
of	actions
	in	response	to	our	teammates’	contributions:	we	should	
acknowledge,
repeat,	rephrase,
	and	
elaborate
	on	what	other	group	members	say.	Studies	show
that	engaging	in	this	kind	of	communication
	elicits	more	complete	and
comprehensive	information.	It	re-exposes	the	entire	group	to	the	information	that
was	shared	initially,	improving	group	members’	understanding	of	and	memory
for	that	information.	And	it	increases	the	accuracy	of	the	information	that	is
shared,	a	process	that	psychologists	call	“error	pruning.”
	Although	it	may	seem
cumbersome	or	redundant,	research	suggests	that	this	kind	of	enhanced
--- Page 212 ---
communication	is	part	of	what	makes	expert	teamwork	so	effective.	A	study	of
airplane	pilots,
	for	example,	found	that	experienced	aviators	regularly	repeated,
restated,	and	elaborated	on	what	their	fellow	pilots	said,	while	novice	pilots
failed	to	do	so—and	as	a	result,	the	less	experienced	pilots	formed	sparser	and
less	accurate	memories	of	their	time	in	the	air.
Another	way	to	make	our	thinking	visible	to	others	is	to	collaborate	on	the
creation	of	what	Gary	Olson	and	Judith	Olson	call	“shared	artifacts.”
	The
Olsons,	both	professors	of	informatics	at	the	University	of	California,	Irvine,
have	spent	more	than	three	decades	studying	how	people	think	and	work
together.	One	major	contributor	to	the	success	of	group	cognition,	they	have
discovered,	is	the	effective	use	of	such	artifacts,	or	tangible	representations	of
the	task	to	be	completed—which	are,	ideally,	
large,	complex,	persistent,
	and
revisable.
	Over	the	course	of	their	long	
careers,	the	Olsons	have	often	evaluated
the	effectiveness	of	workplace	technology	such	as	video-conferencing	software
and	digital	collaboration	platforms.	But	the	baseline	against	which	they	compare
these	tools—the	working	arrangement	they	regard	as	the	best	of	all	worlds
—is
decidedly	analog:	a	group	of	people	gathered	together	in	a	room	that	is	dedicated
to	their	current	project,	with	plenty	of	space	on	the	walls	to	tack	up	those	shared
artifacts	(which	may	take	the	form	of	lists,	graphs,	charts,	or	sketches).
It	matters	above	all	that	these	artifacts	are,	in	fact,	shared.	At	one	design
meeting	they	observed,	all	the	participants	were	handed	individual	copies	of	a
system	diagram.	“As	they	discussed	and	agreed
	to	things,	they	took	notes	on
their	own	copy	of	the	diagram,	adding	things	and	crossing	things	out,”	the
Olsons	recounted	in	one	of	their	academic	articles.	“We	noted	at	the	end	of	the
meeting	that	different	people	had	made	different	marks,	implying	different
understandings	of	what	they	had	agreed	to.”	Without	the	capacity	to	refer	to	a
single	shared	artifact,	the	Olsons	concluded,	these	co-workers	“ended	up	not
‘singing	from	the	same	sheet	of	music.’
 
”
In	addition	to	being	shared,	it’s	beneficial	for	group	artifacts	to	be	large	and
complex.	The	Olsons	have	found	that	people	often	gesture	at	large	artifacts,
enhancing	their	own	thinking	and	that	of	the	people	who	observe	them;
meanwhile,	a	complex	artifact	(as	opposed	to	a	simple	or	schematic	one)	allows
more	of	the	group’s	thinking	to	be	explicitly	represented	for	all	to	see,	rather
than	remaining	concealed	inside	individuals’	heads.	Finally,	shared	artifacts	are
most	effective	when	they	are	persistent—preserved,	retained,	and	kept
continuously	visible—but	also	revisable,	able	to	be	changed	as	new	information
or	insight	emerges.	Describing	another	team	at	work,	the	Olsons	noted	that	this
group’s	artifacts	“were	often	put	up	in	the	order
	in	which	they	were	produced.
People	knew	where	to	look	for	something	because	they	knew	when	it	was
--- Page 213 ---
produced,	and	they	could	tell	something	about	another	person’s	attention	by
seeing	where	that	person	was	looking.”	Lamenting	the	“inherent	invisibility
	of
much	of	today’s	computing	artifacts”—we	can’t	see	what’s	inside	our
colleague’s	laptop,	any	more	than	we	can	see	what’s	inside	her	head—the
Olsons	report	that	the	best	materials	with	which	to	create	these	representations
are	simple	ones:	a	felt-tip	pen,	used	on	large	sheets	of	paper.
There’s	a	third	way	in	which	group	thinking	diverges	from	individ
ual
thinking:	when	engaged	in	the	latter,	we	of	course	have	access	to	the	full	depth
of	our	own	knowledge	and	skill.	That’s	not	the	case	when	we’re	thinking
collectively—and	that’s	a	good	thing.	One	of	the	great	advantages	of	the	group
mind	is	its	capacity	to	bring	together	many	and	varied	areas	of	proficiency,
ultimately	encompassing	far	more	expertise	than	could	ever	be	held	in	a	single
mind.	We	
couldn’t
	know	all	that	our	fellow	group	members	know,	nor	should
we	want	to;	our	mental	bandwidth	would	quickly	become	overloaded.	We	do,
however,	need	to	know	that	
they
	know	it,	in	order	to	call	upon	it	when	it’s
needed.	The	process	by	which	we	leverage	an	awareness	of	the	knowledge	other
people	possess	is	called	“transactive	memory.”
It	could	be	said	that	the	study	of	transactive	memory	began	on	the	day	when
Daniel	Wegner	and	Toni	Giuliano	were	wed.	The	groom	later	wrote:	“Toni	and	I
noticed
	not	long	after	we	were	married	that	we	were	sharing	memory	duties.	I
remembered	where	car	and	yard	things	were,	she	remembered	where	house
things	were,	and	we	could	each	depend	on	the	other	to	be	an	expert	in	domains
we	didn’t	need	to	master.”	As	social	psychologists,	Wegner	and	Giuliano
quickly	identified	their	experience	as	not	only	an	interesting	feature	of
newlywed	life	but	also	a	promising	target	of	scientific	investigation.	A	year	later
the	couple	(along	with	colleague	Paula	Hertel)	published	a	paper	introducing
what	Wegner	called	a	new	way	“to	understand	the	group	mind.”
	As	he	observed:
“Nobody	remembers	everything.	Instead,	each	of	us	in	a	couple	or	group
remembers	some	things	personally—and	then	can	remember	much	more	by
knowing	who	else	might	know	what	we	don’t.	In	this	way,	we	become	part	of	a
transactive	memory	system.”
Over	the	past	few	decades,	psychologists	have	confirmed	Wegner’s	claim
	that
a	robust	transactive	memory	system	effectively	multiplies	the	amount	of
information	each	group	member	has.	Members	of	such	groups	are	able	to	work
on	deepening	their	own	areas	of	expertise	while	still	remaining	in	contact,
through	their	colleagues,	with	a	broader	range	of	relevant	information.	Their
cognitive	load	is	reduced,	as	they	need	only	to	attend	in	the	moment	to	the
portion	of	incoming	information	that	concerns	them,	secure	in	the	knowledge
that	their	teammates	are	doing	the	same.	And	members	of	these	groups	are	able
--- Page 214 ---
to	engage	in	smooth	and	efficient	coordination,	directing	tasks	to	those	members
who	are	best	suited	to	carry	them	out.	As	a	result,	research	finds,	teams	that
build	a	strong	
transactive	memory	structure
	perform	better	than	teams	for	which
that	structure	is	less	defined.
Within	a	group	of	any	size,	a	transactive	memory	system	will	spontaneously
assemble	itself,	as	it	did	for	Daniel	Wegner	and	Toni	Giuliano	once	they	married
and	began	living	together.	But	because	such	systems	usually	aren’t	cultivated	in
an	intentional	way,	much	of	their	potential
	to	extend	the	group’s	intelligence	is
lost.	The	goal	of	such	cultivation	is	to	make	the	group	aware	of	what	its
members	know,	without	requiring	each	member	to	take	on	the	full	burden	of	her
teammates’	specialized	knowledge.	Notice	how	this	model	differs	from	early
notions	of	the	“group	mind,”	in	which	members	of	a	group	were	believed	to	be
thinking	the	same	thoughts	at	the	same	time.	By	contrast,	the	value	of	a
transactive	memory	system	lies	in	its	members	thinking	
different
	thoughts
	while
also	remaining	aware	of	the	contents	of	their	fellow	members’	minds.	The
struggle	to	cope	with	information	overload	has	led	many	of	us	to	turn	to
technological	filters—smartphone	alerts	and	email	applications	that	offer	to	sort
for	us	the	information	that	must	be	attended	to	from	the	information	that	can	be
ignored.	Research	suggests,	however,	that	
other	people
	can	function	as	the	most
sensitive	and	discriminating	filters
	of	all—as	long	as	we’re	aware	of	what	they
know	and	can	access	their	knowledge	when	we	need	it.
All	of	us	maintain	a	set	of	mental	markers	that	help	us	locate	information	we
don’t	currently	possess;	we	may	not	recall	every	detail	contained	in	a	report,	but
we	know	the	folder	(physical	or	digital)	where	the	report	can	be	found.	Such
markers	also	point	us	toward	the	people
	who	possess	information	we	do	not;	the
aim	in	building	a	robust	transactive	memory	system	is	to	make	these	pointers	as
explicit	and	as	accurate	as	possible.	The	process	of	setting	out	these	markers
should	begin	early	in	a	team’s	work	together.	It’s	important	to	establish	from	the
outset	not	only	who’s	responsible	for	
doing
	what	but	also	who’s	responsible	for
knowing
	what.	Group	members	should	be	explicitly	informed
	about	their
colleagues’	distinctive	talents	or	spheres	of	specialization,	and	clear	protocols
should	be	established	for	directing	questions	and	tasks	to	the	appropriate
individual.	Research	shows	that	groups	perform	best	when	each	member	is
clearly	in	charge	of	maintaining	a	particular	body	of	expertise—when	each	topic
has	its	designated	“knowledge	champion,”	as	it	were.	Studies	
further	suggest
that	it	can	be	useful	to	appoint	a	
meta
-knowledge	champion
:	an	individual	who
is	responsible	for	keeping	track	of	what	others	in	the	group	know	and	making
sure	that	group	members’	mental	“directory”	of	who	knows	what	stays	up	to
date.
--- Page 215 ---
There’s	one	more	way	in	which	solo	thought	and	collective	thought	differ.	For
an	individual	thinking	on	her	own,	applying	her	mental	effort	toward	the
advancement	of	her	own	interests	is	a	straightforward	matter.	When	a	group	of
people	think	together,	however,	their	potentially	divergent	interests	need
somehow	to	be	directed	toward	the	accomplishment	of	a	collective	goal.
Incentives	must	thus	be	engineered	such	that,	instead	of	pursuing	their	own	ends,
group	members	are	inspired	by	a	sense	of	“shared	fate”
:	the	results	achieved	by
one	member	are	felt	to	benefit	them	all.	Psychological	research,	and	some	still
relevant	history,	show	that	such	reengineering	can	be	dramatically	effective—
even	in	the	most	volatile	of	situations.
	
T
HE	PUBLIC	SCHOOLS
	in	Austin,	Texas,
	were	in	crisis.	It	was	1971,	and	the
education	system	was	undergoing	court-ordered	desegregation,	bringing	white
students,	African	American	students,	and	Latino	students	together	in	classrooms
for	the	first	time.	The	schools	were	roiling	with	conflict	and	even	physical
violence.	Matthew	Snapp,	assistant	superintendent	of	schools,	turned	for	help	to
his	former	academic	mentor,	a	social	psychologist	and	University	of	Texas
professor	named	Elliot	Aronson.
“The	first	step
	was	to	find	out	what	the	hell	was	going	on	in	those
classrooms,”	Aronson	recalled.	He	and	his	graduate	students	sat	in	the	back	and
watched,	and	what	they	saw	was	in	many	ways	typical	of	middle	school
education,	both	then	and	now:	“The	teacher	stands
	in	front	of	the	room,	asks	a
question,	and	waits	for	the	students	to	indicate	that	they	know	the	answer,”
Aronson	recounted.	“Most	frequently,	six	to	ten	youngsters	strain	in	their	seats
and	raise	their	hands—some	waving	them	vigorously	in	an	attempt	to	attract	the
teacher’s	attention.	Several	other	students	sit	quietly	with	their	eyes	averted,	as	if
trying	to	make	themselves	invisible.”
Through	daily	experience	with	such	scenarios,	he	noted,	“students	learn	more
than	the	content	of	the	material	explicitly	taught	in	the	classroom.	The	medium
is	the	message;	they	learn	implicit	lessons	from	the	
process	as	well.”	And	what
they	learned	was	that	“there	is	no	payoff	for	consulting	with	their	peers”;	rather,
the	payoff	lay	solely	in	“giving	the	correct	answer—the	one	which	the	teacher
had	in	her	head.”
In	the	best	of	times,	such	single-minded	pursuit	of	one’s	own	interests	was
incompatible	with	cooperation	and	collaboration;	in	the	uneasy	environment	that
then	prevailed,	it	was	exacerbating	tensions	and	reinforcing	stereotypes.
Aronson	and	his	team	sought	to	foster	a	more	communal	spirit	among	the
students,	but	they	knew	that	simply	encouraging	them	to	work	together	wasn’t
the	answer.	Instead,	they	shifted	the	incentives	to	which	students	were
--- Page 216 ---
responding—by	creating,	in	Aronson’s	words,	“a	situation	where	they	needed	to
cooperate
	with	one	another	in	order	to	understand	the	material.”	They	called
their	procedure	the	“jigsaw	classroom.”
This	is	how	it	worked:	Students	were	divided	into	groups	of	five	or	six.	When
a	class	began	a	new	unit—say,	on	the	life	of	Eleanor	Roosevelt—each	student	in
the	group	was	assigned	one	section	of	the	material:	Roosevelt’s	childhood	and
young	adulthood,	or	her	role	as	first	lady,	or	her	work	on	behalf	of	causes	such
as	civil	rights	and	world	peace.	The	students’	task	was	to	master	their	own
section,	then	rejoin	the	group	and	report	to	the	others	on	what	they	had	learned.
“Each	student	has	possession
	of	a	unique	and	vital	part	of	the	information,
which,	like	the	pieces	of	a	jigsaw	puzzle,	must	be	put	together	before	anyone	can
learn	the	whole	picture,”	Aronson	explained.	By	arranging	instruction	in	this
manner,	he	was	effectively	creating	a	transactive	memory	system	on	the	spot,
turning	each	student	into	an	expert	on	a	particular	facet	of	the	subject	under
study.	“In	this	situation,”
	Aronson	added,	“the	only	way	a	child	can	be	a	good
learner	is	to	begin	to	be	a	good	listener	and	interviewer”;	the	jigsaw	structure
“demands	that	the	students	utilize	one	another	as	resources.”
The	effects	of	the	new	approach	were	immediately	apparent:	the	same
students	who	had	been	straining	to	be	recognized	for	their	individual	brilliance,
or	endeavoring	to	retreat	into	a	cloak	of	invisibility,	were	now	focused	on
collaborating	with	one	another.	In	studies	carried	out	by	Aronson	and	his
graduate	students	that	compared	the	jigsaw	method	to	traditional	modes	of
instruction,	they	identified	longer-term	effects	as	well.	Students	learned	the
material	faster	and	performed	better	on	exams	when	they	participated	in	the
jigsaw	exercise;	they	also	developed	greater	empathy	and	respect	for	their
classmates.	In	the	Austin-area	schools	where	
the	jigsaw	classroom	was
implemented,	racial	tensions	diminished,	absenteeism	declined,	and	students
reported	more	favorable	attitudes	toward	school.
In	an	effort	to	collect	as	much	objective	evidence	as	possible,	Elliot	Aronson
asked	one	of	his	graduate	students	to	climb	to	the	roofs	of	the	schools	in	which
they	were	working	and	take	pictures	of	the	playgrounds	at	recess.	At	the	start,
these	photographs	showed	a	dispiriting	reality:	students	were	tightly	clustered	in
groups	defined	by	race,	ethnicity,	and	gender.	As	the	jigsaw	experiment
progressed,	however,	the	pictures	documented	a	striking	shift,	as	these	clenched
formations	began	to	loosen	and	disperse.	Pupils	were	mingling	and	mixing	more
freely,	their	play	reflecting	their	new	experiences	in	the	classroom.	From	several
stories	up,	an	observer	could	see	the	change	in	Austin’s	students:	they	were	at
last	getting	outside	their	own	heads.
--- Page 217 ---
Conclusion
S
OME	FIFTEEN	YEARS
	after	Elliot	Aronson	ventured	into	the	restive	classrooms
of	Austin,	Texas,	his	twenty-five-year-old	son	set	out	to	follow	his	father’s
professional	path.	The	younger	man	arrived	on	the	campus	of	Princeton
University	to	pursue	his	PhD	in	1986.	But	Joshua	Aronson	soon	encountered	an
unanticipated	obstacle	to	achieving	his	aim	of	becoming	a	social	psychologist:
he	found	himself	struck	dumb	whenever	he	met	with	his	graduate	school	adviser,
a	distinguished	scholar	named	Edward	Ellsworth	Jones.	“I	was	totally
intimidated
	by	him,”	Aronson	recounts.	“I’d	walk	into	his	office	as	prepared	as	I
could	be,	but	without	fail,	I	would	lose	ten	or	fifteen	IQ	points	the	minute	I	came
through	the	door.	They	would	get	sucked	out	of	my	head	just	by	being	in	the
presence	of	this	person.”
The	humiliation	of	standing,	dull-witted	and	tongue-tied,	in	Professor	Jones’s
office	affected	him	so	deeply	that	it	shaped	the	course	of	his	burgeoning	career.
Less	than	a	decade	later,	as	a	junior	professor	at	the	University	of	Texas	at
Austin,	Aronson	helped	design	a	study	that	became	one	of	the	most	influential
ever	conducted	in	psychology—“a	modern	classic,”
	as	it’s	been	called.	The
paper	described	for	the	first	time
	a	phenomenon	that	he	and	his	coauthor,	Claude
Steele,	named	“stereotype	threat”:	a	temporary	condition	that	saps	the
brainpower	of	those	affected,	rendering	them	effectively	less	intelligent.
Aronson	and	Steele’s	experiments	demonstrated	that	members	of	groups
stereotyped	as	academically	inferior—such	as	female	students	enrolled	in	math
and	science	courses,	or	African	American	and	Latino	students	attending	college
—score	lower	
on	tests	of	intellectual	ability	when	made	conspicuously	aware	of
their	gender	or	ethnicity.
Stereotype	threat	has	since	become	a	crucial	concept	within	psychology,
guiding	researchers’	inquiries	into	why	women	are	underrepresented	in	STEM
fields,	for	example,	and	why	well-prepared	minority	high	school	graduates	may
still	struggle	in	college.	These	investigations	are	rooted	in	a	more	general	truth,
says	Aronson,	one	that	that	applies	to	every	one	of	us.	Intelligence	is	not	“a	fixed
lump
	of	something	that’s	in	our	heads,”	he	explains.	Rather,	“it’s	a	transaction”:
--- Page 218 ---
a	fluid	interaction	among	our	brains,	our	bodies,	our	spaces,	and	our
relationships.	The	capacity	to	think	intelligently	emerges	from	the	skillful
orchestration	of	these	internal	and	external	elements.	And	indeed,	studies	have
shown	that	such	mental	extensions	can	help	us	think	more	effectively	when
confronted	with	a	challenge	like	stereotype	threat.	Using	“cognitive	reappraisal”
to	reinterpret	bodily	signals,
	as	we	learned	to	do	in	chapter	1,	can	head	off	the
performance-suppressing	effects	of	anxiety.	Adding	“cues	of	belonging”
	to	the
physical	environment,	of	the	kind	we	explored	in	chapter	5,	can	generate	a	sense
of	psychological	ease	that’s	conducive	to	intelligent	thought.	And	carefully
structuring	the	expert	feedback
	offered	to	a	“cognitive	apprentice,”	as	we	learned
about	in	chapter	7,	can	instill	the	confidence	necessary	to	overcome	self-doubt.
With	a	wry	smile,	Joshua	Aronson	(currently	an	associate	professor	of
psychology	at	New	York	University)	refers	to	his	stammering	state	when
encountering	his	adviser	as	“conditional	stupidity.”
	Knowing	what	we	do	about
mental	extensions	and	how	they	work,	we	are	now	able	to	assemble	the
conditions	for	intelligence,	even	brilliance.	In	this	book	we’ve	looked	intently	at
one	extension	at	a	time:	interoceptive	signals,	movements,	and	gestures;	natural
spaces,	built	spaces,	and	the	“space	of	ideas”;	experts,	peers,	and	groups.	But
evidence	suggests	that	extensions	are	most	powerful	when	they	are	employed	in
combination,	incorporated	into	mental	routines	that	draw	on	the	full	range	of
extra-neural	resources	we	have	at	hand.
The	skilled	use	of	extensions	is	a	proficiency	that	has	gone	largely
unrecognized	and	uncultivated	by	our	schools	and	workplaces,	and	it	was	long
ignored	by	researchers	in	psychology,	education,	and	management.	But	some
general	principles	of	effective	extending	are	now	clearly	dis
cernible,	implicit	in
the	more	recent	research	we’ve	covered	in	previous	chapters.	Let’s	take	up,	in
turn,	three	sets	of	such	principles—three	lenses	through	which	to	view	the
project	of	extending	the	mind.
The	first	set	of	principles	lays	out	some	habits	of	mind	we	would	do	well	to
adopt,	starting	with	this	one:	whenever	possible,	we	should	
offload
	information,
externalize	it,	move	it	out	of	our	heads	and	into	the	world.	Throughout	this	book
we’ve	encountered	many	examples	of	offloading	and	have	become	familiar	with
its	manifold	benefits.	It	relieves	us	of	the	burden	of	keeping	a	host	of	details	“in
mind,”	thereby	freeing	up	mental	resources	for	more	demanding	tasks,	like
problem	solving	and	idea	generation.	It	also	produces	for	us	the	“detachment
gain,”	whereby	we	can	inspect	with	our	senses,	and	often	perceive	anew,	an
image	or	idea	that	once	existed	only	in	the	imagination.
In	its	most	straightforward	form,	offloading	is	the	simple	act	of	putting	our
thoughts	down	on	paper—simple,	but	often	skipped	over	in	a	world	that	values
--- Page 219 ---
doing	things	in	our	heads.	As	we	learned	from	the	story	of	Charles	Darwin	and
the	ship’s	log	he	kept	on	the	HMS	
Beagle,
	a	habit	of	
continuous
	offloading—
through	the	use	of	a	daily	journal	or	field	notebook—can	extend	our	ability	to
make	fresh	observations	and	synthesize	new	ideas.	And	as	we	saw	in	the
example	of	historian	Robert	Caro,	offloading	information	onto	a	space	that’s	big
enough	for	us	to	
physically
	navigate	(wall-sized	outlines,	oversized	concept
maps,	multiple-monitor	workstations)	allows	us	to	apply	to	that	material	our
powers	of	spatial	reasoning	and	spatial	memory.
Externalizing	information	takes	a	more	involved	form:	it	may	entail	carefully
designing	a	task	such	that	one	part	of	the	task	is	offloaded	even	as	another	part
absorbs	our	full	attention.	This	was	the	practice	adopted	by	law	professor	Monte
Smith,	who	had	his	students	offload	the	task	of	structuring	a	legal	memo	onto	a
model	while	they	focused	their	efforts	on	understanding	and	articulating	their
newly	acquired	knowledge	of	the	law.	Offloading	need	not	require	written
language,	either.	At	times,	offloading	may	be	
embodied:
	when	we	gesture,	for
example,	we	permit	our	hands	to	“hold”	some	of	the	thoughts	we	would
otherwise	have	to	maintain	in	our	head.	Likewise,	when	we	use	our	hands	to
move	objects	around,	we	offload	the	task	of	visualizing	new	configurations	onto
the	world	itself,
	where	those	configurations	take	tangible	shape	before	our	
eyes.
(Picture	an	interior	designer	manipulating	a	model	as	she	tries	out	new	groupings
of	furniture,	for	example,	or	a	Scrabble	player	rearranging	the	tiles	on	his	tray	to
form	new	words.)
At	other	times,	offloading	may	be	
social
:
	we’ve	seen	how	engaging	in
argument	allows	us	to	distribute	among	human	debaters	the	task	of	tallying
points	for	and	against	a	given	proposition;	we’ve	learned	how	constructing	a
transactive	memory	system	offloads	onto	our	colleagues	the	task	of	monitoring
and	remembering	incoming	information.	Offloading	also	occurs	in	an
interpersonal	context	when	we	externalize	“traces”	of	our	own	thinking
processes	for	the	benefit	of	our	teammates;	in	this	case,	we’re	offloading	not	to
unburden	our	own	minds	but	to	facilitate	collaboration	with	others.
Onward	to	the	second	principle:	whenever	possible,	we	should	endeavor	to
transform	information	into	an	artifact,	to	make	data	into	something	
real
—and
then	proceed	to	interact	with	it,	labeling	it,	mapping	it,	feeling	it,	tweaking	it,
showing	it	to	others.	Humans	evolved	to	handle	the	concrete,	not	to	contemplate
the	abstract.	We	extend	our	intelligence	when	we	give	our	minds	something	to
grab	onto:	when	we	experience	a	concept	from	physics	as	a	bicycle	wheel
spinning	in	our	hands,	for	example,	or	when	we	turn	a	foreign	language
vocabulary	word	into	a	gesture	we	can	see	and	sense	and	demonstrate	to	others.
Vague	impressions	of	what	constitutes	“excellent	work”	can	usefully	take	form
--- Page 220 ---
as	a	display	of	actual	models	to	which	to	aspire	(remember	“Austin’s
Butterfly”?);	dry	intellectual	deliberations	can	acquire	a	rooted,	embodied
dimension	when	we	closely	attend	to,	and	label	and	track,	the	internal	signals
that	arise	in	our	bodies.	Our	days	are	now	spent	processing	an	endless	stream	of
symbols;	with	a	bit	of	ingenuity,	we	can	find	ways	to	turn	these	abstract	symbols
into	tangible	objects	and	sensory	experiences,	and	thereby	think	about	them	in
new	ways.
In	a	related	vein,	the	third	principle:	whenever	possible,	we	should	seek	to
productively	alter	
our	own	state
	when	engaging	in	mental	labor.	We’ve
repeatedly	confronted	the	limits	of	the	brain-as-computer	analogy,	and	here	we
come	up	against	perhaps	its	most	conspicuous	flaw.	When	fed	a	chunk	of
information,	a	computer	processes	it	in	the	same	way	on	each	occasion—
whether	it’s	been	at	work	for	five	minutes	or	five	hours,	whether	it’s	located	in	a
fluorescent-lit	office	or	positioned	next	to	a	sunny	window,	whether	it’s	near
other	computers	or	is	the	only	computer	in	
the	room.	This	is	how	computers
operate,	but	the	same	doesn’t	hold	for	human	beings.	The	way	we’re	able	to
think	about	information	is	dramatically	affected	by	the	state	we’re	in	when	we
encounter	it.
Effective	mental	extension,	then,	requires	us	to	think	carefully	about	inducing
in	ourselves	the	state	that	is	best	suited	for	the	task	at	hand.	We	might	engage	in
a	bout	of	brisk	exercise	before	sitting	down	to	learn	something	new,	for
example;	we	might	seek	out	an	opportunity	to	engage	in	group	synchrony	and
shared	physical	arousal	(spicy	food,	anyone?)	when	we’re	expected	to	work
together	as	a	team.	We	might	get	up	from	our	desk	and	get	our	hands	and	bodies
moving	when	we’re	seeking	to	understand	a	spatial	concept;	we	might	plan	a
three-day	trip	into	the	wilderness	when	we’re	in	need	of	a	creative	boost.
Deliberately	altering	our	own	state	could	entail	taking	a	walk	in	a	nearby	park
when	our	frazzled	attention	requires	restoration,	or	seeking	out	a	sparring	partner
with	whom	to	argue	when	we	want	to	make	sure	our	ideas	are	sound.	Instead	of
heedlessly	driving	the	brain	like	a	machine,	we’ll	think	more	intelligently	when
we	treat	it	as	the	context-sensitive	organ	it	is.
The	second	set	of	principles	offers	a	higher-level	view	of	how	mental
extension	works,	in	accordance	with	an	understanding	of	what	the	brain	evolved
to	do.	The	brain	is	well	adapted	to	sensing	and	moving	the	body,	to	navigating
through	physical	space,	and	to	interacting	with	other	members	of	our	species.	On
top	of	this	basic	suite	of	human	competencies,	civilization	has	built	a	vast	edifice
of	abstraction,	engaging	our	brains	in	acts	of	symbolic	processing	and
conceptual	cognition	that	don’t	come	as	naturally.	These	abstractions	have,	of
course,	allowed	us	to	expand	our	powers	exponentially—but	now,	paradoxically,
--- Page 221 ---
further	progress	may	depend	on	running	this	process	in	reverse.	In	order	to
succeed	at	the	increasingly	complex	thinking	modern	life	demands,	we	will	find
ourselves	needing	to	translate	abstractions	
back	into
	the	corporeal,	spatial,	and
social	forms	from	which	they	sprang—forms	with	which	the	brain	is	still	most	at
ease.
We	can	begin	to	understand	what	this	means	by	taking	up	the	fourth	principle:
whenever	possible,	we	should	take	measures	to	
re-embody
	the	information	we
think	about.	The	pursuit	of	knowledge	has	frequently	sought	to	disengage
thinking	from	the	body,	to	elevate	ideas	to	a	cerebral	sphere	separate	from	our
grubby	animal	anatomy.	Research	on	the	extended	mind	counsels	the	opposite
approach:	we	should	be	seeking	to	
draw	the	body	back	into	the	thinking	process.
That	may	take	the	form	of	allowing	our	choices	to	be	influenced	by	our
interoceptive	signals—a	source	of	guidance	we’ve	often	ignored	in	our	focus	on
data-driven	decisions.	It	might	take	the	form	of	enacting,	with	bodily
movements,	the	academic	concepts	that	have	become	abstracted,	detached	from
their	origin	in	the	physical	world.	Or	it	might	take	the	form	of	attending	to	our
own	and	others’	gestures,	tuning	back	in	to	what	was	humanity’s	first	language,
present	long	before	speech.	As	we’ve	seen	from	research	on	embodied
cognition,	at	a	deep	level	the	brain	still	understands	abstract	concepts	in	terms	of
physical	action,	a	fact	reflected	in	the	words	we	use	(“reaching	for	a	goal,”
“running	behind	schedule”);	we	can	assist	the	brain	in	its	efforts	by	bringing	the
literal	body	back	into	the	act	of	thinking.
The	fifth	principle	emphasizes	another	human	strength:	whenever	possible,	we
should	take	measures	to	
re-spatialize
	the	information	we	think	about.	We
inherited	“a	mind	on	the	hoof,”	as	Andy	Clark	puts	it:	a	brain	that	was	built	to
pick	a	path	through	a	landscape	and	to	find	the	way	back	home.	Neuroscientific
research	indicates	that	our	brains	process	and	store	information—even,	or
especially,	abstract	information—in	the	form	of	mental	maps.	We	can	work	in
concert	with	the	brain’s	natural	spatial	orientation	by	placing	the	information	we
encounter	into	expressly	spatial	formats:	creating	memory	palaces,	for	example,
or	designing	concept	maps.	In	the	realm	of	education	research,	experts	now
speak	of	“spatializing	the	curriculum”
—that	is,	simultaneously	drawing	on	and
strengthening	students’	spatial	capacities	by	having	them	employ	spatial
language	and	gestures,	engage	in	sketching	and	mapmaking,	and	learn	to
interpret	and	create	charts,	tables,	and	diagrams.	The	spatialized	curriculum	has
obvious	applications	to	subjects	like	geometry,	but	researchers	report	that
learning	in	a	spatial	mode	can	also	help	students	think	in	more	advanced	ways
about	topics	including	chemistry,	biology,	and	history.	Nor	should	spatial
reasoning	be	restricted	to	schools;	the	workplace	offers	abundant	opportunities
--- Page 222 ---
for	reconceiving	information	in	spatial	terms—terms	that	put	us	back	in	touch
with	our	natural	talent	for	navigation.
The	sixth	principle	rounds	out	the	roster	of	our	innate	aptitudes:	whenever
possible,	we	should	take	measures	to	
re-socialize
	the	information	we	think
about.	We	learned	earlier	in	this	book	that	the	continual	patter	we	carry	on	in	our
heads	is	in	fact	a	kind	of	internalized	conversation.	Likewise,	many	of	the
written	forms	we	encounter	at	school	and	
at	work—from	exams	and	evaluations,
to	profiles	and	case	studies,	to	essays	and	proposals—are	really	social	exchanges
(questions,	stories,	arguments)	put	on	paper	and	addressed	to	some	imagined
listener	or	interlocutor.	As	we’ve	seen,	there	are	significant	advantages	to
turning	such	interactions	at	a	remove	back	into	actual	social	encounters.
Research	we’ve	reviewed	demonstrates	that	the	brain	processes	the	“same”
information	differently,	and	often	more	effectively,	when	other	human	beings
are	involved—whether	we’re	imitating	them,	debating	them,	exchanging	stories
with	them,	synchronizing	and	cooperating	with	them,	teaching	or	being	taught
by	them.	We	are	inherently	social	creatures,	and	our	thinking	benefits	from
bringing	other	people	into	our	train	of	thought.
The	final	set	of	principles	of	mental	extension	steps	back	for	a	still	wider
view,	taking	up	a	rather	profound	question:	What	
kind
	of	creatures	are	we?	We
can’t	design	effective	protocols	for	extension	without	a	nuanced	understanding
of	our	highly	particular,	intriguingly	eccentric	human	nature.	A	clear-eyed
acknowledgment	of	our	quirks	can	lead	us	to	create	new	kinds	of	mental
routines,	such	as	the	one	encapsulated	in	the	seventh	principle:	whenever
possible,	we	should	manage	our	thinking	by	
generating
	
cognitive	loops.
As	Andy	Clark	has	pointed	out,	when	computer	scientists	develop	artificial
intelligence	systems,	they	don’t	design	machines
	that	compute	for	a	while,	print
out	the	results,	inspect	what	they	have	produced,	add	some	marks	in	the	margin,
circulate	copies	among	colleagues,	and	then	start	the	process	again.	That’s	not
how	computers	work—but	it	is	how	
we
	work;	we	are	“intrinsically	loopy
creatures,”	as	Clark	likes	to	say.	Something	about	our	biological	intelligence
benefits	from	being	rotated	in	and	out	of	internal	and	external	modes	of
cognition,	from	being	passed	among	brain,	body,	and	world.	This	means	we
should	resist	the	urge	to	shunt	our	thinking	along	the	linear	path	appropriate	to	a
computer—input,	output,	done—and	instead	allow	it	to	take	a	more	winding
route.
We	can	pass	our	thoughts	through	the	portal	of	our	bodies:	seeking	the	verdict
of	our	interoception,	seeing	what	our	gestures	have	to	show	us,	acting	out	our
ideas	in	movement,	observing	the	inspirations	that	arise	during	or	after	vigorous
exercise.	We	can	spread	out	our	thoughts	in	space,	treating	the	contents	of	the
--- Page 223 ---
mind	as	a	territory	to	be	mapped	and	navigated,	surveyed	and	explored.	And	we
can	run	our	thoughts	through	the	brains	of	the	people	we	know,	gathering	from
the	lot	of	them	
the	insights	no	single	mind	could	generate.	Most	felicitous	of	all,
we	can	loop	our	thoughts	through	all	three	of	these	realms.	What	we	
shouldn’t
do	is	keep	our	thoughts	inside	our	heads,	inert,	unchanged	by	encounters	with
the	world	beyond	the	skull.
We	are	loopy	creatures—and	we	are	also	situationally	sensitive	ones,
responsive	to	the	immediate	conditions	and	circumstances	in	which	we	find
ourselves.	Hence,	the	eighth	principle:	whenever	possible,	we	should	manage
our	thinking	by	
creating	cognitively	congenial	situations.
	We	often	regard	the
brain	as	an	organ	of	awesome	and	almost	unfathomable	power.	But	we’re	also
apt	to	treat	it	with	high-handed	imperiousness,	expecting	it	to	do	our	bidding	as
if	it	were	a	docile	servant.	Pay	attention	to	
this,
	we	tell	it;	remember	
that;
	buckle
down	
now
	and	get	the	job	done.	Alas,	we	often	find	that	the	brain	is	an
unreliable	and	even	impertinent	attendant:	fickle	in	its	focus,	porous	in	its
memory,	and	inconstant	in	its	efforts.	The	problem	lies	in	our	attempt	to
command	it.	We’ll	elicit	improved	performance	from	the	brain	when	we
approach	it	with	the	aim	not	of	issuing	orders	but	of	creating	situations	that	draw
out	the	desired	result.
Instead	of	dictating	to	a	student	the	information	she	needs	to	learn,	for
example,	have	her	explain	it	in	front	of	a	group	of	her	peers;	the	gestures	she
makes	will	generate	a	deeper	level	of	understanding.	Instead	of	handing	an
employee	a	manual	packed	with	guidelines,	create	spaces	and	occasions	where
stories—full	of	the	tacit	knowledge	manuals	can’t	convey—will	be	shared
among	his	co-workers.	Instead	of	instructing	a	team	to	cooperate	and	work
together,	plan	an	event	(a	shared	meal,	a	group	hike,	karaoke!)	where
synchronized	movement	and	mutual	physiological	arousal	are	bound	to	take
place.	The	art	of	creating	intelligence-extending	situations	is	one	that	every
parent,	teacher,	and	manager	needs	to	master.
The	final	principle	of	extension	doubles	back	on	itself	with	a	self-referential
observation.	What	kind	of	creatures	are	we?	The	kind	who	
extend,
	eagerly	and
energetically,	when	given	the	chance.	Consider:	research	from	neuroscience	and
cognitive	psychology	indicates	that	when	we	begin	using	a	tool,	our	“body
schema”—our	sense	of	the	body’s	shape,	size,	and	position—rapidly	expands	to
encompass	it,
	as	if	the	tool	we’re	grasping	in	our	hand	has	effectively	become	an
extension	of	our	arm.	Something	similar	occurs	in	the	case	of	mental	extensions.
As	long	as	extensions	are	available—and	especially	when	they	are	reliably,
persis
tently	available—we	humans	will	incorporate	them	into	our	thinking.
--- Page 224 ---
Accordingly,	the	ninth	principle:	whenever	possible,	we	should	manage	our
thinking	by	
embedding	extensions
	in	our	everyday	environments.
Think	of	the	cues	of	belonging	and	identity,	for	example,	that	bolster	our
motivation	and	improve	our	performance	when	displayed	in	our	study	and	work
spaces.	Recall	the	transactive	memory	system	we	construct	with	a	group	of
colleagues	over	time,	in	which	the	burden	of	attending	to	and	remembering
information	is	distributed	across	group	members.	Picture,	even,	the	indoor	plants
and	“green”	walls	and	roofs	that	help	restore	our	attention	by	providing	regular
glimpses	of	nature.	Once	securely	embedded,	such	extensions	can	function	as
seamless	adjuncts	to	our	neural	capacity,	supporting	and	augmenting	our	ability
to	think	intelligently.
It’s	worth	noting	that	this	principle	bears	a	bias	toward	stability:	enduring	cues
of	belonging	and	identity	are	hard	to	sustain	in	an	office	where	“hot-desking,”	or
unassigned	work	space,	is	the	norm;	a	transactive	memory	system	is	difficult	to
build	in	a	work	environment	where	turnover	is	high	or	team	composition	is
constantly	changing.	In	a	dynamic	and	fast-changing	society	that	celebrates
novelty	and	flexibility,	the	maintenance	and	preservation	of	valued	mental
extensions	also	deserve	our	respect.	We	may	not	know	how	much	they	bolster
our	intelligence	until	they’re	gone.
	
T
HIS	NESTED	SET
	of	principles,	what	we	might	call	a	“curriculum	of	the	extended
mind,”	is	not	currently	taught	in	any	school	or	addressed	in	any	workplace
training.	That	ought	to	change;	learning	to	extend	the	mind	should	be	an	element
of	everyone’s	education.	At	present,	to	the	degree	that	people	know	how	to
extend	their	minds,	it’s	something	they’ve	figured	out	on	their	own.	Strikingly,
we	now	have	evidence	that	individuals	do	differ	in	how	fully	they	have
developed	their	capacity	to	extend.	Furthermore,	scientists	have	found	that	this
competence	can	be	accurately	and	precisely	measured,	using	a	variation	on
conventional	IQ	tests	(which,	in	their	unaltered	form,	deliberately	exclude	all
kinds	of	mental	extensions:	test	takers	are	not	permitted	to	use	tools	such	as
calculators	or	the	Internet,	nor	are	they	allowed	to	move	their	bodies,	rearrange
their	environments,	or	talk	to	their	neighbors).	Most	intriguing,	results	from
these	studies	show	that	skill	at	employing	extensions,	as	assessed	by	a	test,
corresponds	to	real-world	performance:	empirical	evidence	that	individuals	who
can	extend	their	minds	more	fully	can	solve	problems	more	effectively	in
everyday	life.
In	February	2019,	a	group	of	psychologists	from	the	Netherlands—plus
philosopher	Andy	Clark—published	a	study	in	the	journal	
Nature	Human
Behaviour.
	The	researchers	set	out,	they	wrote,	“to	quantitatively	assess
	a
--- Page 225 ---
powerful,	although	understudied,	feature	of	human	intelligence:	our	ability	to
use	external	objects,	props	and	aids	to	solve	complex	problems.”	They	started
with	a	conventional	test	of	intelligence,	the	Raven	Advanced	Progressive
Matrices;	this	IQ	test,	used	millions	of	times	all	over	the	world	since	it	was	first
introduced	in	1938,	presents	users	with	a	series	of	geometric	puzzles,	each	of
which	is	missing	a	piece.	Test	takers	are	asked	to	select,	from	a	number	of
options	provided,	the	piece	that	correctly	completes	each	pattern.	(The	test	is
available	in	a	paper-and-pencil	version,	but	today	it	is	most	often	administered
on	a	computer.)
In	the	standard	version	of	“the	Raven,”	as	it	is	known,	test	takers	are	expected
to	carry	out	the	required	operations	in	their	heads,	imagining	how	each	potential
choice	might	or	might	not	fit.	The	rules	of	the	test	don’t	permit	them	to	extend
their	minds	with	extra-neural	resources;	they	must	rely	on	their	internal
reasoning	processes	alone.	In	the	version	of	the	test	designed	by	Clark	and	his
colleagues,	by	contrast,	test	takers	are	able	to	digitally	manipulate	the	potential
solution	pieces,	moving	them	around	the	screen	to	create	new	configurations.	To
assess	the	validity	of	the	new	test	they	had	created,	the	researchers	recruited	495
students	from	Leiden	University	and	Erasmus	University,	both	located	in	the
Netherlands.	Half	the	students	were	randomly	assigned	to	take	the	conventional
version	of	the	Raven;	the	other	half	were	given	the	extended-mind	variant	of	the
test.	In	the	case	of	that	second	group,	the	researchers	monitored	how	actively	test
takers	engaged	in	manipulating	the	layout	on	the	screen.
A	suggestive	finding	soon	surfaced:	test	takers	who	took	full	advantage	of	the
new	interactive	feature	were	often	able	to	identify	patterns	that	had	not	been
apparent	to	them	before	they	began	shifting	the	pieces	around.	An	analysis	of	the
moves	they	made	while	taking	the	test	showed	that	these	active	extenders
seemed	to	be	running	their	thinking	processes	through	successive	loops—
switching	between	external	actions,	which	altered	the	problem-solving	space	in
helpful	ways,	and	internal	evaluations	
of	the	new	configurations	thus	created.
“Our	study	showed	very	clearly
	the	relationship	between	the	amount	of
interaction	participants	engaged	in	and	how	well	they	solved	the	problems,”	says
Bruno	Bocanegra,	an	assistant	professor	of	psychology	at	Erasmus	University
and	the	lead	author	of	the	paper.	“We	saw	people	interacting	with	the	pieces,
reflecting	on	the	new	configurations,	reassessing	their	strategy,	and	then
reaching	out	to	interact	again.	These	loops	are	what	allowed	them	to	solve	the
problems	effectively.”
Final	results	demonstrated	that	the	more	test	takers	extended	their	minds	using
the	movable	pieces,	the	more	successful	they	were	at	solving	the	complex	visual
puzzles.	What’s	more,	the	researchers	found,	the	extended-mind	version	of	the
test	was	better	than	the	standard	“static”	Raven	at	predicting	students’
--- Page 226 ---
test	was	better	than	the	standard	“static”	Raven	at	predicting	students’
intellectual	performance	outside	the	lab—in	the	form	of	the	grades	they	received
in	their	college	courses.	The	test	that	measured	the	students’	skill	at	mental
extension,	the	authors	wrote,	“might	be	tapping	into	an	additional	behavioral
aspect	of	intelligence	that	is	not	currently	measured”	by	conventional	IQ	tests.
Says	Bruno	Bocanegra:	“People	are	applying	an	underappreciated	wealth	of
strategies	to	solve	problems—underappreciated,	in	part,	because	people	are	not
good	at	describing	their	own	thought	processes.	They	often	don’t	have	conscious
access	to	their	strategies—but	they	are	using	them	nonetheless.	We’re	interested
in	studying	people	over	time	to	see	if	they	can	develop	more	sophisticated
strategies.”
Bocanegra’s	publication	is	just	a	start,	but	it’s	easy	to	envision	a	broad
expansion	of	similar	efforts.	Imagine	a	test	that	would	evaluate	how	well	an
individual	is	able	to	use	interoception,	movement,	and	gesture	to	think;	how
adept	she	is	at	soaking	up	natural	settings,	designing	built	environments,	and
exploiting	the	space	of	ideas	to	enhance	her	cognition;	how	skillfully	she
manages	thinking	with	experts,	thinking	with	peers,	and	thinking	with	groups.
Such	an	assessment	could	represent	a	new	kind	of	IQ	test,	measuring	a	new	sort
of	intelligence.	(“New”	in	the	sense	of	newly	admitted	into	our	society’s
definition	of	smart;	as	we’ve	seen	throughout	this	book,	humans	have	been
extending	their	minds	since	time	immemorial.)
“Much	more	than	we	usually	recognize,	humans	use	their	environment	to
solve	problems—an	environment	that	is	both	material	and	social,”	says
Bocanegra.	“When	you	see	things	that	way,	it	starts	to	seem	
very	silly	to	think
that	we	can	measure	intelligence	as	some	internal,	intrinsic,	individual	quality.”
Of	course,	it’s	possible	that	such	a	test	would	be	misused,	as	IQ	tests	have	so
often	been	misused—employed	to	rank,	divide,	and	exclude	people	instead	of
helping	them	to	develop.	But	such	misuse	need	not	be	inevitable.	Once	we	make
mental	extensions	visible,	what	we	do	with	our	new	awareness	is	up	to	us.
We	might	begin	by	applying	it	to	an	issue	now	roiling	our	society:	America’s
pervasive	inequality,	a	state	of	affairs	that	many	are	finding	ever	less	justifiable
or	tolerable.	Defenders	of	the	status	quo	have	long	argued	that	social	and
economic	inequality	merely	reflects	a	kind	of	organic	inequality,	determined	by
nature,	in	the	talents	and	abilities	with	which	individuals	are	born.	That
argument	appears	less	plausible	when	viewed	through	the	lens	of	the	extended
mind.	If	our	ability	to	think	intelligently	is	shaped	so	profoundly	by	the
availability	of	extra-neural	resources,	how	then	can	we	continue	to	justify	their
extraordinarily	inequitable	distribution?
--- Page 227 ---
In	a	famous	thought	experiment,	the	contemporary	philosopher	John	Rawls
imagined	designing	the	ideal	society—but	doing	so	from	behind	a	“veil	of
ignorance”
	regarding	how	the	designers	themselves	would	fare	in	the	new	world
they	are	creating.	While	engaged	in	deciding	how	society’s	affluence	and
opportunities	are	to	be	distributed,	Rawls	writes,	“no	one	knows	his	place	in
society,	his	class	position	or	social	status,	nor	does	anyone	know	his	fortune	in
the	distribution	of	natural	assets	and	abilities,	his	intelligence,	strength,	and	the
like.”
Intriguing	though	it	is	to	contemplate,	Rawls’s	scenario	has	always	been	hard
to	enter	into	fully—so	closely	are	we	identified	with	what	we	take	to	be	our
“natural	assets	and	abilities,”	our	“intelligence”	foremost	among	them.	The
theory	of	the	extended	mind	is	a	tool	with	which	we	might	begin	to	pry	loose
this	instinctive	identification.	Unlike	innate	intelligence,	which	we	imagine	to	be
an	inseparable	part	of	who	we	“are,”	access	to	mental	extensions	is	more	readily
understood	as	a	matter	of	chance	or	luck.	This	radically	new	conceptual	theory
harbors	within	it	an	old	and	humble	moral	sentiment:	“There	but	for	the	grace	of
God	go	I.”	Acknowledging	the	reality	of	the	extended	mind	might	well	lead	us
to	embrace	the	extended	heart.
--- Page 228 ---
Acknowledgments
The	cognitive	psychologist	Stephen	Kosslyn	has	proposed	a	notion	that	is	a	close
cousin	to	the	theory	of	the	extended	mind:	he	submits	that	one	individual	can
engage	another	as	a	“social	prosthetic.”	As	he	has	written	(with	G.	Wayne
Miller):	“The	crucial	idea	is	that	when	you	are	interacting	with	another	person	in
this	way,	he	or	she	has	the	capacity	to	make	you	more	effective	.	.	.	He	or	she
fills	in	for	your	lack.	And	in	the	process,	at	that	moment	you	become	a	different
person,	transformed	by	your	interactions	with	the	other.”
Two	people	functioned	in	this	way	for	me	during	the	writing	of	this	book:
Tina	Bennett	and	Eamon	Dolan.	At	moments	when	I	doubted	that	I	could	pull
off	this	ambitious	project,	Tina	and	Eamon	filled	in	for	my	lack,	supplying	me
with	all	the	hope	and	confidence	and	inspiration	I	could	want.	Thank	you,	Tina,
and	thank	you,	Eamon.
Many	other	people	worked	hard	to	make	this	book	a	reality.	I’m	grateful	to
the	editorial	and	production	team	at	Houghton	Mifflin	Harcourt:	Deb	Brody,	Ivy
Givens,	Bruce	Nichols	(now	at	Little,	Brown),	and	Beth	Burleigh	Fuller.
Amanda	Heller	provided	a	scrupulous	copyedit.	Mark	Robinson	designed	a
gorgeous	cover.	At	WME,	Jay	Mandel	was	a	sure-footed	guide,	assisted	by	the
extremely	capable	Sian-Ashleigh	Edwards.	Joseph	Hinson	and	his	team	at
Out:think	Group	built	me	a	wonderful	website;	Stephanie	Anestis	cheerfully
took	my	author	photo	on	a	cold	and	windy	New	Haven	day.	Mika	Yamaguchi,	of
Yale	University’s	Department	of	East	Asian	Languages	and	Literatures,	helped
me	with	the	section	on	Radio	Taiso.
During	the	long	period	of	researching	and	writing	this	book,	I	was	fortunate
enough	to	be	supported	by	three	fellowships	granted	by	New	America:	the
Bernard	L.	Schwartz	Fellowship,	the	Future	Tense	Fellowship,	and	the	Learning
Sciences	Exchange	Fellowship	(offered	in	conjunction	with	the	Jacobs
Foundation).	My	sincere	thanks	are	due	to	Anne-Marie	Slaughter,	Lisa
Guernsey,	Andrés	Martinez,	Peter	Bergen,	Awista	Ayub,	Torie	Bosch,	and	Elise
Franchino.	Work	on	this	book	was	also	supported	by	the	Spencer	Foundation.	As
a	recipient	of	the	Spencer	Education	Journalism	Fellowship,	I’m	grateful	to	the
Spencer	Foundation’s	president	emeritus	Michael	McPherson;	to	LynNell
--- Page 229 ---
Spencer	Foundation’s	president	emeritus	Michael	McPherson;	to	LynNell
Hancock	and	Marguerite	Holloway	of	the	Columbia	University	Graduate	School
of	Journalism;	and	to	my	fellow	fellows	Jamaal	Abdul-Alim	and	Lauren	Smith
Camera.	I’d	also	like	to	recognize	my	erstwhile	colleagues	at	the	Poorvu	Center
for	Teaching	and	Learning	at	Yale	University:	Jennifer	Frederick,	Mark	Graham,
Tracie	Addy,	and	Beth	Luoma.
The	content	of	this	book	was	enriched	by	many	conversations	with
researchers,	educators,	writers,	and	editors.	I’m	indebted	to	the	scientists	who
made	time	to	answer	my	questions	about	their	work.	My	deepest	appreciation	as
well	to	a	cadre	of	informal	advisers	who	helped	me	think	through	the	issues
explored	in	this	book:	Paul	Bloom,	David	Daniel,	David	Dockterman,	Dan
Willingham,	and	Carl	Zimmer.	I’d	also	like	to	acknowledge	the	insights	gleaned
from	interactions	with	Mahzarin	Banaji,	Tina	Barseghian,	Emily	Bazelon,	Ulrich
Boser,	Bill	Brown,	Adam	Cohen,	Nicky	Dawidoff,	Jacob	Hacker,	Jake	Halpern,
Carla	Horwitz,	Scott	Barry	Kaufman,	Holly	Korbey,	Doug	Lemov,	Steve
Levingston,	Daniel	Markovits,	Kyle	Pedersen,	Robert	Pondiscio,	Jessica	Sager,
Jason	Stanley,	Bror	Saxberg,	Liz	Taylor,	Greg	Toppo,	Liz	Willen,	and	Aubrey
White.
Several	friends	were	kind	enough	to	read	the	manuscript	of	this	book	and
offer	their	comments:	Kathryn	Bowers,	Ben	Dattner,	Mark	Oppenheimer,
Wendy	Paris,	Gretchen	Rubin,	and	Amy	Sudmyer.	Other	friends	offered	much-
appreciated	moral	support:	Victor	Agran	and	Cassandra	Albinson,	Suzie
Alderman,	Sarah	Bilston,	Jenny	Brown	and	James	Feighny,	Alison	Burns,	Andy,
Emma,	and	Jack	Bowers,	Susie	Cain,	Julie	Cooper,	Lisa	Damour,	Rachel	Doft,
Emily	Gordon,	Marla	Geha	and	Matt	Polly,	Alison	Illick,	Jessica	Kaufman,
Chris	Kenneally,	Oz	Kus,	Nadya	Labi,	Marguerite	Lamb,	Alison	MacKeen	and
Scott	Shapiro,	Michele	Orecklin,	Pamela	Paul,	Eeva	Pelkonen	and	Turner
Brooks,	Dan	Perkins,	Emily	Rubin,	
Emma	Seppälä,	Katherine	Stewart,	Bob
Sullivan,	Shel	Swanson,	Bron	Tamulis,	Abby	Tucker,	Jenny	Watts	and	the
Deverells	(Bill,	John,	Helen,	Linus,	Petal,	and	Biggie),	Karen	Wynn,	and	Grace
Zimmer.
For	more	than	fifteen	years	the	Invisible	Institute—a	writers’	group	I	started
with	Alissa	Quart—has	provided	invaluable	advice	and	enjoyable	camaraderie.
My	warm	thanks	go	to	those	members	already	mentioned	and	to	Gary	Bass,
Susan	Burton,	Ada	Calhoun,	KJ	Dell’Antonia,	Lydia	Denworth,	Elizabeth
Devita-Raeburn,	Rebecca	Donner,	Abby	Ellin,	Randi	Epstein,	Sheri	Fink,
Lindsay	Gellman,	Anya	Kamenetz,	Reem	Kassis,	Maria	Konnikova,	Brendan
Koerner,	Jess	Lahey,	Katherine	Lanpher,	Ron	Lieber,	Judith	Matloff,	Katie
Orenstein,	Kaja	Perina,	Andrea	Peterson,	Mary	Pilon,	Josh	Prager,	Paul
Raeburn,	Alexander	Russo,	Catherine	St.	Louis,	Debbie	Stier,	Maia	Szalavitz,
Lauren	Sandler,	Debbie	Siegel,	Rebecca	Skloot,	Stacy	Sullivan,	Harriet
--- Page 230 ---
Lauren	Sandler,	Debbie	Siegel,	Rebecca	Skloot,	Stacy	Sullivan,	Harriet
Washington,	and	Tom	Zoellner.
Closer	to	home,	I’m	deeply	grateful	for	the	support	and	insight	of	Miryam
Welbourne;	the	calm	presence	and	good	humor	of	Darcy	Chase;	and	the	devoted
fathering	of	my	co-parent,	John	Witt.	I	honor	the	work	of	my	children’s
teachers:	at	the	Calvin	Hill	Day	Care	Center	and	Kitty	Lustman-Findling
Kindergarten,	the	Foote	School,	and	Hopkins	School.	Finally,	I	give	thanks	for
my	family:	my	mother,	Nancy	Paul;	the	memory	of	my	father,	Tim	Paul;	my
sister,	Sally	Paul;	Sally’s	partner,	Billy	Fowks;	and	their	son,	Frankie	Fowks.
And	to	my	beloved	sons,	Teddy	Witt	and	Gus	Witt:	more	than	anyone	else,
you	two	have	led	me	to	become	a	different	person—transformed,	in	the	best
way,	by	my	interactions	with	you.
--- Page 231 ---
Notes
--- Page 232 ---
PROLOGUE
“How	quickly	we	guess”:
	Friedrich	Nietzsche,	quoted	in	Frédéric	Gros,	
A
Philosophy	of	Walking,
	trans.	John	Howe	(London:	Verso,	2014),	19.
“Think	of	the	scribe’s	body”:
	Gros,	
A	Philosophy	of	Walking,
	19.
“the	walking	body”:
	Gros,	
A	Philosophy	of	Walking,
	19.
“sit	as	little	as	possible”:
	Friedrich	Nietzsche,	quoted	in	Gros,	
A	Philosophy	of
Walking,
	11.
“retains	and	expresses”:
	Gros,	
A	Philosophy	of	Walking,
	20.
“I	did	the	best	thinking”:
	Daniel	Kahneman,	
Thinking,	Fast	and	Slow
	(New
York:	Farrar,	Straus	and	Giroux,	2011),	40.
“brain	in	a	vat”:
	Evan	Thompson	and	Diego	Cosmelli,	“Brain	in	a	Vat	or	Body
in	a	World?	Brainbound	Versus	Enactive	Views	of	Experience,”
Philosophical	Topics
	39	(Spring	2011):	163–80.
“Where	does	the	mind	stop”:
	Andy	Clark	and	David	Chalmers,	“The	Extended
Mind,”	
Analysis
	58	(January	1998):	7–19.	The	phrase	“extended	mind”	was
originally	proposed	by	David	Chalmers.
Ned	Block	likes	to	say:
	Cited	in	David	J.	Chalmers,	“Extended	Cognition	and
Extended	Consciousness,”	in	
Andy	Clark	and	His	Critics,
	ed.	Matteo
Colombo,	Elizabeth	Irvine,	and	Mog	Stapleton	(New	York:	Oxford	University
Press,	2019),	12.
“What	about	socially	extended	cognition?”:
	Clark	and	Chalmers,	“The
Extended	Mind.”
“an	important	role”:
	Andy	Clark,	
Supersizing	the	Mind:	Embodiment,	Action,
and	Cognitive	Extension
	(New	York:	Oxford	University	Press,	2011),	131.
“designer	environments”:
	Andy	Clark,	“Embodied,	Situated,	and	Distributed
Cognition,”	in	
A	Companion	to	Cognitive	Science,
	ed.	William	Bechtel	and
George	Graham	(Malden,	MA:	Blackwell	Publishing,	1998),	510.
the	“brainbound”	perspective:
	Clark,	
Supersizing	the	Mind,
	xxv.
“quest	for	a	different	light”:
	Gros,	
A	Philosophy	of	Walking,
	19.
INTRODUCTION:	THINKING	OUTSIDE	THE	BRAIN
“the	most	complex	structure”:
	Alexis	Madrigal,	“Mapping	the	Most	Complex
Structure	in	the	Universe:	Your	Brain,”	
Wired,
	January	24,	2000.
“the	will	trying	to	do	the	work”:
	William	Butler	Yeats,	“Emotion	of	Multitude,”
in	
The	Collected	Works	of	W.	B.	Yeats,
	vol.	4,	
Early	Essays,
	ed.	George
Bernstein	and	Richard	J.	Finneran	(New	York:	Scribner,	2007),	159.
“By	my	faith!”:
	Molière	[Jean-Baptiste	Poquelin],	
The	Middle	Class	Gentleman,
trans.	Philip	Dwight	Jones,	act	2,	posted	on	the	website	of	Project	Gutenberg,
--- Page 233 ---
https://www.gutenberg.org/files/2992/2992-h/2992-h.htm
.
“neurocentric	bias”:
	Andy	Clark,	
Natural-Born	Cyborgs:	Minds,	Technologies,
and	the	Future	of	Human	Intelligence
	(New	York:	Oxford	University	Press,
2003),	4–5.
“I	used	to	think”:
	Emo	Philips,	
Emo	Philips	Live!	At	the	Hasty	Pudding	Theatre
(New	York:	HBO	Video,	1987).
Electronic	Numerical	Integrator	and	Computer:
	My	discussion	of	the	ENIAC
draws	on	the	following	sources:	Thomas	Haigh,	Mark	Priestley,	and	Crispin
Rope,	
ENIAC	in	Action:	Making	and	Remaking	the	Modern	Computer
(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	2016);	Scott	McCartney,	
ENIAC:	The	Triumphs	and
Tragedies	of	the	World’s	First	Computer
	(New	York:	Walker	Publishing,
1999);	Jean	Jennings	Bartik,	
Pioneer	Programmer:	Jean	Jennings	Bartik	and
the	Computer	That	Changed	the	World
	(Kirksville,	MO:	Truman	State
University	Press,	2013);	Walter	Isaacson,	
The	Innovators:	How	a	Group	of
Hackers,	Geniuses,	and	Geeks	Created	the	Digital	Revolution
	(New	York:
Simon	&	Schuster,	2014);	Annie	Jacobsen,	
The	Pentagon’s	Brain:	An
Uncensored	History	of	DARPA
	(New	York:	Little,	Brown,	2015);	C.	Dianne
Martin,	“ENIAC:	The	Press	Conference	That	Shook	the	World,”	
IEEE
Technology	and	Society	Magazine,
	December	1995;	Steven	Levy,	“The	Brief
History	of	the	ENIAC	Computer,”	
Smithsonian	Magazine,
	November	2013;
David	K.	Allison,	“Using	the	Computer:	Episodes	Across	50	Years,”	paper
presented	at	the	24th	Annual	ACM	Computer	Science	Conference,	February
1996;	T.	R.	Kennedy,	“Electronic	Computer	Flashes	Answers,	May	Speed
Engineering,”	
New	York	Times,
	February	14,	1946;	National	Museum	of
American	History,	“ENIAC	Accumulator	#2,”	post	on	the	website	of	NMAH,
https://americanhistory.si.edu/collections/search/object/nmah_334742
;	Penn
Engineering,	“ENIAC	at	Penn	Engineering,”	post	on	the	website	of	the
University	of	Pennsylvania,	
https://www.seas.upenn.edu/about/history-
heritage/eniac/
.
“if	made	to	take	place”:
	Kennedy,	“Electronic	Computer	Flashes	Answers,	May
Speed	Engineering.”
“It	was	unheard	of”:
	Bartik,	
Pioneer	Programmer,
	25.
“One	of	the	war’s	top	secrets”:
	Kennedy,	“Electronic	Computer	Flashes
Answers,	May	Speed	Engineering.”
compared	to	a	human	brain:
	C.	Dianne	Martin,	“Digital	Dreams:	Public
Perceptions	About	Computers,”	
ACM	Inroads
	4	(September	2013):	34–35.
“giant	electronic	brain”:
	Cited	in	Haigh,	Priestley,	and	Rope,	
ENIAC	in	Action.
“robot	brain”:
	Cited	in	C.	Dianne	Martin,	“The	Myth	of	the	Awesome	Thinking
Machine,”	
Communications	of	the	ACM
	36	(April	1993):	120–33.
--- Page 234 ---
“took	seriously	the	idea”:
	Steven	Sloman	and	Philip	Fernbach,	
The	Knowledge
Illusion:	Why	We	Never	Think	Alone
	(New	York:	Riverhead	Books,	2017),
24–25.
“New	Research	Shows”:
	Lisa	S.	Blackwell,	“Psychological	Mediators	of
Student	
Achievement	During	the	Transition	to	Junior	High	School:	The	Role
of	Implicit	Theories”	(PhD	diss.,	Columbia	University,	2002).
“the	incremental	theory”:
	Lisa	S.	Blackwell,	Kali	H.	Trzesniewski,	and	Carol
Sorich	Dweck,	“Implicit	Theories	of	Intelligence	Predict	Achievement	Across
an	Adolescent	Transition:	A	Longitudinal	Study	and	an	Intervention,”	
Child
Development
	78	(January–February	2007):	246–63.
“growth	mindset”:
	Carol	S.	Dweck,	
Mindset:	The	New	Psychology	of	Success
(New	York:	Random	House,	2006),	7.
“The	key	message”:
	Blackwell,	Trzesniewski,	and	Dweck,	“Implicit	Theories	of
Intelligence	Predict	Achievement	Across	an	Adolescent	Transition.”
“perseverance	and	passion”:
	Angela	L.	Duckworth,	Christopher	Peterson,
Michael	D.	Matthews,	and	Dennis	R.	Kelly,	“Grit:	Perseverance	and	Passion
for	Long-Term	Goals,”	
Journal	of	Personality	and	Social	Psychology
	92
(June	2007):	1087–1101.
“Like	a	muscle”:
	Angela	Duckworth,	
Grit:	The	Power	of	Passion	and
Perseverance
	(New	York:	Scribner,	2016),	192.
“neuromyths”:
	Elena	Pasquinelli,	“Neuromyths:	Why	Do	They	Exist	and
Persist?,”	
Mind,	Brain,	and	Education
	6	(May	2012):	89–96.
likened	to	machines:
	Matthew	Cobb,	
The	Idea	of	the	Brain:	The	Past	and	Future
of	Neuroscience
	(New	York:	Basic	Books,	2020).
“Because	we	do	not	understand”:
	John	R.	Searle,	
Minds,	Brains	and	Science
(Cambridge:	Harvard	University	Press,	1984),	44.
“What	do	we	do”:
	John	Harvey	Kellogg,	
First	Book	in	Physiology	and	Hygiene
(New	York:	Harper	&	Brothers,	1888),	106.
“the	oldest	issues”:
	Stephen	Jay	Gould,	
The	Mismeasure	of	Man
	(New	York:	W.
W.	Norton,	1996),	27.
“Essentialism	shows	up”:
	Paul	Bloom,	
Descartes’	Baby:	How	the	Science	of
Child	Development	Explains	What	Makes	Us	Human
	(New	York:	Norton,
2004),	48.
a	power	outage:
	Park	Sae-jin,	“Power	Firm	Seeks	Every	Method	to	Keep
Magpies	Off	Power	Poles,”	
Aju	Business	Daily,
	July	3,	2018.
“biologically	primary”:
	David	C.	Geary,	“Reflections	of	Evolution	and	Culture
in	Children’s	Cognition:	Implications	for	Mathematical	Development	and
Instruction,”	
American	Psychologist
	50	(January	1995):	24–37.
--- Page 235 ---
a	century-long	climb:
	James	R.	Flynn,	“Massive	IQ	Gains	in	14	Nations:	What
IQ	Tests	Really	Measure,”	
Psychological	Bulletin
	101	(March	1987):	171–91.
scores	have	stopped	rising:
	James	R.	Flynn	and	Michael	Shayer,	“IQ	Decline
and	Piaget:	Does	the	Rot	Start	at	the	Top?,”	
Intelligence
	66	(January	2018):
112–21.
“our	brains	are	already	working”:
	Nicholas	S.	Fitz	and	Peter	B.	Reiner,	“Time
to	Expand	the	Mind,”	
Nature
	531	(March	2016):	S9.
Lumosity	alone	claims:
	Lumos	Labs,	“Press	Resources,”
https://www.lumosity.com/en/resources/
.
little	more	than	disappointment:
	Bobby	Stojanoski	et	al.,	“Targeted	Training:
Converging	Evidence	Against	the	Transferable	Benefits	of	Online	Brain
Training	on	Cognitive	Function,”	
Neuropsychologia
	117	(August	2018):	541–
50.
“little	evidence”:
	Daniel	J.	Simons	et	al.,	“Do	‘Brain-Training’	Programs
Work?,”	
Psychological	Science	in	the	Public	Interest
	17	(October	2016):	103–
86.
“is	rare,	or	possibly	inexistent”:
	N.	Deniz	Aksayli,	Giovanni	Sala,	and	Fernand
Gobet,	
“The	Cognitive	and	Academic	Benefits	of	Cogmed:	A	Meta-
Analysis,”	
Educational	Research	Review
	27	(June	2019):	229–43.
“appears	to	have	no	benefits”:
	Joseph	W.	Kable	et	al.,	“No	Effect	of
Commercial	Cognitive	Training	on	Brain	Activity,	Choice	Behavior,	or
Cognitive	Performance,”	
Journal	of	Neuroscience
	37	(August	2017):	7390–
402.
reported	for	older	individuals:
	Giovanni	Sala	et	al.,	“Working	Memory	Training
Does	Not	Enhance	Older	Adults’	Cognitive	Skills:	A	Comprehensive	Meta-
Analysis,”	
Intelligence
	77	(November–December	2019):	1–13.
a	$2	million	fine:
	Federal	Trade	Commission,	“Lumosity	to	Pay	$2	Million	to
Settle	FTC	Deceptive	Advertising	Charges	for	Its	‘Brain	Training’	Program,”
press	release	posted	on	the	FTC	website,	January	5,	2016,
https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2016/01/lumosity-pay-2-
million-settle-ftc-deceptive-advertising-charges
.
haven’t	fared	much	better:
	Masud	Husain	and	Mitul	A	Mehta,	“Cognitive
Enhancement	by	Drugs	in	Health	and	Disease,”	
Trends	in	Cognitive	Sciences
15	(January	2011):	28–36.
one	“nootropic”	drug:
	Christina	Farr,	“This	Start-Up	Raised	Millions	to	Sell
‘Brain	Hacking’	Pills,	but	Its	Own	Study	Found	Coffee	Works	Better,”
CNBC,	November	30,	2017.
actually	enhance	intelligence:
	Martha	J.	Farah,	“The	Unknowns	of	Cognitive
Enhancement:	Can	Science	and	Policy	Catch	Up	with	Practice?,”	
Science
	350
--- Page 236 ---
(October	2015),	379–80.
left	his	laptop:
	Andy	Clark	interviewed	by	Natasha	Mitchell,	“Natural	Born
Cyborgs:	Minds,	Technologies,	and	the	Future	of	Human	Intelligence,”	
All	in
the	Mind,
	Australian	Broadcasting	Company,	May	18,	2003.
“like	a	sudden	and	somewhat	vicious”:
	Clark,	
Natural-Born	Cyborgs,
	4,	10.
“Where	does	the	mind”:
	Clark	and	Chalmers,	“The	Extended	Mind.”
three	other	journals:
	Julian	Baggini,	“A	Piece	of	iMe:	An	Interview	with	David
Chalmers,”	
The	Philosophers’	Magazine,
	2008.
“10,000	hours”:
	K.	Anders	Ericsson,	Ralf	T.	Krampe,	and	Clemens	Tesch-
Römer,	“The	Role	of	Deliberate	Practice	in	the	Acquisition	of	Expert
Performance,”	
Psychological	Review
	100	(July	1993):	363–406.
economy,	efficiency,	and	optimality:
	Paul	P.	Maglio,	Michael	J.	Wenger,	and
Angelina	M.	Copeland,	“The	Benefits	of	Epistemic	Action	Outweigh	the
Costs,”	paper	presented	at	the	25th	Annual	Conference	of	the	Cognitive
Science	Society,	July–August	2003.
1.	THINKING	WITH	SENSATIONS
working	as	a	financial	trader:
	John	Coates,	
The	Hour	Between	Dog	and	Wolf:
Risk	Taking,	Gut	Feelings,	and	the	Biology	of	Boom	and	Bust
	(New	York:
Penguin	Press,	2012),	119,	98.	My	discussion	of	John	Coates’s	years	on	Wall
Street	is	drawn	from	this	source.
a	group	of	financial	traders:
	Narayanan	Kandasamy	et	al.,	“Interoceptive	Ability
Predicts	Survival	on	a	London	Trading	Floor,”	
Scientific	Reports
	6
(September	2016).
awareness	of	the	inner	state:
	For	an	overview,	see	A.	D.	(Bud)	Craig,
“Interoception:	The	Sense	of	the	Physiological	Condition	of	the	Body,”
Current	Opinion	in	Neurobiology
	13	(August	2003):	500–505.
feel	them	more	keenly:
	Vivien	Ainley	et	al.,	“
 
‘Bodily	Precision’:	A	Predictive
Coding	
Account	of	Individual	Differences	in	Interoceptive	Accuracy,”
Philosophical	Transactions	of	the	Royal	Society	B:	Biological	Sciences
	371
(November	2016).
heartbeat	detection	test:
	Sarah	N.	Garfinkel	et	al.,	“Knowing	Your	Own	Heart:
Distinguishing	Interoceptive	Accuracy	from	Interoceptive	Awareness,”
Biological	Psychology
	104	(January	2015):	65–74.
“How	on	earth”:
	Vivien	Ainley,	quoted	in	Jyoti	Madhusoodanan,	“Inner
Selfie,”	
Science	Notes
	(2014).
“He	had	always	been	able”:
	Author	interview	with	Vivien	Ainley.
visible	to	scientists:
	Hugo	D.	Critchley	et	al.,	“Neural	Systems	Supporting
Interoceptive	Awareness,”	
Nature	Neuroscience
	7	(January	2004):	189–95.
--- Page 237 ---
See	also	A.	D.	Craig,	“Human	Feelings:	Why	Are	Some	More	Aware	Than
Others?,”	
Trends	in	Cognitive	Science
	8	(June	2004):	239–41.
interoceptive	capacities	already	operating:
	Jennifer	Murphy	et	al.,
“Interoception	and	Psychopathology:	A	Developmental	Neuroscience
Perspective,”	
Developmental	Cognitive	Neuroscience
	23	(February	2017):	45–
56.
Differences	in	sensitivity:
	Jennifer	Murphy	et	al.,	“Estimating	the	Stability	of
Heartbeat	Counting	in	Middle	Childhood:	A	Twin	Study,”	
Biological
Psychology
	148	(November	2019).	See	also	Kristina	Oldroyd,	Monisha
Pasupathi,	and	Cecilia	Wainryb,	“Social	Antecedents	to	the	Development	of
Interoception:	Attachment	Related	Processes	Are	Associated	with
Interoception,”	
Frontiers	in	Psychology
	10	(April	2019).
communications	we	receive:
	A.	D.	(Bud)	Craig,	
How	Do	You	Feel?:	An
Interoceptive	Moment	with	Your	Neurobiological	Self
	(Princeton:	Princeton
University	Press,	2014),	7–8.
this	process	in	microcosm:
	Pawel	Lewicki,	Maria	Czyzewska,	and	Hunter
Hoffman,	“Unconscious	Acquisition	of	Complex	Procedural	Knowledge,”
Journal	of	Experimental	Psychology:	Learning,	Memory,	and	Cognition
	13
(1987):	523–30.
“Nonconscious	information	acquisition”:
	Pawel	Lewicki,	Thomas	Hill,	and
Maria	Czyzewska,	“Nonconscious	Acquisition	of	Information,”	
American
Psychologist
	47	(June	1992):	796–801.
scrolling	through	our	mental	archive:
	Moshe	Bar,	“The	Proactive	Brain:
Memory	for	Predictions,”	
Philosophical	Transactions	of	the	Royal	Society	B:
Biological	Sciences
	364	(May	2009):	1235–43.
“The	human	cognitive	system”:
	Lewicki,	Hill,	and	Czyzewska,	“Nonconscious
Acquisition	of	Information.”
“somatic	rudder”:
	Guy	Claxton,	“Corporal	Thinking,”	
Chronicle	of	Higher
Education
	62	(September	2015):	19.
a	gambling	game:
	Antoine	Bechara	et	al.,	“Deciding	Advantageously	Before
Knowing	the	Advantageous	Strategy,”	
Science
	275	(1997):	1293–95.	See	also
Tasha	Poppa	and	Antoine	Bechara,	“The	Somatic	Marker	Hypothesis:
Revisiting	the	Role	of	the	‘Body-Loop’	in	Decision-Making,”	
Current
Opinion	in	Behavioral	Sciences
	19	(February	2018):	61–66.
more	interoceptively	aware:
	Natalie	S.	Werner	et	al.,	“Enhanced	Cardiac
Perception	Is	Associated	with	Benefits	in	Decision-Making,”
Psychophysiology
	46	(November	2009):	1123–29.	See	also	Barnaby	D.	Dunn
et	al.,	“Listening	to	Your	Heart:	How	Interoception	Shapes	Emotion
--- Page 238 ---
Experience	and	Intuitive	Decision	Making,”	
Psychological	Science
	21
(December	2010):	1835–44.
shows	us	something	important:
	Antonio	R.	Damasio,	
Descartes’	Error
	(New
York:	G.	P.	Putnam’s	Sons,	1994),	165–204.
Mindfulness	meditation:
	Dana	Fischer,	Matthias	Messner,	and	Olga	Pollatos,
“Improvement	of	Interoceptive	Processes	After	an	8-Week	Body	Scan
Intervention,”	
Frontiers	in	Human	Neuroscience
	11	(September	2017).	See
also	Bethany	E.	Kok	and	Tania	Singer,	“Phenomenological	Fingerprints	of
Four	Meditations:	Differential	State	Changes	in	Affect,	Mind-Wandering,
Meta-Cognition,	and	Interoception	Before	and	After	Daily	Practice	Across	9
Months	of	Training,”	
Mindfulness
	8	(August	2017):	218–31.
alter	the	size	and	activity:
	Paul	B.	Sharp	et	al.,	“Mindfulness	Training	Induces
Structural	Connectome	Changes	in	Insula	Networks,”	
Scientific	Reports
	8
(May	2018).	See	also	Norman	A.	S.	Farb,	Zindel	V.	Segal,	and	Adam	K.
Anderson,	“Mindfulness	Meditation	Training	Alters	Cortical	Representations
of	Interoceptive	Attention,”	
Social	Cognitive	and	Affective	Neuroscience
	8
(January	2013):	15–26.
“People	find	the	body	scan”:
	Jon	Kabat-Zinn,	
Full	Catastrophe	Living:	Using
the	Wisdom	of	Your	Body	and	Mind	to	Face	Stress,	Pain,	and	Illness
	(New
York:	Bantam	Books,	2013),	88,	95–97.
a	profound	effect:
	Matthew	D.	Lieberman	et	al.,	“Subjective	Responses	to
Emotional	Stimuli	During	Labeling,	Reappraisal,	and	Distraction,”	
Emotion
11	(June	2011):	468–80.
a	series	of	impromptu	speeches:
	Andrea	N.	Niles	et	al.,	“Affect	Labeling
Enhances	Exposure	Effectiveness	for	Public	Speaking	Anxiety,”	
Behaviour
Research	and	Therapy
	68	(May	2015):	27–36.
reduces	activity	in	the	amygdala:
	Uwe	Herwig	et	al.,	“Self-Related	Awareness
and	Emotion	Regulation,”	
Neuroimage
	50	(April	2010):	734–41.	See	also
Matthew	D.	Lie
berman	et	al.,	“Putting	Feelings	into	Words:	Affect	Labeling
Disrupts	Amygdala	Activity	in	Response	to	Affective	Stimuli,”	
Psychological
Science
	18	(May	2007):	421–28.
produces
	greater	
activity:
	Herwig	et	al.,	“Self-Related	Awareness	and	Emotion
Regulation.”
a	larger	number	of	terms:
	Niles	et	al.,	“Affect	Labeling	Enhances	Exposure
Effectiveness	for	Public	Speaking	Anxiety.”
as
	granular	
as	possible:
	Todd	B.	Kashdan,	Lisa	Feldman	Barrett,	and	Patrick	E.
McKnight,	“Unpacking	Emotion	Differentiation:	Transforming	Unpleasant
Experience	by	Perceiving	Distinctions	in	Negativity,”	
Current	Directions	in
Psychological	Science
	24	(February	2015):	10–16.
--- Page 239 ---
making	sounder	decisions:
	Jeremy	A.	Yip	et	al.,	“Follow	Your	Gut?	Emotional
Intelligence	Moderates	the	Association	Between	Physiologically	Measured
Somatic	Markers	and	Risk-Taking,”	
Emotion
	20	(April	2019):	462–72.
acting	less	impulsively:
	Aleksandra	Herman	et	al.,	“Interoceptive	Accuracy
Predicts	Nonplanning	Trait	Impulsivity,”	
Psychophysiology
	56	(June	2019).
decline	low	offers:
	Gary	E.	Bolton	and	Rami	Zwick,	“Anonymity	Versus
Punishment	in	Ultimatum	Bargaining,”	
Games	and	Economic	Behavior
	10
(July	1995):	95–121.
scanned	the	brains:
	Ulrich	Kirk,	Jonathan	Downar,	and	P.	Read	Montague,
“Interoception	Drives	Increased	Rational	Decision-Making	in	Meditators
Playing	the	Ultimatum	Game,”	
Frontiers	in	Neuroscience
	5	(April	2011).
“in	this	study,	we	identified”:
	Kirk,	Downar,	and	Montague,	“Interoception
Drives	Increased	Rational	Decision-Making	in	Meditators	Playing	the
Ultimatum	Game.”
popularized	by	psychologist:
	Kahneman,	
Thinking,	Fast	and	Slow.
a	series	of	interviews:
	Mark	Fenton-O’Creevy	et	al.,	“Thinking,	Feeling	and
Deciding:	The	Influence	of	Emotions	on	the	Decision	Making	and
Performance	of	Traders,”	
Journal	of	Organizational	Behavior
	32	(November
2011):	1044–61.	See	also	Mark	Fenton-O’Creevy,	“
 
‘The	Heart	Has	Its
Reasons’:	Emotions	and	Cognition	in	the	World	of	Finance,”	
Financial
World,
	February	2015.
“You	have	to	trust”:
	Financial	trader,	quoted	in	Shalini	Vohra	and	Mark	Fenton-
O’Creevy,	“Intuition,	Expertise	and	Emotion	in	the	Decision	Making	of
Investment	Bank	Traders,”	in	
Handbook	of	Research	Methods	on	Intuition,
ed.	Marta	Sinclair	(Northampton:	Edward	Elgar	Publishing,	2014),	88–98.
in	that	moment:
	Mark	Fenton-O’Creevy	et	al.,	“Emotion	Regulation	and	Trader
Expertise:	Heart	Rate	Variability	on	the	Trading	Floor,”	
Journal	of
Neuroscience,	Psychology,	and	Economics
	5	(November	2012):	227–37.
fast-paced	decisions:
	Vohra	and	Fenton-O’Creevy,	“Intuition,	Expertise	and
Emotion	in	the	Decision	Making	of	Investment	Bank	Traders.”
“De-biasing	approaches”:
	Mark	Fenton-O’Creevy	et	al.,	“A	Learning	Design	to
Support	the	Emotion	Regulation	of	Investors,”	paper	presented	at	the	OECD-
SEBI	International	Conference	on	Investor	Education,	February	2012.
a	specially	designed	video	game:
	Mark	Fenton-O’Creevy	et	al.,	“A	Game	Based
Approach	to	Improve	Traders’	Decision	Making,”	paper	presented	at	the
International	Gamification	for	Business	Conference,	September	2015.	See
also	Gilbert	Peffer	et	al.,	“xDelia	Final	Report:	Emotion-Centred	Financial
Decision	Making	and	Learning,”	report	produced	by	Open	University,
January	2012.
--- Page 240 ---
“interoceptive	learning”:
	Sahib	S.	Khalsa	et	al.,	“Interoception	and	Mental
Health:	A	Roadmap,”	
Biological	Psychiatry:	Cognitive	Neuroscience	and
Neuroimaging
	3	(June	2018):	501–13.
“éminence	grise”:
	Coates,	
The	Hour	Between	Dog	and	Wolf,
	53.
scarce,	precious	energy:
	For	an	overview,	see	Lisa	Feldman	Barrett,	
How
Emotions	Are	Made:	The	Secret	Life	of	the	Brain
	(New	York:	Houghton
Mifflin	Harcourt,	2017),	56–83.
monitor	and	manage:
	Johann	D.	Kruschwitz	et	al.,	“Self-Control	Is	Linked	to
Interoceptive	Inference:	Craving	Regulation	and	the	Prediction	of	Aversive
Interoceptive	States	Induced	with	Inspiratory	Breathing	Load,”	
Cognition
	193
(December	2019).	See	also	Hayley	A.	Young	et	al.,	“Interoceptive	Accuracy
Moderates	the	Response	to	a	Glucose	Load:	A	Test	of	the	Predictive	Coding
Framework,”	
Proceedings	of	the	Royal	Society	B:	Biological	Sciences
	286
(March	2019).
In	a	study	he	conducted:
	Lori	Haase	et	al.,	“When	the	Brain	Does	Not
Adequately	Feel	the	Body:	Links	Between	Low	Resilience	and	Interoception,”
Biological	Psychology
	113	(January	2016):	37–45.
a	list	of	statements:
	Kathryn	M.	Connor	and	Jonathan	R.	T.	Davidson,
“Development	of	a	New	Resilience	Scale:	The	Connor-Davidson	Resilience
Scale	(CD-RISC),”	
Depression	and	Anxiety
	(September	2003):	76–82.
champion	swimmer:
	Diana	Nyad,	
Find	a	Way
	(New	York:	Alfred	A.	Knopf,
2015),	223–24.	See	also	Ariel	Levy,	“Breaking	the	Waves,”	
The	New	Yorker,
February	3,	2014.
“Of	course	I’m	competitive”:
	Nyad,	
Find	a	Way,
	224.
“Clumped	at	the	bottom”:
	Nyad,	
Find	a	Way,
	224.
found	the	same	pattern:
	Martin	P.	Paulus	et	al.,	“Subjecting	Elite	Athletes	to
Inspiratory	Breathing	Load	Reveals	Behavioral	and	Neural	Signatures	of
Optimal	Perform
ers	in	Extreme	Environments,”	
PLoS	One
	7	(January	2012).
See	also	Alan	Simmons	et	al.,	“Altered	Insula	Activation	in	Anticipation	of
Changing	Emotional	States:	Neural	Mechanisms	Underlying	Cognitive
Flexibility	in	Special	Operations	Forces	Personnel,”	
NeuroReport
	24	(March
2012):	234–39.
a	superior	ability	to	sense:
	Martin	P.	Paulus	et	al.,	“A	Neuroscience	Approach	to
Optimizing	Brain	Resources	for	Human	Performance	in	Extreme
Environments,”	
Neuroscience	&	Biobehavioral	Reviews
	33	(July	2009):
1080–88.
people	with	low	resilience:
	Haase	et	al.,	“When	the	Brain	Does	Not	Adequately
Feel	the	Body.”
--- Page 241 ---
“cognitive	resilience”:
	Amishi	P.	Jha	et	al.,	“Practice	Is	Protective:	Mindfulness
Training	Promotes	Cognitive	Resilience	in	High-Stress	Cohorts,”	
Mindfulness
(February	2017):	46–58.
“dig	in,	access	deep	wells”:
	Elizabeth	A.	Stanley,	
Widen	the	Window:	Training
Your	Brain	and	Body	to	Thrive	During	Stress	and	Recover	from	Trauma
	(New
York:	Avery,	2019),	5.
created	a	program:
	Elizabeth	A.	Stanley,	“Mindfulness-Based	Mind	Fitness
Training	(MMFT):	An	Approach	for	Enhancing	Performance	and	Building
Resilience	in	High	Stress	Contexts,”	in	
The	Wiley	Blackwell	Handbook	of
Mindfulness,
	ed.	Amanda	Ie,	Christelle	T.	Ngnoumen,	and	Ellen	J.	Langer
(Malden,	MA:	John	Wiley	&	Sons,	2014),	964–85.
maintain	their	attentional	focus:
	Amishi	P.	Jha	et	al.,	“Minds	‘At	Attention’:
Mindfulness	Training	Curbs	Attentional	Lapses	in	Military	Cohorts,”	
PLoS
One
	10	(February	2015).
preserve	their	working	memory:
	Amishi	P.	Jha	et	al.,	“Short-Form	Mindfulness
Training	Protects	Against	Working	Memory	Degradation	over	High-Demand
Intervals,”	
Journal	of	Cognitive	Enhancement
	1	(June	2017):	154–71.
a	technique	she	calls	“shuttling”:
	Stanley,	
Widen	the	Window,
	284–91.
“to	pay	attention	and	notice	what’s	happening”:
	Stanley,	“Mindfulness-Based
Mind	Fitness	Training	(MMFT).”
feel	their	emotions	more	intensely:
	Lisa	Feldman	Barrett	et	al.,	“Interoceptive
Sensitivity	and	Self-Reports	of	Emotional	Experience,”	
Journal	of	Personality
and	Social	Psychology
	87	(November	2004):	684–97.	See	also	Beate	M.
Herbert,	Olga	Pollatos,	and	Rainer	Schandry,	“Interoceptive	Sensitivity	and
Emotion	Processing:	An	EEG	Study,”	
International	Journal	of
Psychophysiology
	65	(September	2007):	214–27.
managing	their	emotions	more	adeptly:
	Anne	Kever	et	al.,	“Interoceptive
Sensitivity	Facilitates	Both	Antecedent-	and	Response-Focused	Emotion
Regulation	Strategies,”	
Personality	and	Individual	Differences
	87	(December
2015):	20–23.
“Common	sense	says”:
	William	James,	“What	Is	an	Emotion?,”	
Mind
	9	(April
1884):	188–205.
constructed	from	more	elemental	parts:
	Barrett,	
How	Emotions	Are	Made.
	See
also	Lisa	Feldman	Barrett,	“The	Theory	of	Constructed	Emotion:	An	Active
Inference	Account	of	Interoception	and	Categorization,”	
Social	Cognitive	and
Affective	Neuroscience
	12	(January	2017):	1–23.
In	a	series	of	three	studies:
	Alison	Wood	Brooks,	“Get	Excited:	Reappraising
Pre-Performance	Anxiety	as	Excitement,”	
Journal	of	Experimental
Psychology:	General
	143	(June	2014):	1144–58.
--- Page 242 ---
reappraise	debilitating	“stress”:
	Alia	J.	Crum,	Peter	Salovey,	and	Shawn	Achor,
“Re
thinking	Stress:	The	Role	of	Mindsets	in	Determining	the	Stress
Response,”	
Journal	of	Personality	and	Social	Psychology
	104	(April	2013):
716–33.
the
	positive	
effects	of	stress:
	Jeremy	P.	Jamieson	et	al.,	“Turning	the	Knots	in
Your	Stomach	into	Bows:	Reappraising	Arousal	Improves	Performance	on	the
GRE,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Social	Psychology
	46	(January	2010):	208–
12.
neural	effects	of	the	reappraisal	technique:
	Rachel	Pizzie	et	al.,	“Neural
Evidence	for	Cognitive	Reappraisal	as	a	Strategy	to	Alleviate	the	Effects	of
Math	Anxiety,”	paper	posted	on	PsyArXiv,	March	2019.
reappraisal	works	best:
	Jürgen	Füstös	et	al.,	“On	the	Embodiment	of	Emotion
Regulation:	Interoceptive	Awareness	Facilitates	Reappraisal,”	
Social
Cognitive	and	Affective	Neuroscience
	8	(December	2013):	911–17.
the	sensations	we’re	actually	feeling:
	Brooks,	“Get	Excited.”
subtly	and	unconsciously	mimic:
	Adrienne	Wood	et	al.,	“Fashioning	the	Face:
Sensorimotor	Simulation	Contributes	to	Facial	Expression	Recognition,”
Trends	in	Cognitive	Sciences
	20	(March	2016):	227–40.
can’t	engage	in	such	mimicking:
	David	T.	Neal	and	Tanya	L.	Chartrand,
“Embodied	Emotion	Perception:	Amplifying	and	Dampening	Facial	Feedback
Modulates	Emotion	Perception	Accuracy,”	
Social	Psychological	and
Personality	Science
	2	(April	2011):	673–78.
more	likely	to	mimic:
	Vivien	Ainley,	Marcel	Brass,	and	Manos	Tsakiris,
“Heartfelt	Imitation:	High	Interoceptive	Awareness	Is	Linked	to	Greater
Automatic	Imitation,”	
Neuropsychologia
	60	(July	2014):	21–28.
more	accurate	in	their	interpretation:
	Yuri	Terasawa	et	al.,	“Interoceptive
Sensitivity	Predicts	Sensitivity	to	the	Emotions	of	Others,”	
Cognition	&
Emotion
	28	(February	2014):	1435–48.	See	also	Punit	Shah,	Caroline	Catmur,
and	Geoffrey	Bird,	“From	Heart	to	Mind:	Linking	Interoception,	Emotion,
and	Theory	of	Mind,”	
Cortex
	93	(August	2017):	220–23.
tend	to	have	more	empathy:
	Delphine	Grynberg	and	Olga	Pollatos,	“Perceiving
One’s	Body	Shapes	Empathy,”	
Physiology	&	Behavior
	140	(March	2015):
54–60.
their	own	bodies’	signals:
	Irene	Messina	et	al.,	“Somatic	Underpinnings	of
Perceived	Empathy:	The	Importance	of	Psychotherapy	Training,”
Psychotherapy	Research
	23	(March	2013):	169–77.
“For	me	it’s	like	using”:
	Psychotherapist,	quoted	in	Robert	Shaw,	“The
Embodied	Psychotherapist:	An	Exploration	of	the	Therapists’	Somatic
--- Page 243 ---
Phenomena	Within	the	Therapeutic	Encounter,”	
Psychotherapy	Research
	14
(August	2006):	271–88.
“has	helped	me	to	realize”:
	Susie	Orbach,	“The	John	Bowlby	Memorial
Lecture:	The	Body	in	Clinical	Practice,	Part	One	and	Part	Two,”	in	
Touch:
Attachment	and	the	Body,
	ed.	Kate	White	(New	York:	Routledge,	2019),	17–
48.
“social	interoception”:
	Andrew	J.	Arnold,	Piotr	Winkielman,	and	Karen
Dobkins,	“Interoception	and	Social	Connection,”	
Frontiers	in	Psychology
	10
(November	2019).
directly	in	the	eye:
	Tomoko	Isomura	and	Katsumi	Watanabe,	“Direct	Gaze
Enhances	Interoceptive	Accuracy,”	
Cognition
	195	(February	2020).	See	also
Matias	Baltazar	et	al.,	“Eye	Contact	Elicits	Bodily	Self-Awareness	in	Human
Adults,”	
Cognition
	133	(October	2014):	120–27.
a	brief	touch:
	Nesrine	Hazem	et	al.,	“Social	Contact	Enhances	Bodily	Self-
Awareness,”	
Scientific	Reports
	8	(March	2018).
we	tend	to	shift	our	focus:
	Arnold,	Winkielman,	and	Dobkins,	“Interoception	and
So
cial	Connection.”	See	also	Caroline	Durlik	and	Manos	Tsakiris,	“Decreased
Interoceptive	Accuracy	Following	Social	Exclusion,”	
International	Journal	of
Psychophysiology
	96	(April	2015),	57–63.
a	flexible	back-and-forth	movement:
	Arnold,	Winkielman,	and	Dobkins,
“Interoception	and	Social	Connection.”
“sensitive	parabolic	reflectors”:
	Coates,	
The	Hour	Between	Dog	and	Wolf,
	120.
a	similar	device:
	Cassandra	D.	Gould	van	Praag	et	al.,	“HeartRater:	Tools	for	the
Evaluation	of	Interoceptive	Dimensions	of	Experience,”	
Psychosomatic
Medicine
	79	(May	2017).
deliberately	distorted:
	“How	doppel	Works,”	post	on	feeldoppel.com,	May	24,
2017,	
https://feeldoppel.com/pages/science
.
induces	a	sense	of	calm:
	Ruben	T.	Azevedo,	“The	Calming	Effect	of	a	New
Wearable	Device	During	the	Anticipation	of	Public	Speech,”	
Scientific
Reports
	7	(May	2017).
more	alert	and	more	accurate:
	Manos	Tsakiris,	“Investigating	the	Effect	of
doppel
	on	Alertness,”	working	paper.
“to	harvest	our	natural	responses”:
	Manos	Tskakiris,	quoted	in	“Wearing	a
Heart	on	Your	Sleeve:	New	Research	Shows	That	a	Tactile	Heartbeat
Significantly	Reduces	Stress,”	post	on	the	website	of	Royal	Holloway,
University	of	London,	October	18,	2018,
https://www.royalholloway.ac.uk/research-and-teaching/departments-and-
schools/psychology/news/wearing-a-heart-on-your-sleeve/
.
--- Page 244 ---
“What	makes	me	the	same	person”:
	Derek	Parfit,	
Reasons	and	Persons
	(Oxford:
Oxford	University	Press,	1984),	ix.
“I
	feel,
therefore	I	am”:
	A.	D.	(Bud)	Craig,	
How	Do	You	Feel?	An	Interoceptive
Moment	with	Your	Neurobiological	Self
	(Princeton:	Princeton	University
Press,	2014),	xvii,	182.
2.	THINKING	WITH	MOVEMENT
Fidler	walks	as	he	looks:
	Jeff	Fidler,	interviewed	by	Sanjay	Gupta,	“Exercising
at	Work,”	CNN,	July	7,	2007.
inspected	a	batch	of	images:
	Jeff	L.	Fidler	et	al.,	“Feasibility	of	Using	a	Walking
Workstation	During	CT	Image	Interpretation,”	
Journal	of	the	American
College	of	Radiology
	5	(November	2008):	1130–36.
images	of	patients’	lungs:
	Amee	A.	Patel	et	al.,	“Walking	While	Working:	A
Demonstration	of	a	Treadmill-Based	Radiologist	Workstation,”	paper
presented	at	the	Radiological	Society	of	North	America	Scientific	Assembly
and	Annual	Meeting,	February	2008.
used	a	treadmill	workstation:
	Cody	R.	Johnson	et	al.,	“Effect	of	Dynamic
Workstation	Use	on	Radiologist	Detection	of	Pulmonary	Nodules	on	CT,”
Journal	of	the	American	College	of	Radiology
	16	(April	2019):	451–57.
visual	sense	is	sharpened:
	Tom	Bullock	et	al.,	“Acute	Exercise	Modulates
Feature-Selective	Responses	in	Human	Cortex,”	
Journal	of	Cognitive
Neuroscience
	29	(April	2017):	605–18.	See	also	Tom	Bullock,	Hubert
Cecotti,	and	Barry	Giesbrecht,	“Multiple	Stages	of	Information	Processing
Are	Modulated	During	Acute	Bouts	of	Exercise,”	
Neuroscience
	307	(October
2015):	138–50.
the	periphery	of	our	gaze:
	Liyu	Cao	and	Barbara	Händel,	“Walking	Enhances
Peripheral	Visual	Processing	in	Humans,”	
PLoS	Biology
	17	(October	2019).
See	also	Liyu	Cao	and	Barbara	Händel,	“Increased	Influence	of	Periphery	on
Central	Visual	Processing	in	Humans	During	Walking,”	bioRxiv	(January
2018).
overall	physical	fitness:
	Fernando	Gomez-Pinilla	and	Charles	Hillman,	“The
Influence	of	Exercise	on	Cognitive	Abilities,”	
Comprehensive	Physiology
	3
(January	2013):	403–28.
larger	than	it	“should”	be:
	David	A.	Raichlen	and	John	D.	Polk,	“Linking
Brains	and	Brawn:	Exercise	and	the	Evolution	of	Human	Neurobiology,”
Proceedings	of	the	Royal	Society	of	London	B:	Biological	Sciences
	280
(January	2013).
“At	the	same	time”:
	Raichlen	and	Polk,	“Linking	Brains	and	Brawn.”
--- Page 245 ---
“Human	ancestors	transitioned”:
	David	A.	Raichlen	and	Gene	E.	Alexander,
“Adaptive	Capacity:	An	Evolutionary	Neuroscience	Model	Linking	Exercise,
Cognition,	and	Brain	Health,”	
Trends	in	Neurosciences
	40	(July	2017):	408–
21.
vigorous,	sustained	physical	activity:
	Raichlen	and	Alexander,	“Adaptive
Capacity.”
Hunting,	too,	poses:
	Ian	J.	Wallace,	Clotilde	Hainline,	and	Daniel	E.	Lieberman,
“Sports	and	the	Human	Brain:	An	Evolutionary	Perspective,”	in	
Handbook	of
Clinical	Neurology,
	vol.	158,
Sports	Neurology,
	ed.	Brian	Hainline	and	Robert
A.	Stern	(Amsterdam:	Elsevier,	2018),	3–10.
135	minutes	a	day:
	David	A.	Raichlen	et	al.,	“Physical	Activity	Patterns	and
Biomarkers	of	Cardiovascular	Disease	Risk	in	Hunter-Gatherers,”	
American
Journal	of	Human	Biology
	29	(March–April	2017).
“I	see	that	I	can	depend”:
	Robert	Feld,	“Re:	‘Walking	Workstations:
Ambulatory	Medicine	Redefined,’
 
”	
Journal	of	the	American	College	of
Radiology
	6	(March	2009):	213.
50	percent	of	the	school	day:
	Karl	E.	Minges	et	al.,	“Classroom	Standing	Desks
and	Sedentary	Behavior:	A	Systematic	Review,”	
Pediatrics
	137	(February
2016).
two-thirds	of	the	average	workday:
	Stacy	A.	Clemes	et	al.,	“Sitting	Time	and
Step	Counts	in	Office	Workers,”	
Occupational	Medicine
	64	(April	2014):
188–92.
“a	mind	on	the	hoof”:
	Andy	Clark,	
Being	There:	Putting	Brain,	Body,	and
World	Together	Again
	(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	1998),	35.
students	don’t	sit	still:
	Mireya	Villarreal,	“California	School	Becomes	First	to
Lose	Chairs	for	Standing	Desks,”	CBS	News,	October	12,	2015.
“I	taught	at	sitting	desks”:
	Maureen	Zink,	quoted	in	Juliet	Starrett,	“Eight
Reasons	Why	Kids	Should	Stand	at	School,”	
Medium,
	June	3,	2019.
a	limited	resource:
	Roy	F.	Baumeister	and	Kathleen	D.	Vohs,	“Willpower,
Choice,	and	Self-Control,”	in	
Time	and	Decision:	Economic	and
Psychological	Perspectives	on	Intertemporal	Choice,
	ed.	George
Loewenstein,	Daniel	Read,	and	Roy	Baumeister	(New	York:	Russell	Sage
Foundation,	2003),	201–16.	See	also	Joel	S.	Warm,	Raja	Parasuraman,	and
Gerald	Matthews,	“Vigilance	Requires	Hard	Mental	Work	and	Is	Stressful,”
Human	Factors
	50	(June	2008):	433–41.
solve	a	set	of	math	problems:
	Christine	Langhanns	and	Hermann	Müller,
“Effects	of	Trying	‘Not	to	Move’	Instruction	on	Cortical	Load	and	Concurrent
Cognitive	Performance,”	
Psychological	Research
	82	(January	2018):	167–76.
--- Page 246 ---
simply	by	standing:
	James	A.	Levine,	Sara	J.	Schleusner,	and	Michael	D.	Jensen,
“Energy	Expenditure	of	Nonexercise	Activity,”	
American	Journal	of	Clinical
Nutrition
	72	(December	2000):	1451–54.
enhancement	in	students’	executive	function:
	Ranjana	K.	Mehta,	Ashley	E.
Shortz,	and	Mark	E.	Benden,	“Standing	Up	for	Learning:	A	Pilot	Investigation
on	the	Neurocognitive	Benefits	of	Stand-Biased	School	Desks,”	
International
Journal	of	Environmental	Research	and	Public	Health
	13	(December	2015).
“on-task	engagement”:
	Marianela	Dornhecker	et	al.,	“The	Effect	of	Stand-
Biased	
Desks	on	Academic	Engagement:	An	Exploratory	Study,”
International	Journal	of	Health	Promotion	and	Education
	53	(September
2015):	271–80.
shown	to	boost	productivity:
	Gregory	Garrett	et	al.,	“Call	Center	Productivity
over	6	Months	Following	a	Standing	Desk	Intervention,”	
IIE	Transactions	on
Occupational	Ergonomics	and	Human	Factors
	4	(July	2016):	188–95.
Such	variable	stimulation:
	Dustin	E.	Sarver	et	al.,	“Hyperactivity	in	Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity	Disorder	(ADHD):	Impairing	Deficit	or	Compensatory
Behavior?,”	
Journal	of	Abnormal	Child	Psychology
	43	(April	2015):	1219–
32.
chronically
	under-
aroused:
	Kerstin	Mayer,	Sarah	Nicole	Wyckoff,	and	Ute
Strehl,	“Underarousal	in	Adult	ADHD:	How	Are	Peripheral	and	Cortical
Arousal	Related?,”	
Clinical	EEG	and	Neuroscience
	47	(July	2016):	171–79.
See	also	Julia	Geissler	et	al.,	“Hyperactivity	and	Sensation	Seeking	as
Autoregulatory	Attempts	to	Stabilize	Brain	Arousal	in	ADHD	and	Mania?,”
ADHD	Attention	Deficit	and	Hyperactivity	Disorders
	6	(July	2014):	159–73.
children	aged	ten	to	seventeen:
	Tadeus	A.	Hartanto	et	al.,	“A	Trial	by	Trial
Analysis	Reveals	More	Intense	Physical	Activity	Is	Associated	with	Better
Cognitive	Control	Performance	in	Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity	Disorder,”
Child	Neuropsychology
	22	(2016):	618–26.
All	of	these	activities:
	Michael	Karlesky	and	Katherine	Isbister,	“Understanding
Fidget	Widgets:	Exploring	the	Design	Space	of	Embodied	Self-Regulation,”
paper	presented	at	the	9th	Nordic	Conference	on	Human-Computer
Interaction,	October	2016.
“embodied	self-regulation”:
	Katherine	Isbister	and	Michael	Karlesky,
“Embodied	Self-Regulation	with	Tangibles,”	paper	presented	at	the	8th
International	Conference	on	Tangible,	Embedded	and	Embodied	Interaction,
February	2014.
“Changing	what	the	body	does”:
	Katherine	Isbister,	quoted	in	Melissa	Dahl,
“Researchers	Are	Studying	the	Things	People	Fiddle	With	at	Their	Desks,”
New	York	Magazine,
	March	12,	2015.
--- Page 247 ---
a	mildly	positive	mood	state:
	Michael	Karlesky	and	Katherine	Isbister,
“Designing	for	the	Physical	Margins	of	Digital	Workspaces:	Fidget	Widgets
in	Support	of	Productivity	and	Creativity,”	paper	presented	at	the	8th
International	Conference	on	Tangible,	Embedded	and	Embodied	Interaction,
February	2014.
flexible	and	creative	thinking:
	Alice	M.	Isen,	“Positive	Affect	as	a	Source	of
Human	Strength,”	in	
A	Psychology	of	Human	Strengths:	Fundamental
Questions	and	Future	Directions	for	a	Positive	Psychology,
	ed.	Lisa	G.
Aspinwall	and	Ursula	M.	Staudinger	(Washington,	DC:	American
Psychological	Association,	2003),	179–95.
directed	to	doodle:
	Jackie	Andrade,	“What	Does	Doodling	Do?,”	
Applied
Cognitive	Psychology
	24	(2010):	100–106.
“Today’s	digital	devices”:
	Karlesky	and	Isbister,	“Understanding	Fidget
Widgets.”
“I	usually	keep	track”:
	Kahneman,	
Thinking,	Fast	and	Slow,
	39–40.
positive	changes	documented	by	scientists:
	My	discussion	of	the	effects	of
physical	activity	on	cognition	draws	on	the	following	sources:	Matthew	B.
Pontifex	et	al.,	“A	Primer	on	Investigating	the	After	Effects	of	Acute	Bouts	of
Physical	Activity	on	Cognition,”	
Psychology	of	Sport	&	Exercise
	40	(January
2019):	1–22;	Annese	Jaffery,	Meghan	K.	Edwards,	and	Paul	D.	Loprinzi,
“The	Effects	of	Acute	Exercise	on	Cognitive	Function:	Solomon
Experimental	Design,”	
Journal	of	Primary	Prevention
	39	(February	2018):
37–46;	Charles	H.	Hillman,	Nicole	E.	Logan,	and	Tatsuya	T.	Shigeta,	“A
Review	of	Acute	
Physical	Activity	Effects	on	Brain	and	Cognition	in
Children,”	
Translational	Journal	of	the	American	College	of	Sports	Medicine
4	(September	2019):	132–36;	Yu-Kai	Chang	et	al.,	“The	Effects	of	Acute
Exercise	on	Cognitive	Performance:	A	Meta-Analysis,”	
Brain	Research
	1453
(May	2012):	87–101;	Phillip	D.	Tomporowski,	“Effects	of	Acute	Bouts	of
Exercise	on	Cognition,”	
Acta	Psychologica
	112	(March	2003):	297–324;
Eveleen	Sng,	Emily	Frith,	and	Paul	D.	Loprinzi,	“Temporal	Effects	of	Acute
Walking	Exercise	on	Learning	and	Memory	Function,”	
American	Journal	of
Health	Promotion
	32	(September	2018):	1518–25.	Paul	D.	Loprinzi	et	al.,
“The	Temporal	Effects	of	Acute	Exercise	on	Episodic	Memory	Function:
Systematic	Review	with	Meta-Analysis,”	
Brain	Sciences
	9	(April	2019);
James	T.	Haynes	4th	et	al.,	“Experimental	Effects	of	Acute	Exercise	on
Episodic	Memory	Function:	Considerations	for	the	Timing	of	Exercise,”
Psychological	Reports
	122	(October	2019):	1744–54;	Paul	D.	Loprinzi	and
Christy	J.	Kane,	“Exercise	and	Cognitive	Function:	A	Randomized	Controlled
Trial	Examining	Acute	Exercise	and	Free-Living	Physical	Activity	and
--- Page 248 ---
Sedentary	Effects,”	
Mayo	Clinic	Proceedings
	90	(April	2015):	450–60;	Ai-
Guo	Chen	et	al.,	“Effects	of	Acute	Aerobic	Exercise	on	Multiple	Aspects	of
Executive	Function	in	Preadolescent	Children,”	
Psychology	of	Sport	and
Exercise
	15	(November	2014):	627–36;	and	Julia	C.	Basso	and	Wendy	A.
Suzuki,	“The	Effects	of	Acute	Exercise	on	Mood,	Cognition,
Neurophysiology,	and	Neurochemical	Pathways:	A	Review,”	
Brain	Plasticity
2	(March	2017):	127–52.
focus	their	attention:
	Matthew	T.	Mahar,	“Impact	of	Short	Bouts	of	Physical
Activity	on	Attention-to-Task	in	Elementary	School	Children,”	
Preventive
Medicine
	52	(June	2011):	S60–64.
executive	function	faculties:
	Anneke	G.	van	der	Niet	et	al.,	“Effects	of	a
Cognitively	Demanding	Aerobic	Intervention	During	Recess	on	Children’s
Physical	Fitness	and	Executive	Functioning,”	
Pediatric	Exercise	Science
	28
(February	2018):	64–70.
recess	has	been	reduced:
	Jennifer	McMurrer,	“NCLB	Year	5:	Choices,	Changes,
and	Challenges:	Curriculum	and	Instruction	in	the	NCLB	Era,”	report
produced	by	the	Center	on	Education	Policy,	December	2007.
“movement	breaks”:
	Wendell	C.	Taylor,	“Transforming	Work	Breaks	to
Promote	Health,”	
American	Journal	of	Preventive	Medicine
	29	(December
2005):	461–65.
“inverted	U-shaped	curve”:
	Pontifex	et	al.,	“A	Primer	on	Investigating	the	After
Effects	of	Acute	Bouts	of	Physical	Activity	on	Cognition.”
conducive	to	creative	thought:
	Yanyun	Zhou	et	al.,	“The	Impact	of	Bodily	States
on	Divergent	Thinking:	Evidence	for	a	Control-Depletion	Account,”	
Frontiers
in	Psychology
	8	(September	2017).
more	than	two	dozen	marathons:
	Haruki	Murakami,	“The	Running	Novelist,”
The	New	Yorker,
	June	2,	2008.
fifty	miles	a	week:
	Haruki	Murakami,	
What	I	Talk	About	When	I	Talk	About
Running:	A	Memoir
	(New	York:	Alfred	A.	Knopf,	2008),	48.
“I’m	often	asked”:
	Murakami,	
What	I	Talk	About	When	I	Talk	About	Running,
16–17.
“transient	hypofrontality”:
	Arne	Dietrich,	“Transient	Hypofrontality	as	a
Mechanism	for	the	Psychological	Effects	of	Exercise,”	
Psychiatry	Research
145	(November	2006):	79–83.	See	also	Arne	Dietrich	and	Michel	Audiffren,
“The	Reticular-Activating	Hypofrontality	(RAH)	Model	of	Acute	Exercise,”
Neuroscience	&	Biobehavioral	Reviews
	35	(May	2011):	1305–25.
ideas	and	impressions	mingle:
	Evangelia	G.	Chrysikou,	“Creativity	In	and	Out
of	(Cognitive)	Control,”	
Current	Opinion	in	Behavioral	Sciences
	27	(June
2019):	94–99.
--- Page 249 ---
all	kinds	of	altered	states:
	Arne	Dietrich	and	Laith	Al-Shawaf,	“The	Transient
Hypofrontality	Theory	of	Altered	States	of	Consciousness,”	
Journal	of
Consciousness	Studies
	25	(2018):	226–47.	See	also	Arne	Dietrich,
“Functional	Neuroanatomy	of	Altered	States	of	Consciousness:	The	Transient
Hypofrontality	Hypothesis,”	
Consciousness	and	Cognition
	12	(June	2003):
231–56.
does	not	generate	this	disinhibiting	effect:
	Chun-Chih	Wang,	“Executive
Function	During	Acute	Exercise:	The	Role	of	Exercise	Intensity,”	
Journal	of
Sport	and	Exercise	Psychology
	35	(August	2013):	358–67.
generally	requires	exercising:
	Jacqueline	M.	Del	Giorno	et	al.,	“Cognitive
Function	During	Acute	Exercise:	A	Test	of	the	Transient	Hypofrontality
Theory,”	
Journal	of	Sport	and	Exercise	Psychology
	32	(June	2010):	312–23.
“provoke	a	kind	of	Cartesian	collapse”:
	Kathryn	Schulz,	“What	We	Think
About	When	We	Run,”	
The	New	Yorker,
	November	3,	2015.
persuasive	evidence:
	For	a	review,	see	Lawrence	W.	Barsalou,	“Grounded
Cognition,”	
Annual	Review	of	Psychology
	59	(January	2008):	617–45.
remarkably	weak:
	James	Bigelow	and	Amy	Poremba,	“Achilles’	Ear?	Inferior
Human	Short-Term	and	Recognition	Memory	in	the	Auditory	Modality,”
PLoS	One
	9	(2014).
much	more	robust:
	Ilaria	Cutica,	Francesco	Ianì,	and	Monica	Bucciarelli,
“Learning	from	Text	Benefits	from	Enactment,”	
Memory	&	Cognition
	42
(May	2014):	1026–37.	See	also	Christopher	R.	Madan	and	Anthony	Singhal,
“Using	Actions	to	Enhance	Memory:	Effects	of	Enactment,	Gestures,	and
Exercise	on	Human	Memory,”	
Frontiers	in	Psychology
	3	(November	2012).
engage	a	process:
	Manuela	Macedonia	and	Karsten	Mueller,	“Exploring	the
Neural	Representation	of	Novel	Words	Learned	Through	Enactment	in	a
Word	Recognition	Task,”	
Frontiers	in	Psychology
	7	(June	2016).
“enactment	effect”:
	Lars-Göran	Nilsson,	“Remembering	Actions	and	Words,”	in
The	Oxford	Handbook	of	Memory,
	ed.	Endel	Tulving	and	Fergus	I.	M.	Craik
(New	York:	Oxford	University	Press,	2000),	137–48.
can	shed	light:
	Helga	Noice	and	Tony	Noice,	“What	Studies	of	Actors	and
Acting	Can	Tell	Us	About	Memory	and	Cognitive	Functioning,”	
Current
Directions	in	Psychological	Science
	15	(February	2006):	14–18.
98	percent	accuracy:
	Helga	Noice	and	Tony	Noice,	“Long-Term	Retention	of
Theatrical	Roles,”	
Memory
	7	(May	1999):	357–82.
“you’ve	got	to	have	these	two	tracks”:
	Actor,	quoted	in	Helga	Noice,
“Elaborative	Memory	Strategies	of	Professional	Actors,”	
Applied	Cognitive
Psychology
	6	(September–October	1992):	417–27.
--- Page 250 ---
six	actors	from	a	repertory	company:
	Helga	Noice,	Tony	Noice,	and	Cara
Kennedy,	“Effects	of	Enactment	by	Professional	Actors	at	Encoding	and
Retrieval,”	
Memory
	8	(November	2000):	353–63.
scene	from	the	play:
	A.	R.	Gurney,	
The	Dining	Room
	(New	York:	Dramatist
Play	Service,	1998),	act	1.
series	of	studies:
	Helga	Noice	et	al.,	“Improving	Memory	in	Older	Adults	by
Instructing	Them	in	Professional	Actors’	Learning	Strategies,”	
Applied
Cognitive	Psychology
	13	(August	1999):	315–28;	Helga	Noice,	Tony	Noice,
and	Graham	Staines,	“A	Short-Term	Intervention	to	Enhance	Cognitive	and
Affective	Functioning	in	Older	Adults,”	
Journal	of	Aging	and	Health
	16
(August	2004):	562–85;	Tony	Noice	and	Helga	Noice,	“A	Theatrical
Intervention	to	Lower	the	Risk	of	Alzheimer’s	and	Other	Forms	of
Demen
tia,”	in	
The	Routledge	Companion	to	Theatre,	Performance	and
Cognitive	Science,
	ed.	Rick	Kemp	and	Bruce	McConchie	(New	York:
Routledge,	2019),	280–90.
a	study	of	undergraduates:
	Helga	Noice	and	Tony	Noice,	“Learning	Dialogue
With	and	Without	Movement,”	
Memory	&	Cognition
	29	(September	2001):
820–27.
not	a	literal	enactment:
	Helga	Noice	and	Tony	Noice,	“The	Non-Literal
Enactment	Effect:	Filling	in	the	Blanks,”	
Discourse	Processes
	44	(August
2007):	73–89.
reproduce	that	same	movement	later:
	Christopher	Kent	and	Koen	Lamberts,
“The	Encoding-Retrieval	Relationship:	Retrieval	as	Mental	Simulation,”
Trends	in	Cognitive	Sciences
	12	(March	2008):	92–98.
forming	the
	intention	
to	move:
	Elena	Daprati,	Angela	Sirigu,	and	Daniele	Nico,
“Remembering	Actions	Without	Proprioception,”	
Cortex
	113	(April	2019):
29–36.
“One	might	paraphrase	Descartes”:
	Noice	and	Noice,	“The	Non-Literal
Enactment	Effect.”
designed	a	study:
	Sian	L.	Beilock	et	al.,	“Sports	Experience	Changes	the	Neural
Processing	of	Action	Language,”	
Proceedings	of	the	National	Academy	of
Sciences
	105	(September	2008):	13269–73.
later	demonstrate:
	Tanja	Link	et	al.,	“Walk	the	Number	Line—An	Embodied
Training	of	Numerical	Concepts,”	
Trends	in	Neuroscience	and	Education
	2
(June	2013):	74–84.	See	also	Margina	Ruiter,	Sofie	Loyens,	and	Fred	Paas,
“Watch	Your	Step	Children!	Learning	Two-Digit	Numbers	Through	Mirror-
Based	Observation	of	Self-Initiated	Body	Movements,”	
Educational
Psychology	Review
	27	(September	2015):	457–74.
--- Page 251 ---
“Moved	by	Reading”	intervention:
	Arthur	M.	Glenberg,	“How	Reading
Comprehension	Is	Embodied	and	Why	That	Matters,”	
International
Electronic	Journal	of	Elementary	Education
	4	(2011):	5–18.
reading	comprehension	can	actually	double:
	Arthur	M.	Glenberg	et	al.,
“Activity	and	Imagined	Activity	Can	Enhance	Young	Children’s	Reading
Comprehension,”	
Journal	of	Educational	Psychology
	96	(September	2004):
424–36.
read	stories	about	life	on	a	farm:
	Glenberg	et	al.,	“Activity	and	Imagined
Activity	Can	Enhance	Young	Children’s	Reading	Comprehension.”	See	also
Arthur	Glenberg,	“Thinking	with	the	Body,”	
Scientific	American,
	March	3,
2008.
help	children	with	math:
	Arthur	M.	Glenberg	et	al.,	“What	Brains	Are	For:
Action,	Meaning,	and	Reading	Comprehension,”	in	
Reading	Comprehension
Strategies:	Theories,	Interventions,	and	Technologies,
	ed.	Danielle	S.
McNamara	(Mahwah,	NJ:	Psychology	Press,	2007),	221–40.
35	percent	less	likely:
	Arthur	Glenberg	et	al.,	“Improving	Reading	to	Improve
Math,”	
Scientific	Studies	of	Reading
	16	(July	2012):	316–40.
support	the	successful	learning:
	Ayelet	Segal,	John	Black,	and	Barbara	Tversky,
“Do	Gestural	Interfaces	Promote	Thinking?	Congruent	Gestures	Promote
Performance	in	Math,”	paper	presented	at	the	51st	Annual	Meeting	of	the
Psychonomic	Society,	November	2010.	See	also	John	B.	Black	et	al.,
“Embodied	Cognition	and	Learning	Environment	Design,”	in	
Theoretical
Foundations	of	Learning	Environments,
	ed.	Susan	Land	and	David	Jonassen
(New	York:	Routledge,	2012),	198–223.
number	line	estimation:
	Adam	K.	Dubé	and	Rhonda	N.	McEwen,	“Do	Gestures
Matter?	The	Implications	of	Using	Touchscreen	Devices	in	Mathematics
Instruction,”	
Learning	and	Instruction
	40	(December	2015):	89–98.
research	on	physics	education:
	David	Hestenes	and	Malcolm	Wells,	“Force
Concept	Inventory,”	
The	Physics	Teacher
	30	(March	1992):	141–58.
becomes
	less	
accurate:
	Carl	Wieman,	“The	‘Curse	of	Knowledge,’	or	Why
Intuition	About	Teaching	Often	Fails,”	
American	Physical	Society	News
	16
(November	2017).	See	also	Edward	F.	Redish,	Jeffery	M.	Saul,	and	Richard
N.	Steinberg,	“Student	Expectations	in	Introductory	Physics,”	
American
Journal	of	Physics
	66	(October	1998):	212–24.
imagining	themselves	into	a	given	scenario:
	Daniel	L.	Schwartz	and	Tamara
Black,	“Inferences	Through	Imagined	Actions:	Knowing	by	Simulated
Doing,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Psychology:	Learning,	Memory,	and
Cognition
	25	(January	1999):	1–21.
--- Page 252 ---
a	set	of	hands-on	activities:
	Carly	Kontra	et	al.,	“Physical	Experience	Enhances
Science	Learning,”	
Psychological	Science
	26	(June	2015):	737–49.
“Learning	is	moving”:
	Dor	Abrahamson	and	Raúl	Sánchez-García,	“Learning	Is
Moving	in	New	Ways:	The	Ecological	Dynamics	of	Mathematics	Education,”
Journal	of	the	Learning	Sciences
	25	(2016):	203–39.
“empathy	with	entities”:
	Elinor	Ochs,	Patrick	Gonzales,	and	Sally	Jacoby,
“
 
‘When	I	Come	Down	I’m	in	the	Domain	State’:	Grammar	and	Graphic
Representation	in	the	Interpretive	Activity	of	Physicists,”	in	
Interaction	and
Grammar,
	ed.	Elinor	Ochs,	Emanuel	A.	Schegloff,	and	Sandra	A.	Thompson
(Cambridge:	Cambridge	University	Press,	1996),	328–69.
riding	on	a	beam	of	light:
	Walter	Isaacson,	“The	Light-Beam	Rider,”	
New	York
Times,
	October	30,	2015.
“No	scientist	thinks”:
	Albert	Einstein,	quoted	in	Leopold	Infeld,	
Albert	Einstein:
His	Work	and	Its	Influence	on	Our	World
	(New	York:	Scribner,	1961),	312.
“visual”	and	even	“muscular”:
	Albert	Einstein,	quoted	in	Jacques	Hadamard,
The	Mathematician’s	Mind:	The	Psychology	of	Invention	in	the	Mathematical
Field
	(Princeton:	Princeton	University	Press,	1945),	143.
“When	I	was	really	working	with	them”:
	Barbara	McClintock,	quoted	in	Evelyn
Fox	Keller,	
A	Feeling	for	the	Organism:	The	Life	and	Work	of	Barbara
McClintock
	(New	York:	Henry	Holt,	1983),	117.
“I	would	picture	myself”:
	Jonas	Salk,	
Anatomy	of	Reality:	Merging	of	Intuition
and	Reason
	(New	York:	Columbia	University	Press,	1983),	7.
“embodied	imagination”:
	Susan	Gerofsky,	“Approaches	to	Embodied	Learning
in	Mathematics,”	in	
Handbook	of	International	Research	in	Mathematics
Education,
	ed.	Lyn	D.	English	and	David	Kirshner	(New	York:	Routledge,
2016),	60–97.
“integrative	glue”:
	Jie	Sui	and	Glyn	W.	Humphreys,	“The	Integrative	Self:	How
Self-Reference	Integrates	Perception	and	Memory,”	
Trends	in	Cognitive
Sciences
	19	(December	2015):	719–28.
the	ability	to	alternate:
	Firat	Soylu	et	al.,	“Embodied	Perspective	Taking	in
Learning	About	Complex	Systems,”	
Journal	of	Interactive	Learning	Research
28	(July	2017):	269–03.	See	also	David	J.	DeLiema	et	al.,	“Learning	Science
by	Being	You,	Being	It,	Being	Both,”	in	
Proceedings	of	the	10th	International
Conference	of	the	Learning	Sciences:	Future	of	Learning,
	vol.	2,	ed.	Peter
Freebody	et	al.	(Sydney:	University	of	Sydney,	2012),	102–3.
“Energy	Theater”:
	Rachel	E.	Scherr	et	al.,	“Negotiating	Energy	Dynamics
Through	Embodied	Action	in	a	Materially	Structured	Environment,”	
Physical
Review
	9	(July	2013).
“Students	who	use	movement”:
	Author	interview	with	Rachel	Scherr.
--- Page 253 ---
“become”	human	chromosomes:
	Joseph	P.	Chinnici,	Joyce	W.	Yue,	and	Kieron
M.	Tor
res,	“Students	as	‘Human	Chromosomes’	in	Role-Playing	Mitosis	&
Meiosis,”	
The	American	Biology	Teacher
	66	(2004):	35–39.
embody	the	solar	system’s	planets:
	Ted	Richards,	“Using	Kinesthetic	Activities
to	Teach	Ptolemaic	and	Copernican	Retrograde	Motion,”	
Science	&
Education
	21	(2012):	899–910.
embody	carbon	molecules:
	Pauline	M.	Ross,	Deidre	A.	Tronson,	and	Raymond
J.	Ritchie,	“Increasing	Conceptual	Understanding	of	Glycolysis	&	the	Krebs
Cycle	Using	Role-Play,”	
The	American	Biology	Teacher
	70	(March	2008):
163–68.
embody	amino	acids:
	Diana	Sturges,	Trent	W.	Maurer,	and	Oladipo	Cole,
“Understanding	Protein	Synthesis:	A	Role-Play	Approach	in	Large
Undergraduate	Human	Anatomy	and	Physiology	Classes,”	
Advances	in
Physiology	Education
	33	(June	2009):	103–10.
“Being	it”:
	Carmen	J.	Petrick	and	H.	Taylor	Martin,	“Learning	Mathematics:
You’re	It	vs.	It’s	It,”	in	
Proceedings	of	the	10th	International	Conference	of
the	Learning	Sciences:	Future	of	Learning,
	vol.	2,	ed.	Peter	Freebody	et	al.
(Sydney:	University	of	Sydney,	2012),	101–2.
form	a	triangle:
	Carmen	Smith	and	Candace	Walkington,	“Four	Principles	for
Designing	Embodied	Mathematics	Activities,”	
Australian	Mathematics
Education	Journal
	1	(2019):	16–20.
“body-based	activities”:
	Carmen	Petrick	Smith,	“Body-Based	Activities	in
Secondary	Geometry:	An	Analysis	of	Learning	and	Viewpoint,”	
Social
Science	and	Mathematics
	118	(May	2018):	179–89.
“Moving	the	body”:
	Sian	L.	Beilock,	
How	the	Body	Knows	Its	Mind
	(New	York:
Atria	Books,	2015),	69–70.
“thinking	outside	the	box”:
	Angela	K.-y.	Leung	et	al.,	“Embodied	Metaphors
and	Creative	‘Acts,’
 
”	
Psychological	Science
	23	(May	2012):	502–9.
“on	one	hand”:
	Leung	et	al.,	“Embodied	Metaphors	and	Creative	‘Acts.’
 
”
a	loose	kind	of	metaphor:
	Michael	L.	Slepian	and	Nalini	Ambady,	“Fluid
Movement	and	Creativity,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Psychology:	General
	141
(November	2012):	625–29.	See	also	Shu	Imaizumi,	Ubuka	Tagami,	and	Yi
Yang,	“Fluid	Movements	Enhance	Creative	Fluency:	A	Replication	of	Slepian
and	Ambady	(2012),”	paper	posted	on	PsyArXiv,	March	2020.
the	effects	of	walking:
	Marily	Oppezzo	and	Daniel	L.	Schwartz,	“Give	Your
Ideas	Some	Legs:	The	Positive	Effect	of	Walking	on	Creative	Thinking,”
Journal	of	Experimental	Psychology:	Learning,	Memory,	and	Cognition
	40
(July	2014):	1142–52.
--- Page 254 ---
a	meandering,	free-form	route:
	Chun-Yu	Kuo	and	Yei-Yu	Yeh,	“Sensorimotor-
Conceptual	Integration	in	Free	Walking	Enhances	Divergent	Thinking	for
Young	and	Older	Adults,”	
Frontiers	in	Psychology
	7	(October	2016).
“Only	thoughts	which	come”:
	Friedrich	Nietzsche,	
Twilight	of	the	Idols
(Oxford:	Oxford	University	Press,	1998),	9.
“I	have	walked	myself”:
	Søren	Kierkegaard,	
Søren	Kierkegaard’s	Journals	and
Papers,
	vol.	5,	ed.	and	trans.	Howard	V.	Hong	and	Edna	H.	Hong
(Bloomington:	Indiana	University	Press,	1978),	412.
“gymnastics	for	the	mind”:
	Ralph	Waldo	Emerson,	
The	Topical	Notebooks	of
Ralph	Waldo	Emerson,
	vol.	1,	ed.	Susan	Sutton	Smith	(Columbia:	University
of	Missouri	Press,	1990),	260.
“I	am	unable	to	reflect”:
	Jean-Jacques	Rousseau,	
The	Confessions	of	Jean-
Jacques	Rousseau
	(London:	Reeves	and	Turner,	1861),	343.
“I	have	nothing”:
	Michel	de	Montaigne,	
The	Essays:	A	Selection,
	ed.	and	trans.
M.	A.	Screech	(New	York:	Penguin	Books,	1987),	304.
“the	mind	at	three	miles	per	hour”:
	Rebecca	Solnit,	
Wanderlust:	A	History	of
Walking
	(New	York:	Penguin	Books,	2000).
“I	think	that	I	cannot	preserve”:
	Henry	David	Thoreau,	“Walking,”	
Atlantic
Monthly
	9	(June	1862):	657–74.
“How	vain	it	is”:
	Henry	David	Thoreau,	
A	Year	in	Thoreau’s	Journal:	1851
(New	York:	Penguin	Books,	1993).
3.	THINKING	WITH	GESTURE
bounded	onto	the	stage:
	Gabriel	Hercule,	“HUDlog—Demo	Day	Pitch,”	video
posted	on	YouTube,	January	25,	2018,	
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=dbBemSKGPbM
.
the	motions	of	the	hands:
	Geoffrey	Beattie	and	Heather	Shovelton,	“An
Experimental	Investigation	of	the	Role	of	Different	Types	of	Iconic	Gesture	in
Communication:	A	Semantic	Feature	Approach,”	
Gesture
	1	(January	2001):
129–49.
impressionistic	and	holistic:
	Rowena	A.	E.	Viney,	Jean	Clarke,	and	Joep
Cornelissen,	“Making	Meaning	from	Multimodality:	Embodied
Communication	in	a	Business	Pitch	Setting,”	in	
The	SAGE	Handbook	of
Qualitative	Business	and	Management	Research	Methods,
	ed.	Catherine
Cassell,	Ann	L.	Cunliffe,	and	Gina	Grandy	(Thousand	Oaks,	CA:	Sage
Publications,	2017),	193–214.
the	effort	to	persuade:
	Nicole	Torres,	“When	You	Pitch	an	Idea,	Gestures	Matter
More	Than	Words,”	
Harvard	Business	Review,
	May–June	2019.
--- Page 255 ---
the	center	of	the	action:
	Joep	P.	Cornelissen,	Jean	S.	Clarke,	and	Alan	Cienki,
“Sensegiving	in	Entrepreneurial	Contexts:	The	Use	of	Metaphors	in	Speech
and	Gesture	to	Gain	and	Sustain	Support	for	Novel	Business,”	
International
Small	Business	Journal:	Researching	Entrepreneurship
	30	(April	2012):	213–
41.
human-scale,	embodied	terms:
	Alan	Cienki,	Joep	P.	Cornelissen,	and	Jean
Clarke,	“The	Role	of	Human	Scale,	Embodied	Metaphors/Blends	in	the
Speech	and	Gestures	of	Entrepreneurs,”	paper	presented	at	the	9th	Conference
on	Conceptual	Structure,	Discourse,	and	Language,	October	2008.
mentally	simulate	the	gesturer’s	point	of	view:
	Francesco	Ianì	and	Monica
Bucciarelli,	“Mechanisms	Underlying	the	Beneficial	Effect	of	a	Speaker’s
Gestures	on	the	Listener,”	
Journal	of	Memory	and	Language
	96	(October
2017):	110–21.
a	palpable	reality:
	Ruben	van	Werven,	Onno	Bouwmeester,	and	Joep	P.
Cornelissen,	“Pitching	a	Business	Idea	to	Investors:	How	New	Venture
Founders	Use	Micro-Level	Rhetoric	to	Achieve	Narrative	Plausibility,”
International	Small	Business	Journal:	Researching	Entrepreneurship
	37	(May
2019):	193–214.
“entrepreneurs	are	operating”:
	Van	Werven,	Bouwmeester,	and	Cornelissen,
“Pitching	a	Business	Idea	to	Investors.”
“the	skilled	use	of	gesture”:
	Jean	S.	Clarke,	Joep	P.	Cornelissen,	and	Mark	P.
Healey,	“Actions	Speak	Louder	Than	Words:	How	Figurative	Language	and
Gesturing	in	Entrepreneurial	Pitches	Influences	Investment	Judgments,”
Academy	of	Management	Journal
	62	(April	2019):	335–60.
“I	talk	with	my	hands”:
	Author	interview	with	Frederic	Mishkin.
humankind’s	earliest	language:
	Michael	A.	Arbib,	Katja	Liebal,	and	Simone
Pika,	“Primate	Vocalization,	Gesture,	and	the	Evolution	of	Human
Language,”	
Current	Anthropology
	49	(December	2008):	1053–76.	See	also
Erica	A.	Cartmill,	Sian	Beilock,	and	Susan	Goldin-Meadow,	“A	Word	in	the
Hand:	Action,	Gesture	and	Mental	Representation	in	Humans	and	Non-
Human	Primates,”	
Philosophical	Transactions	of	the	Royal	Society	B:
Biological	Sciences
	367	(January	2012):	129–43.
exert	a	powerful	impact:
	Spencer	D.	Kelly	et	al.,	“Offering	a	Hand	to	Pragmatic
Understanding:	The	Role	of	Speech	and	Gesture	in	Comprehension	and
Memory,”	
Journal	of	Memory	and	Language
	40	(May	1999):	577–92.
“extra-verbal	meaning”:
	Jean	A.	Graham	and	Michael	Argyle,	“A	Cross-
Cultural	Study	of	the	Communication	of	Extra-Verbal	Meaning	by	Gestures,”
International	Journal	of	Psychology
	10	(February	1975):	57–67.
--- Page 256 ---
more	richly	specify:
	Susan	Goldin-Meadow,	“Gesture	and	Cognitive
Development,”	in	
Handbook	of	Child	Psychology	and	Developmental
Science:	Cognitive	Processes,
	ed.	Lynn	S.	Liben,	Ulrich	Müller,	and	Richard
M.	Lerner	(Hoboken,	NJ:	John	Wiley	&	Sons,	2015),	339–80.
meaning	that	is	not	found	anywhere:
	Susan	Goldin-Meadow	and	Catherine
Momeni	Sandhofer,	“Gestures	Convey	Substantive	Information	About	a
Child’s	Thoughts	to	Ordinary	Listeners,”	
Developmental	Science
	2
(December	1999):	67–74.	See	also	Ruth	Breckinridge	Church	and	Susan
Goldin-Meadow,	“The	Mismatch	Between	Gesture	and	Speech	as	an	Index	of
Transitional	Knowledge,”	
Cognition
	23	(June	1986):	43–71.
contradicts	or	departs	entirely:
	David	McNeill,	Justine	Cassell,	and	Karl-Erik
McCullough,	“Communicative	Effects	of	Speech-Mismatched	Gestures,”
Research	on	Language	and	Social	Interaction
	27	(1994):	223–37.
doctor-patient	dialogue:
	Christian	Heath,	“Gesture’s	Discrete	Tasks:	Multiple
Relevancies	in	Visual	Conduct	and	in	the	Contextualization	of	Language,”	in
The	Contextualization	of	Language,
	ed.	Peter	Auer	and	Aldo	Di	Luzio
(Philadelphia:	John	Benjamins,	1992),	101–28.
“gestural	foreshadowing”:
	Elaine	M.	Crowder,	“Gestures	at	Work	in	Sense-
Making	Science	Talk,”	
Journal	of	the	Learning	Sciences
	5	(1996),	173–208.
we’ve	said	something	in	error:
	Mandana	Seyfeddinipur	and	Sotaro	Kita,
“Gesture	as	an	Indicator	of	Early	Error	Detection	in	Self-Monitoring	of
Speech,”	paper	presented	at	the	Disfluency	in	Spontaneous	Speech	Workshop,
August	2001.
mentally	prime	a	word:
	Frances	H.	Rauscher,	Robert	M.	Krauss,	and	Yihsiu
Chen,	“Gesture,	Speech,	and	Lexical	Access:	The	Role	of	Lexical	Movements
in	Speech	Production,”	
Psychological	Science
	7	(July	1996):	226–31.
they	talk	less	fluently:
	Karen	J.	Pine,	Hannah	Bird,	and	Elizabeth	Kirk,	“The
Effects	of	Prohibiting	Gestures	on	Children’s	Lexical	Retrieval	Ability,”
Developmental	Science
	10	(November	2007):	747–54.	See	also	Sheena
Finlayson	et	al.,	“Effects	of	the	Restriction	of	Hand	Gestures	on	Disfluency,”
paper	presented	at	the	Disfluency	in	Spontaneous	Speech	Workshop,
September	2003.
remember	less	useful	information:
	Donna	Frick-Horbury	and	Robert	E.
Guttentag,	“The	Effects	of	Restricting	Hand	Gesture	Production	on	Lexical
Retrieval	and	Free	Recall,”	
American	Journal	of	Psychology
	111	(Spring
1998):	43–62.
solve	problems	less	well:
	Monica	Bucciarelli	et	al.,	“Children’s	Creation	of
Algorithms:	Simulations	and	Gestures,”	
Journal	of	Cognitive	Psychology
	28
(2016):	297–318.
--- Page 257 ---
less	able	to	explain:
	Martha	W.	Alibali	and	Sotaro	Kita,	“Gesture	Highlights
Perceptually	Present	Information	for	Speakers,”	
Gesture
	10	(January	2010):
3–28.
before	babies	can	talk:
	Núria	Esteve-Gibert	and	Pilar	Prietoba,	“Infants
Temporally	Coordinate	Gesture-Speech	Combinations	Before	They	Produce
Their	First	Words,”	
Speech	Communication
	57	(February	2014):	301–16.
one	of	children’s	first	gestures:
	Elizabeth	Bates	et	al.,	“Vocal	and	Gestural
Symbols	at	13	Months,”	
Merrill-Palmer	Quarterly	of	Behavior	and
Development
	26	(October	1980):	407–23.
a	request	to	point	to	their	nose:
	Bari	Walsh,	“The	Power	of	Babble,”	
Harvard
Gazette,
	July	2016.
elicit	from	their	caretakers:
	Susan	Goldin-Meadow	et	al.,	“Young	Children	Use
Their	Hands	to	Tell	Their	Mothers	What	to	Say,”	
Developmental	Science
	10
(November	2007):	778–85.
lay	the	foundation:
	Jana	M.	Iverson	and	Susan	Goldin-Meadow,	“Gesture	Paves
the	Way	for	Language	Development,”	
Psychological	Science
	16	(May	2005):
367–71.	See	also	Seyda	Ozçalişkan	and	Susan	Goldin-Meadow,	“Gesture	Is	at
the	Cutting	Edge	of	Early	Language	Development,”	
Cognition
	96	(July	2005):
B101–13.
documented	a	link:
	Meredith	L.	Rowe	and	Susan	Goldin-Meadow,	“Early
Gesture	
Selectively
	Predicts	Later	Language	Learning,”	
Developmental
Science
	12	(January	2009):	182–87.
a	30	million–“word	gap”:
	Betty	Hart	and	Todd	R.	Risley,	
Meaningful
Differences	in	the	Everyday	Experience	of	Young	American	Children
(Baltimore:	Paul	H.	Brookes	Publishing,	1995).
other	research	has	confirmed:
	Roberta	Michnick	Golinkoff	et	al.,	“Language
Matters:	Denying	the	Existence	of	the	30-Million-Word	Gap	Has	Serious
Consequences,”	
Child	Development
	90	(May	2019):	985–92.
tend	to	talk	more:
	Janellen	Huttenlocher	et	al.,	“Sources	of	Variability	in
Children’s	Language	Growth,”	
Cognitive	Psychology
	61	(December	2010):
343–65.
employ	a	greater	diversity	of	word	types:
	Erika	Hoff,	“The	Specificity	of
Environmental	Influence:	Socioeconomic	Status	Affects	Early	Vocabulary
Development	via	Maternal	Speech,”	
Child	Development
	74	(October	2003):
1368–78.
more	complex	and	more	varied	sentences:
	Huttenlocher	et	al.,	“Sources	of
Variability	in	Children’s	Language	Growth”;	Hoff,	“The	Specificity	of
Environmental	Influence.”
--- Page 258 ---
these	differences	are	predictive:
	Huttenlocher	et	al.,	“Sources	of	Variability	in
Children’s	Language	Growth”;	Hoff,	“The	Specificity	of	Environmental
Influence.”	See	also	Meredith	L.	Rowe,	“Child-Directed	Speech:	Relation	to
Socioeconomic	Status,	Knowledge	of	Child	Development	and	Child
Vocabulary	Skill,”	
Journal	of	Child	Language
	35	(February	2008):	185–205.
high-income	parents	gesture	more:
	Meredith	L.	Rowe	and	Susan	Goldin-
Meadow,	“Differences	in	Early	Gesture	Explain	SES	Disparities	in	Child
Vocabulary	Size	at	School	Entry,”	
Science
	323	(February	2009):	951–53.
a	mental	word	bank:
	Betty	Hart	and	Todd	Risley,	“The	Early	Catastrophe:	The
30	Million	Word	Gap	by	Age	3,”	
American	Educator,
	Spring	2003.
a	strong	predictor:
	Dorthe	Bleses	et	al.,	“Early	Productive	Vocabulary	Predicts
Academic	Achievement	10	Years	Later,”	
Applied	Psycholinguistics
	37
(November	2016):	1461–76.
Engage	in	frequent	pointing:
	Meredith	L.	Rowe	and	Kathryn	A.	Leech,	“A
Parent	In
tervention	with	a	Growth	Mindset	Approach	Improves	Children’s
Early	Gesture	and	Vocabulary	Development,”	
Developmental	Science
	22
(July	2019).
the	reading	of	picture	books:
	Eve	Sauer	LeBarton,	Susan	Goldin-Meadow,	and
Stephen	Raudenbush,	“Experimentally	Induced	Increases	in	Early	Gesture
Lead	to	Increases	in	Spoken	Vocabulary,”	
Journal	of	Cognitive	Development
16	(2015):	199–220.
Come	up	with	simple	gestures:
	Susan	W.	Goodwyn,	Linda	P.	Acredolo,	and
Catherine	A.	Brown,	“Impact	of	Symbolic	Gesturing	on	Early	Language
Development,”	
Journal	of	Nonverbal	Behavior
	24	(June	2000):	81–103.
Rowe	delivered	this	message:
	Rowe	and	Leech,	“A	Parent	Intervention	with	a
Growth	Mindset	Approach	Improves	Children’s	Early	Gesture	and
Vocabulary	Development.”
“newest	and	most	advanced	ideas”:
	Susan	Goldin-Meadow,	Martha	W.	Alibali,
and	Ruth	Breckinridge	Church,	“Transitions	in	Concept	Acquisition:	Using
the	Hand	to	Read	the	Mind,”	
Psychological	Review
	100	(April	1993):	279–97.
Such	tasks	were	first	employed:
	Jean	Piaget,	
The	Child’s	Conception	of	Number
(New	York:	W.	W.	Norton	and	Company,	1965).
The	girl	is	shown:
	Church	and	Goldin-Meadow,	“The	Mismatch	Between
Gesture	and	Speech	as	an	Index	of	Transitional	Knowledge.”
40	percent	of	the	time:
	Church	and	Goldin-Meadow,	“The	Mismatch	Between
Gesture	and	Speech	as	an	Index	of	Transitional	Knowledge.”
when	ten-year-olds	solve	math	problems:
	Michelle	Perry,	Ruth	Breckinridge
Church,	and	Susan	Goldin-Meadow,	“Transitional	Knowledge	in	the
Acquisition	of	Concepts,”	
Cognitive	Development
	3	(October	1988):	359–400.
--- Page 259 ---
fifteen-year-olds	working	on	a	problem-solving	task:
	Addison	Stone,	Rebecca
Webb,	and	Shahrzad	Mahootian,	“The	Generality	of	Gesture-Speech
Mismatch	as	an	Index	of	Transitional	Knowledge:	Evidence	from	a	Control-
of-Variables	Task,”	
Cognitive	Development
	6	(July–September	1991):	301–
13.
especially	receptive	to	instruction:
	Martha	W.	Alibali	and	Susan	Goldin-
Meadow,	“Gesture-Speech	Mismatch	and	Mechanisms	of	Learning:	What	the
Hands	Reveal	About	a	Child’s	State	of	Mind,”	
Cognitive	Psychology
	25
(October	1993):	468–523.
a	group	of	college	students:
	Raedy	Ping	et	al.,	“Gesture-Speech	Mismatch
Predicts	Who	Will	Learn	to	Solve	an	Organic	Chemistry	Problem,”	paper
presented	at	the	Annual	Meeting	of	the	American	Educational	Research
Association,	April	2012.
captures	some	aspect:
	Martha	W.	Alibali	et	al.,	“Spontaneous	Gestures
Influence	Strategy	Choices	in	Problem	Solving,”	
Psychological	Science
	22
(September	2011):	1138–44.
“Gesture	encourages	experimentation”:
	Susan	Goldin-Meadow,	quoted	in	Eric
Jaffe,	“Giving	Students	a	Hand:	William	James	Lecturer	Goldin-Meadow
Shows	the	Importance	of	Gesture	in	Teaching,”	
APS	Observer,
	July	2004.
actively	trying	to	apprehend:
	Martha	W.	Alibali,	Sotaro	Kita,	and	Amanda	J.
Young,	“Gesture	and	the	Process	of	Speech	Production:	We	Think,	Therefore
We	Gesture,”	
Language	and	Cognitive	Processes
	15	(December	2000):	593–
613.
increases	as	a	function	of	difficulty:
	Susan	Goldin-Meadow,	
Hearing	Gesture:
How	Our	Hands	Help	Us	Think
	(Cambridge:	Belknap	Press	of	Harvard
University	Press,	2003),	147.	See	also	Autumn	B.	Hostetter,	Martha	W.
Alibali,	and	Sotaro	Kita,	“I	See	It	in	My	Hands’	Eye:	Representational
Gestures	Reflect	Conceptual	Demands,”	
Language	and	Cognitive	Processes
22	(April	2007):	313–36.
“muddled	talk”:
	Wolff-Michael	Roth,	“From	Gesture	to	Scientific	Language,”
Journal	of	Pragmatics
	32	(October	2000):	1683–1714.
we	divide	the	work:
	Susan	Goldin-Meadow	et	al.,	“Explaining	Math:	Gesturing
Lightens	the	Load,”	
Psychological	Science
	12	(November	2001):	516–22.
the	attainment	of	complex	knowledge:
	Wolff-Michael	Roth,	“Gestures:	Their
Role	in	Teaching	and	Learning,”	
Review	of	Educational	Research
	71	(Fall
2001):	365–92.
“virtual	diagram”:
	Barbara	Tversky,	
Mind	in	Motion:	How	Action	Shapes
Thought
	(New	York:	Basic	Books,	2019),	125.
--- Page 260 ---
language	becomes	more	precise:
	Wolff-Michael	Roth	and	Daniel	Lawless,
“Science,	Culture,	and	the	Emergence	of	Language,”	
Science	Education
	86
(May	2002):	368–85.
Gestures	are	less	frequent:
	Mingyuan	Chu	and	Sotaro	Kita,	“The	Nature	of
Gestures’	Beneficial	Role	in	Spatial	Problem	Solving,”	
Journal	of
Experimental	Psychology:	General
	140	(February	2011):	102–16.
more	coordinated	in	meaning	and	timing:
	Crowder,	“Gestures	at	Work	in	Sense-
Making	Science	Talk.”
scaffolding	our	own	thinking:
	David	DeLiema	and	Francis	Steen,	“Thinking
with	the	Body:	Conceptual	Integration	Through	Gesture	in	Multiviewpoint
Model	Construction,”	in	
Language	and	the	Creative	Mind,
	ed.	Michael
Borkent,	Barbara	Dancygier,	and	Jennifer	Hinnell	(Stanford:	CSLI
Publications,	2013),	275–94.
asked	to	write	on	complex	topics:
	Candace	Walkington	et	al.,	“Being
Mathematical	Relations:	Dynamic	Gestures	Support	Mathematical
Reasoning,”	paper	presented	at	the	11th	International	Conference	of	the
Learning	Sciences,	June	2014.
experts	venturing	into	uncharted	territory:
	Kim	A.	Kastens,	Shruti	Agrawal,	and
Lynn	S.	Liben,	“The	Role	of	Gestures	in	Geoscience	Teaching	and	Learning,”
Journal	of	Geoscience	Education
	56	(September	2008):	362–68.
lab	meetings	of	a	biochemistry	research	group:
	L.	Amaya	Becvar,	James	D.
Hollan,	and	Edwin	Hutchins,	“Hands	as	Molecules:	Representational	Gestures
Used	for	Developing	Theory	in	a	Scientific	Laboratory,”	
Semiotica
	156
(January	2005):	89–112.
a	range	of	specialized	gestures:
	Kinnari	Atit	et	al.,	“Spatial	Gestures	Point	the
Way:	A	Broader	Understanding	of	the	Gestural	Referent,”	paper	presented	at
the	35th	Annual	Conference	of	the	Cognitive	Science	Society,	July–August
2013.	See	also	Kinnari	Atit,	Thomas	F.	Shipley,	and	Basil	Tipoff,	“What	Do	a
Geologist’s	Hands	Tell	You?	A	Framework	for	Classifying	Spatial	Gestures
in	Science	Education,”	in	
Space	in	Mind:	Concepts	for	Spatial	Learning	and
Education,
	ed.	Daniel	R.	Montello,	Karl	Grossner,	and	Donald	G.	Janelle
(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	2014),	173–94.
benefit	from	using	gesture:
	Kastens,	Agrawal,	and	Liben,	“The	Role	of	Gestures
in	Geoscience	Teaching	and	Learning.”
how	they	would	use	Play-Doh:
	Kinnari	Atit,	Kristin	Gagnier,	and	Thomas	F.
Shipley,	“Student	Gestures	Aid	Penetrative	Thinking,”	
Journal	of	Geoscience
Education
	63	(February	2015):	66–72.
“many	college	students”:
	Lynn	S.	Liben,	Adam	E.	Christensen,	and	Kim	A.
Kastens,	“Gestures	in	Geology:	The	Roles	of	Spatial	Skills,	Expertise,	and
--- Page 261 ---
Communicative	Context,”	paper	presented	at	the	7th	International	Conference
on	Spatial	Cognition,	July	2010,	referring	to	another	study	by	the	same
authors:	Lynn	S.	Liben,	Kim	A.	Kastens,	and	Adam	E.	Christensen,	“Spatial
Foundations	of	Science	Education:	The	Illustrative	Case	of	Instruction	on
Introductory	Geological	Concepts,”	
Cognition	and	Instruction
	29	(January–
March	2011):	45–87.
Better	performance	on	this	task:
	Liben,	Christensen,	and	Kastens,	“Gestures	in
Geology.”
“language	can	actually	get	in	the	way”:
	Author	interview	with	Michele	Cooke.
an	enhanced	ability	to	process:
	Evguenia	Malaia	and	Ronnie	Wilbur,
“Enhancement	of	Spatial	Processing	in	Sign	Language	Users,”	in	
Space	in
Mind:	Concepts	for	Spatial	Learning	and	Education,
	ed.	Daniel	R.	Montello,
Karl	Grossner,	and	Donald	G.	Janelle	(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	2014),	99–118.
See	also	Karen	Emmorey,	Edward	Klima,	and	Gregory	Hickok,	“Mental
Rotation	Within	Linguistic	and	Non-Linguistic	Domains	in	Users	of
American	Sign	Language,”	
Cognition
	68	(September	1998):	221–46.
exhibited	by	hearing	people:
	Madeleine	Keehner	and	Susan	E.	Gathercole,
“Cognitive	Adaptations	Arising	from	Nonnative	Experience	of	Sign	Language
in	Hearing	Adults,”	
Memory	&	Cognition
	35	(June	2007):	752–61.
evoke	a	stronger	reaction:
	Anthony	Steven	Dick	et	al.,	“Co-Speech	Gestures
Influence	Neural	Activity	in	Brain	Regions	Associated	with	Processing
Semantic	Information,”	
Human	Brain	Mapping
	30	(April	2009):	3509–26.
captures	listeners’	attention:
	Spencer	Kelly	et	al.,	“The	Brain	Distinguishes
Between	Gesture	and	Action	in	the	Context	of	Processing	Speech,”	paper
presented	at	the	163rd	Acoustical	Society	of	America	Meeting,	May	2012.
roused	to	attention:
	Arne	Nagels	et	al.,	“Hand	Gestures	Alert	Auditory	Cortices:
Possible	Impacts	of	Learning	on	Foreign	Language	Processing,”	in	
Positive
Learning	in	the	Age	of	Information,
	ed.	Olga	Zlatkin-Troitschanskaia,	Gabriel
Wittum,	and	Andreas	Dengel	(Wiesbaden:	Springer	VS,	2018),	53–66.
“Hand	gestures	appear	to	alert”:
	Author	interview	with	Spencer	Kelly.
others	better	understand:
	Nicole	Dargue	and	Naomi	Sweller,	“Two	Hands	and	a
Tale:	When	Gestures	Benefit	Adult	Narrative	Comprehension,”	
Learning	and
Instruction
	68	(August	2020).
33	percent	more	likely:
	Ruth	Breckinridge	Church,	Philip	Garber,	and	Kathryn
Rogalski,	“The	Role	of	Gesture	in	Memory	and	Social	Communication,”
Gesture
	7	(July	2007):	137–58.
significantly	more	learning:
	Ji	Y.	Son	et	al.,	“Exploring	the	Practicing-
Connections	Hypothesis:	Using	Gesture	to	Support	Coordination	of	Ideas	in
--- Page 262 ---
Understanding	a	Complex	Statistical	Concept,”	
Cognitive	Research:
Principles	and	Implications
	3	(December	2018).
direct	their	gaze	more	efficiently:
	Zhongling	Pi	et	al.,	“Instructors’	Pointing
Gestures	Improve	Learning	Regardless	of	Their	Use	of	Directed	Gaze	in
Video	Lectures,”	
Computers	&	Education
	128	(January	2019):	345–52.
pay	more	attention:
	Pi	et	al.,	“Instructors’	Pointing	Gestures	Improve	Learning
Regardless	of	Their	Use	of	Directed	Gaze	in	Video	Lectures.”
more	readily	transfer:
	Theodora	Koumoutsakis,	“Gesture	in	Instruction:
Evidence	from	Live	and	Video	Lessons,”	
Journal	of	Nonverbal	Behavior
	40
(December	2016):	301–15.
seem	to	be	especially	helpful:
	Zhongling	Pi	et	al.,	“All	Roads	Lead	to	Rome:
Instructors’	Pointing	and	Depictive	Gestures	in	Video	Lectures	Promote
Learning	Through	Different	Patterns	of	Attention	Allocation,”	
Journal	of
Nonverbal	Behavior
	43	(July	2019):	549–59.
appears	to	be	even	stronger:
	Koumoutsakis	et	al.,	“Gesture	in	Instruction.”
examined	the	top	one	hundred	videos:
	Son	et	al.,	“Exploring	the	Practicing-
Connections	Hypothesis.”
gesture	as	they	teach	on	video:
	Jiumin	Yang	et	al.,	“Instructors’	Gestures
Enhance	Their	Teaching	Experience	and	Performance	While	Recording	Video
Lectures,”	
Journal	of	Computer	Assisted	Learning
	36	(April	2020):	189–98.
make	more	hand	motions:
	Susan	Wagner	Cook	and	Susan	Goldin-Meadow,
“The	Role	of	Gesture	in	Learning:	Do	Children	Use	Their	Hands	to	Change
Their	Minds?,”	
Journal	of	Cognition	and	Development
	7	(April	2006):	211–
32.
A	simple	request:
	Susan	Goldin-Meadow,	interviewed	by	Jaffe,	“Giving
Students	a	Hand.”
encouraging	them	to	gesture:
	Sara	C.	Broaders	et	al.,	“Making	Children	Gesture
Brings	Out	Implicit	Knowledge	and	Leads	to	Learning,”	
Journal	of
Experimental	Psychology:	General
	136	(November	2007):	539–50.
solving	spatial	problems:
	Chu	and	Kita,	“The	Nature	of	Gestures’	Beneficial
Role	in	Spatial	Problem	Solving.”
when	asked	to	gesture	more:
	Alice	Cravotta,	M.	Grazia	Busà,	and	Pilar	Prieto,
“Effects	of	Encouraging	the	Use	of	Gestures	on	Speech,”	
Journal	of	Speech,
Language,	and	Hearing	Research
	62	(September	2019):	3204–19.
when	teachers	are	told:
	Martha	W.	Alibali	et	al.,	“Students	Learn	More	When
Their	Teacher	Has	Learned	to	Gesture	Effectively,”	
Gesture
	13	(January
2013):	210–33.
the	largest	known	cognitive	gender	difference:
	Jillian	E.	Lauer,	Eukyung	Yhang,
and	Stella	F.	Lourenco,	“The	Development	of	Gender	Differences	in	Spatial
--- Page 263 ---
Reasoning:	A	Meta-Analytic	Review,”	
Psychological	Bulletin
	145	(June
2019):	537–65.
five-year-old	boys	were	already	better:
	Stacy	B.	Ehrlich,	Susan	C.	Levine,	and
Susan	Goldin-Meadow,	“The	Importance	of	Gesture	in	Children’s	Spatial
Reasoning,”	
Developmental	Psychology
	42	(November	2006):	1259–68.
children	who	were	encouraged	to	gesture:
	Raedy	Ping	et	al.,	“Using	Manual
Rotation	and	Gesture	to	Improve	Mental	Rotation	in	Preschoolers,”	paper
presented	at	the	33rd	Annual	Conference	of	the	Cognitive	Science	Society,
July	2011.	See	also	Elizabeth	M.	Wakefield	et	al.,	“Breaking	Down	Gesture
and	Action	in	Mental	Rotation:	Understanding	the	Components	of	Movement
That	Promote	Learning,”	
Developmental	Psychology
	55	(May	2019):	981–93.
in	the	face	of	its	demands:
	Carine	Lewis,	Peter	Lovatt,	and	Elizabeth	D.	Kirk,
“Many	Hands	Make	Light	Work:	The	Facilitative	Role	of	Gesture	in	Verbal
Improvisation,”	
Thinking	Skills	and	Creativity
	17	(September	2015):	149–57.
“It	is	from	the	attempt”:
	Wolff-Michael	Roth,	“Making	Use	of	Gestures,	the
Leading	Edge	in	Literacy	Development,”	in	
Crossing	Borders	in	Literacy	and
Science	Instruction:	Perspectives	on	Theory	and	Practice,
	ed.	Wendy	Saul
(Newark,	DE:	International	Reading	Association;	and	Arlington,	VA:
National	Science	Teachers	Association,	2004),	48–70.
research	has	confirmed:
	Andrew	T.	Stull	et	al.,	“Does	Manipulating	Molecular
Models	Promote	Representation	Translation	of	Diagrams	in	Chemistry?,”
paper	presented	at	the	International	Conference	on	Theory	and	Application	of
Diagrams,	August	2010.	See	also	Lilian	Pozzer-Ardenghi	and	Wolff-Michael
Roth,	“Photographs	in	Lectures:	Gestures	as	Meaning-Making	Resources,”
Linguistics	and	Education
	15	(Summer	2004):	275–93.
“visual	artifacts”:
	Roth,	“Gestures:	Their	Role	in	Teaching	and	Learning.”
“more	mature	physics	talk”:
	Roth,	“Making	Use	of	Gestures,	the	Leading	Edge
in	Literacy	Development.”
we	may	miss	the	clues:
	Susan	Goldin-Meadow,	Debra	Wein,	and	Cecilia	Chang,
“Assessing	Knowledge	Through	Gesture:	Using	Children’s	Hands	to	Read
Their	Minds,”	
Cognition	and	Instruction
	9	(1992):	201–19.
less	than	a	third:
	Martha	Wagner	Alibali,	Lucia	M.	Flevares,	and	Susan	Goldin-
Meadow,	“Assessing	Knowledge	Conveyed	in	Gesture:	Do	Teachers	Have	the
Upper	Hand?,”	
Journal	of	Educational	Psychology
	89	(March	1997):	183–93.
recruited	to	watch	video	recordings:
	Spencer	D.	Kelly	et	al.,	“A	Helping	Hand
in	Assessing	Children’s	Knowledge:	Instructing	Adults	to	Attend	to	Gesture,”
Cognition	and	Instruction
	20	(2002):	1–26.
“second”	her	gesture:
	Goldin-Meadow,	
Hearing	Gesture,
	128.
--- Page 264 ---
designed	gestures:
	Shamin	Padalkar	and	Jayashree	Ramadas,	“Designed	and
Spontaneous	Gestures	in	Elementary	Astronomy	Education,”	
International
Journal	of	Science	Education
	33	(August	2011):	1703–39.
multiple	mental	“hooks”:
	Beilock,	
How	the	Body	Knows	Its	Mind,
	92.
hidden	from	our	view:
	Kensy	Cooperrider,	Elizabeth	Wakefield,	and	Susan
Goldin-Meadow,	“More	Than	Meets	the	Eye:	Gesture	Changes	Thought,
Even	Without	Visual	Feedback,”	paper	presented	at	the	37th	Annual
Conference	of	the	Cognitive	Science	Society,	July	2015.
her	students	practice:
	Kerry	Ann	Dickson	and	Bruce	Warren	Stephens,	“It’s	All
in	the	Mime:	Actions	Speak	Louder	Than	Words	When	Teaching	the	Cranial
Nerves,”	
Anatomical	Science	Education
	8	(November–December	2015):	584–
92.
act	as	an	aid	to	memory:
	Manuela	Macedonia,	“Bringing	Back	the	Body	into	the
Mind:	Gestures	Enhance	Word	Learning	in	Foreign	Language,”	
Frontiers	in
Psychology
	5	(December	2014).
That’s	not	how	anyone	learns:
	Manuela	Macedonia,	“Learning	a	Second
Language	Naturally:	The	Voice	Movement	Icon	Approach,”	
Journal	of
Educational	and	Developmental	Psychology
	3	(September	2013):	102–16.
use	of	gestures	to	enhance	verbal	memory:
	Manuela	Macedonia,	“Sensorimotor
Enhancing	of	Verbal	Memory	Through	‘Voice	Movement	Icons’	During
Encoding	of	Foreign	Language”	(PhD	diss.,	University	of	Salzburg,	2003).
areas	in	the	brain:
	Manuela	Macedonia	et	al.,	“Depth	of	Encoding	Through
Observed	Gestures	in	Foreign	Language	Word	Learning,”	
Frontiers	in
Psychology
	10	(January	2019).
found	evidence	that	the	motor	cortex:
	Brian	Mathias	et	al.,	“Motor	Cortex
Causally	Contributes	to	Auditory	Word	Recognition	Following	Sensorimotor-
Enriched	Vocabulary	Training,”	paper	posted	on	ArXiv,	May	2020.
achieve	more	lasting	learning:
	Kirsten	Bergmann	and	Manuela	Macedonia,	“A
Virtual	Agent	as	Vocabulary	Trainer:	Iconic	Gestures	Help	to	Improve
Learners’	Memory	Performance,”	paper	presented	at	the	13th	International
Conference	on	Intelligent	Virtual	Agents,	August	2013.
those	who	observe	the	gesture:
	Manuela	Macedonia,	Kirsten	Bergmann,	and
Friedrich	Roithmayr,	“Imitation	of	a	Pedagogical	Agent’s	Gestures	Enhances
Memory	for	Words	in	Second	Language,”	
Science	Journal	of	Education
	2
(2014):	162–69.
researchers	have	found	that	math	students:
	Susan	Wagner	Cook	et	al.,	“Hand
Gesture	and	Mathematics	Learning:	Lessons	from	an	Avatar,”	
Cognitive
Science
	41	(March	2017):	518–35.
--- Page 265 ---
offloads	our	cognitive	burden:
	Goldin-Meadow	et	al.,	“Explaining	Math.”	See
also	Raedy	Ping	and	Susan	Goldin-Meadow,	“Gesturing	Saves	Cognitive
Resources	When	Talking	About	Nonpresent	Objects,”	
Cognitive	Science
	34
(May	2010):	602–19.
gesture	more	to	compensate:
	Angela	M.	Kessell	and	Barbara	Tversky,	“Using
Diagrams	
and	Gestures	to	Think	and	Talk	About	Insight	Problems,”
Proceedings	of	the	Annual	Meeting	of	the	Cognitive	Science	Society
	28
(2006).
“Academic	language”:
	Author	interview	with	Brendan	Jeffreys.
4.	THINKING	WITH	NATURAL	SPACES
the	artist	Jackson	Pollock:
	My	discussion	of	Jackson	Pollock’s	move	from	New
York	City	to	the	East	End	of	Long	Island	draws	on	the	following	sources:
Deborah	Solomon,	
Jackson	Pollock:	A	Biography
	(New	York:	Simon	&
Schuster,	1987);	Jeffrey	Potter,	
To	a	Violent	Grave:	An	Oral	Biography	of
Jackson	Pollock
	(New	York:	G.	P.	Putnam,	1985);	Lee	F.	Mindel,	“Jackson
Pollock	and	Lee	Krasner’s	Long	Island	House	and	Studio,”	
Architectural
Digest,
	November	30,	2013;	Ellen	Maguire,	“At	Jackson	Pollock’s	Hamptons
House,	a	Life	in	Spatters,”	
New	York	Times,
	July	14,	2006.
“It	was	a	healing	place”:
	Audrey	Flack,	quoted	in	Maguire,	“At	Jackson
Pollock’s	Hamptons	House,	a	Life	in	Spatters.”
it	was	then	that	he	realized:
	Potter,	
To	a	Violent	Grave,
	81.
“a	camping	trip	that	lasts	a	lifetime”:
	Gordon	H.	Orians	and	Judith	H.
Heerwagen,	“Evolved	Responses	to	Landscapes,”	in	
The	Adapted	Mind:
Evolutionary	Psychology	and	the	Generation	of	Culture,
	ed.	Jerome	H.
Barkow,	Leda	Cosmides,	and	John	Tooby	(New	York:	Oxford	University
Press,	1995),	555–79.
only	about	7	percent	of	our	time:
	Neil	E.	Klepeis	et	al.,	“The	National	Human
Activity	Pattern	Survey	(NHAPS):	A	Resource	for	Assessing	Exposure	to
Environmental	Pollutants,”	
Journal	of	Exposure	Science	&	Environmental
Epidemiology
	11	(July	2001):	231–52.
meager	even	when	compared:
	F.	Thomas	Juster,	Frank	Stafford,	and	Hiromi
Ono,	“Changing	Times	of	American	Youth:	1981–2003,”	report	produced	by
the	Institute	for	Social	Research,	University	of	Michigan,	January	2004.
five	hours	or	less:
	Stephen	R.	Kellert	et	al.,	“The	Nature	of	Americans:
Disconnection	and	Recommendations	for	Reconnection,”	report	produced
April	2017.
only	26	percent	of	mothers:
	Rhonda	Clements,	“An	Investigation	of	the	Status	of
Outdoor	Play,”	
Contemporary	Issues	in	Early	Childhood
	5	(March	2004):	68–
--- Page 266 ---
80.
now	live	in	cities:
	United	Nations,	“2018	Revision	of	World	Urbanization
Prospects,”	report	produced	by	the	Population	Division	of	the	UN	Department
of	Economic	and	Social	Affairs,	May	2018.
Forty-two	million	people	visit:
	Central	Park	Conservancy,	“About	Us,”
https://www.centralparknyc.org/about
.
“Natural	scenery”:
	Frederick	Law	Olmsted,	quoted	in	Witold	Rybczynski,	
A
Clearing	in	the	Distance:	Frederick	Law	Olmsted	and	America	in	the	19th
Century
	(New	York:	Simon	&	Schuster,	1999),	258.
When	Olmsted	started	his	work:
	Rybczynski,	
A	Clearing	in	the	Distance.
	See
also	John	G.	Mitchell,	“Frederick	Law	Olmsted’s	Passion	for	Parks,”	
National
Geographic,
	March	2005.
visits	Olmsted	made:
	Rybczynski,	
A	Clearing	in	the	Distance.
preferences	for	certain	kinds	of	natural	spaces:
	John	D.	Balling	and	John	H.
Falk,	“Development	of	Visual	Preference	for	Natural	Environments,”
Environment	and	Behavior
	14	(January	1982):	5–28.	See	also	Mary	Ann
Fischer	and	Patrick	E.	Shrout,	“Children’s	Liking	of	Landscape	Paintings	as	a
Function	of	Their	Perceptions	of	Prospect,	Refuge,	and	Hazard,”	
Environment
and	Behavior
	21	(May	2006):	373–93.
“prospect”	and	“refuge”:
	Jay	Appleton,	
The	Experience	of	Landscape
	(New
York:	John	Wiley	&	Sons,	1977).
we	like	a	bit	of	mystery:
	Andrew	M.	Szolosi,	Jason	M.	Watson,	and	Edward	J.
Ruddell,	“The	Benefits	of	Mystery	in	Nature	on	Attention:	Assessing	the
Impacts	of	Presentation	Duration,”	
Frontiers	in	Psychology
	5	(November
2014).	See	also	Thomas	R.	Herzog	and	Anna	G.	Bryce,	“Mystery	and
Preference	in	Within-Forest	Settings,”	
Environment	and	Behavior
	39	(July
2007):	779–96.
intuited	these	preferences:
	Matt	Ridley,	“Why	We	Love	a	Bit	of	Africa	in	Our
Parkland,”	
The	Times
	(London),	December	28,	2015.
“ghosts	of	environments	past”:
	Gordon	H.	Orians,	
Snakes,	Sunrises,	and
Shakespeare:	How	Evolution	Shapes	Our	Loves	and	Fears
	(Chicago:
University	of	Chicago	Press,	2014),	20.
“environmental	self-regulation”:
	Kalevi	Mikael	Korpela,	“Place-Identity	as	a
Product	of	Environmental	Self-Regulation,”	
Journal	of	Environmental
Psychology
	9	(September	1989):	241–56.
reestablishing	our	mental	equilibrium:
	Roger	S.	Ulrich	et	al.,	“Stress	Recovery
During	Exposure	to	Natural	and	Urban	Environments,”	
Journal	of
Environmental	Psychology
	11	(September	1991):	201–30.
--- Page 267 ---
Drivers	who	travel:
	Russ	Parsons	et	al.,	“The	View	from	the	Road:	Implications
for	Stress	Recovery	and	Immunization,”	
Journal	of	Environmental
Psychology
	18	(June	1998):	113–40.
Laboratory	studies:
	See,	e.g.,	Bin	Jiang	et	al.,	“A	Dose-Response	Curve
Describing	the	Relationship	Between	Urban	Tree	Cover	Density	and	Self-
Reported	Stress	Recovery,”	
Environment	and	Behavior
	48	(September	2014):
607–29.
the	more	benefit	they	derive:
	Tytti	Pasanen	et	al.,	“Can	Nature	Walks	with
Psychological	Tasks	Improve	Mood,	Self-Reported	Restoration,	and
Sustained	Attention?	Results	from	Two	Experimental	Field	Studies,”
Frontiers	in	Psychology
	9	(October	2018).
a	ninety-minute	walk	outside:
	Gregory	N.	Bratman	et	al.,	“Nature	Experience
Reduces	Rumination	and	Subgenual	Prefrontal	Cortex	Activation,”
Proceedings	of	the	National	Academy	of	Sciences
	112	(July	2015):	8567–72.
a	walk	in	nature	lifts	the	mood:
	Marc	G.	Berman	et	al.,	“Interacting	with	Nature
Improves	Cognition	and	Affect	for	Individuals	with	Depression,”	
Journal	of
Affective	Disorders
	140	(November	2012):	300–305.
maintain	our	focus:
	Rita	Berto,	“Exposure	to	Restorative	Environments	Helps
Restore	Attentional	Capacity,”	
Journal	of	Environmental	Psychology
	25
(September	2005):	249–59.
amid	outdoor	greenery:
	Gregory	N.	Bratman,	J.	Paul	Hamilton,	and	Gretchen	C.
Daily,	“The	Impacts	of	Nature	Experience	on	Human	Cognitive	Function	and
Mental	Health,”	
Annals	of	the	New	York	Academy	of	Sciences
	1249	(February
2012):	118–36.
benefits	from	time	spent:
	Marc	G.	Berman,	John	Jonides,	and	Stephen	Kaplan,
“The	Cognitive	Benefits	of	Interacting	with	Nature,”	
Psychological	Science
19	(December	2008):	1207–12.
better	able	to	focus:
	Andrea	Faber	Taylor	and	Frances	E.	Kuo,	“Children	with
Attention	Deficits	Concentrate	Better	After	Walk	in	the	Park,”	
Journal	of
Attention	Disorders
	12	(March	2009):	402–9.	See	also	Frances	E.	Kuo	and
Andrea	Faber	Taylor,	“A	Potential	Natural	Treatment	for	Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity	Disorder:	Evidence	from	a	National	Study,”	
American
Journal	of	Public	Health
	94	(September	2004):	1580–86.
“Doses	of	nature”:
	Taylor	and	Kuo,	“Children	with	Attention	Deficits
Concentrate	Better	After	Walk	in	the	Park.”
“voluntary”	and	“passive”:
	William	James,	
The	Principles	of	Psychology,
	vol.
1	(New	York:	Henry	Holt	and	Company,	1890),	416–19.
“soft	fascination”:
	Avik	Basu,	Jason	Duvall,	and	Rachel	Kaplan,	“Attention
Restoration	Theory:	Exploring	the	Role	of	Soft	Fascination	and	Mental
--- Page 268 ---
Bandwidth,”	
Environment	and	Behavior
	51	(November	2019):	1055–81.
“open	monitoring”:
	Freddie	Lymeus,	Per	Lindberg,	and	Terry	Hartig,	“Building
Mindfulness	Bottom-Up:	Meditation	in	Natural	Settings	Supports	Open
Monitoring	and	Attention	Restoration,”	
Consciousness	and	Cognition
	59
(March	2018):	40–56.
“soft	gazing”:
	Patricia	Morgan	and	Dor	Abrahamson,	“Contemplative
Mathematics	Pedagogy:	Report	from	a	Pioneering	Workshop,”	paper
presented	at	the	Annual	Meeting	of	the	American	Educational	Research
Association,	April	2019.
easier	to	implement	and	maintain:
	Freddie	Lymeus,	Tobias	Lundgren,	and	Terry
Hartig,	“Attentional	Effort	of	Beginning	Mindfulness	Training	Is	Offset	with
Practice	Directed	Toward	Images	of	Natural	Scenery,”	
Environment	and
Behavior
	49	(June	2017):	536–59.	See	also	Freddie	Lymeus,	Per	Lindberg,
and	Terry	Hartig,	“A	Natural	Meditation	Setting	Improves	Compliance	with
Mindfulness	Training,”	
Journal	of	Environmental	Psychology
	64	(August
2019):	98–106.
“substantially	counteracts”:
	Bin	Jiang,	Rose	Schmillen,	and	William	C.
Sullivan,	“How	to	Waste	a	Break:	Using	Portable	Electronic	Devices
Substantially	Counteracts	Attention	Enhancement	Effects	of	Green	Spaces,”
Environment	and	Behavior
	51	(November	2019):	1133–60.	See	also	Theresa
S.	S.	Schilhab,	Matt	P.	Stevenson,	and	Peter	Bentsen,	“Contrasting	Screen-
Time	and	Green-Time:	A	Case	for	Using	Smart	Technology	and	Nature	to
Optimize	Learning	Processes,”	
Frontiers	in	Psychology
	9	(June	2018).
an	app	like	ReTUNE:
	Marc	Berman	and	Kathryn	Schertz,	“ReTUNE	(Restoring
Through	Urban	Nature	Experience),”	post	on	the	website	of	the	University	of
Chicago,	Summer	2017,	
https://appchallenge.uchicago.edu/retune/
.
wants	to	walk:
	The	first	route	described	here	was	mapped	out	using	the	Waze
app,	downloaded	from	
https://www.waze.com/
.	The	second	route	was	mapped
out	using	the	ReTUNE	platform,	found	at	
https://retune-
56d2e.firebaseapp.com/
.
“Restoration	Score”:
	Kathryn	E.	Schertz,	Omid	Kardan,	and	Marc	G.	Berman,
“ReTUNE:	Restoring	Through	Urban	Nature	Experience,”	poster	presented	at
the	UChicago	App	Challenge,	August	2017.
81	percent	accuracy:
	Marc	G.	Berman	et	al.,	“The	Perception	of	Naturalness
Correlates	with	Low-Level	Visual	Features	of	Environmental	Scenes,”	
PLoS
One
	9	(December	2014).
contain	more	visual	information:
	Hiroki	P.	Kotabe,	Omid	Kardan,	and	Marc	G.
Berman,	“The	Nature-Disorder	Paradox:	A	Perceptual	Study	on	How	Nature
Is	Disorderly	Yet	Aesthetically	Preferred,”	
Journal	of	Experimental
--- Page 269 ---
Psychology:	General
	146	(August	2017):	1126–42.	See	also	Agnes	van	den
Berg,	Yannick	Joye,	and	Sander	L.	Koole,	“Why	Viewing	Nature	Is	More
Fascinating	and	Restorative	Than	Viewing	Buildings:	A	Closer	Look	at
Perceived	Complexity,”	
Urban	Forestry	&	Urban	Greening
	20	(October
2016):	397–401.
Roughly	a	third:
	Denise	Grady,	“The	Vision	Thing:	Mainly	in	the	Brain,”
Discover,
	June	1,	1993.
“perceptual	fluency”:
	Yannick	Joye	and	Agnes	van	den	Berg,	“Nature	Is	Easy
on	the	
Mind:	An	Integrative	Model	for	Restoration	Based	on	Perceptual
Fluency,”	paper	presented	at	the	8th	Biennial	Conference	on	Environmental
Psychology,	September	2010.
makes	us	feel	good:
	Rolf	Reber,	Norbert	Schwarz,	and	Piotr	Winkielman,
“Processing	Fluency	and	Aesthetic	Pleasure:	Is	Beauty	in	the	Perceiver’s
Processing	Experience?,”	
Personality	and	Social	Psychology	Review
	8
(November	2004):	364–82.	See	also	Piotr	Winkelman	and	John	T.	Cacioppo,
“Mind	at	Ease	Puts	a	Smile	on	the	Face:	Psychophysiological	Evidence	That
Processing	Facilitation	Elicits	Positive	Affect,”	
Journal	of	Personality	and
Social	Psychology
	81(December	2001):	989–1000.
more
	redundant	
information:
	Yannick	Joye	et	al.,	“When	Complex	Is	Easy	on
the	Mind:	Internal	Repetition	of	Visual	Information	in	Complex	Objects	Is	a
Source	of	Perceptual	Fluency,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Psychology:	Human
Perception	and	Performance
	42	(January	2016):	103–14.
“Natural	environments	are	characterized”:
	Yannick	Joye	and	Agnes	van	den
Berg,	“Is	Love	for	Green	in	Our	Genes?	A	Critical	Analysis	of	Evolutionary
Assumptions	in	Restorative	Environments	Research,”	
Urban	Forestry	&
Urban	Greening
	10	(2011):	261–68.
people	prefer	mid-range	fractals:
	Caroline	M.	Hägerhäll,	Terry	Purcell,	and
Richard	Taylor,	“Fractal	Dimension	of	Landscape	Silhouette	Outlines	as	a
Predictor	of	Landscape	Preference,”	
Journal	of	Environmental	Psychology
	24
(June	2004),	247–55.
a	soothing	effect:
	Richard	P.	Taylor	et	al.,	“Perceptual	and	Physiological
Responses	to	the	Visual	Complexity	of	Fractal	Patterns,”	
Nonlinear
Dynamics,	Psychology,	and	Life	Sciences
	9	(January	2005):	89–114.	See	also
Richard	P.	Taylor,	“Reduction	of	Physiological	Stress	Using	Fractal	Art	and
Architecture,”	
Leonardo
	39	(June	2006):	245–51.
brain	activity	is	being	recorded:
	Caroline	M.	Hägerhäll	et	al.,	“Human
Physiological	Benefits	of	Viewing	Nature:	EEG	Responses	to	Exact	and
Statistical	Fractal	Patterns,”	
Nonlinear	Dynamics,	Psychology,	and	Life
Sciences
	19	(January	2015):	1–12;	Caroline	M.	Hägerhäll	et	al.,
--- Page 270 ---
“Investigations	of	Human	EEG	Response	to	Viewing	Fractal	Patterns,”
Perception
	37	(October	2008):	1488–94.
“fractal	landscapes”:
	Arthur	W.	Juliani	et	al.,	“Navigation	Performance	in
Virtual	Environments	Varies	with	Fractal	Dimension	of	Landscape,”	
Journal
of	Environmental	Psychology
	47	(September	2016):	155–65.
complete	challenging	puzzles:
	Yannick	Joye	et	al.,	“When	Complex	Is	Easy	on
the	Mind:	Internal	Repetition	of	Visual	Information	in	Complex	Objects	Is	a
Source	of	Perceptual	Fluency,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Psychology:	Human
Perception	and	Performance
	42	(January	2016):	103–14.
“tuned”	our	perceptual	faculties:
	Richard	P.	Taylor	and	Branka	Spehar,	“Fractal
Fluency:	An	Intimate	Relationship	Between	the	Brain	and	Processing	of
Fractal	Stimuli,”	in	
The	Fractal	Geometry	of	the	Brain,
	ed.	Antonio	Di	Ieva
(New	York:	Springer,	2016),	485–98.
exhibited	a	fractal	pattern:
	Richard	P.	Taylor,	Adam	P.	Micolich,	and	David
Jonas,	“Fractal	Analysis	of	Pollock’s	Drip	Paintings,”	
Nature
	399	(June
1999):	E9–10.	See	also	Jose	Alvarez-Ramirez,	Carlos	Ibarra-Valdez,	and
Eduardo	Rodriguez,	“Fractal	Analysis	of	Jackson	Pollock’s	Painting
Evolution,”	
Chaos,	Solitons	&	Fractals
	83	(February	2016):	97–104.
“If	someone	asked”:
	Richard	Taylor,	quoted	in	Jennifer	Ouellette,	“Pollock’s
Fractals,”	
Discover,
	October	2001.
“exploit	nature	like	a	drug”:
	Roger	Ulrich,	quoted	in	Michael	Waldholz,	“The
Leafy	Green	Road	to	Good	Mental	Health,”	
Wall	Street	Journal,
	August
2003.
relieved	pain	and	promoted	healing:
	Roger	S.	Ulrich,	“View	Through	a	Window
May	Influence	Recovery	from	Surgery,”	
Science
	224	(April	1984):	420–21.
“As	a	teenager”:
	Roger	Ulrich,	quoted	in	Adam	Alter,	“Where	We	Are	Shapes
Who	We	Are,”	
New	York	Times,
	June	14,	2013.
exposure	to	natural	elements:
	Roger	S.	Ulrich	et	al.,	“A	Review	of	the	Research
Literature	on	Evidence-Based	Healthcare	Design,”	
HERD:	Health
Environments	Research	&	Design
	1	(April	2008):	61–125.
our	blood	pressure	drops:
	Roger	S.	Ulrich,	Robert	F.	Simons,	and	Mark	Miles,
“Effects	of	Environmental	Simulations	and	Television	on	Blood	Donor
Stress,”	
Journal	of	Architectural	and	Planning	Research
	20	(March	2003):
38–47.
brain	activity	becomes	more	relaxed:
	Roger	S.	Ulrich,	“Natural	Versus	Urban
Scenes:	Some	Psychophysiological	Effects,”	
Environment	and	Behavior
	13
(September	1981):	523–56.
our	eye	movements	change:
	Marek	Franěk,	Jan	Petruzalek,	and	Denis	Šefara,
“Eye	Movements	in	Viewing	Urban	Images	and	Natural	Images	in	Diverse
--- Page 271 ---
Vegetation	Periods,”	
Urban	Forestry	&	Urban	Greening
	46	(December
2019).	See	also	Deltcho	Valtchanov	and	Colin	Ellard,	“Cognitive	and
Affective	Responses	to	Natural	Scenes:	Effects	of	Low	Level	Visual
Properties	on	Preference,	Cognitive	Load	and	Eye-Movements,”	
Journal	of
Environmental	Psychology
	43	(September	2015):	184–95.
we	remember	details	of	natural	scenes:
	Rita	Berto	et	al.,	“An	Exploratory	Study
of	the	Effect	of	High	and	Low	Fascination	Environments	on	Attentional
Fatigue,”	
Journal	of	Environmental	Psychology
	30	(December	2010):	494–
500.
the	brain’s	pleasure	receptors:
	Irving	Biederman	and	Edward	A.	Vessel,
“Perceptual	Pleasure	and	the	Brain:	A	Novel	Theory	Explains	Why	the	Brain
Craves	Information	and	Seeks	It	Through	the	Senses,”	
American	Scientist
	94
(May–June	2006):	247–53.
the	“biophilia	hypothesis”:
	Edward	O.	Wilson,	
Biophilia:	The	Human	Bond
with	Other	Species
	(Cambridge:	Harvard	University	Press,	1984),	109–11.
“Everything	we	do	at	Second	Home”:
	Rohan	Silva,	quoted	in	Diana	Budds,
“There	Are	More	Than	2,000	Plants	in	This	Lush	Coworking	Space,”	
Fast
Company,
	February	12,	2017.
presence	of	indoor	plants:
	Ruth	K.	Raanaas	et	al.,	“Benefits	of	Indoor	Plants	on
Attention	Capacity	in	an	Office	Setting,”	
Journal	of	Environmental
Psychology
	31	(March	2011):	99–105.	See	also	Tina	Bringslimark,	Terry
Hartig,	and	Grete	Grindal	Patil,	“Psychological	Benefits	of	Indoor	Plants	in
Workplaces:	Putting	Experimental	Results	into	Context,”	
HortScience
	42
(June	2007):	581–87.
“green	wall”:
	Agnes	E.	van	den	Berg	et	al.,	“Green	Walls	for	a	Restorative
Classroom	Environment:	A	Controlled	Evaluation	Study,”	
Environment	and
Behavior
	49	(August	2017):	791–813.
Bank	of	America	Tower:
	William	Browning,	“Constructing	the	Biophilic
Community,”	in	
Constructing	Green:	The	Social	Structures	of	Sustainability,
ed.	Rebecca	L.	Henn	and	Andrew	J.	Hoffman	(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	2013),
341–50.
“We	wanted	the	first	thing”:
	Author	interview	with	Bill	Browning.
an	indoor	environment:
	Jie	Yin	et	al.,	“Physiological	and	Cognitive	Performance
of	Exposure	to	Biophilic	Indoor	Environment,”	
Building	and	Environment
132	(March	2018):	255–62.
keep	us	alert:
	Kevin	Nute	et	al.,	“The	Animation	of	the	Weather	as	a	Means	of
Sustaining	Building	Occupants	and	the	Natural	Environment,”	
International
Journal	of	Environmental	Sustainability
	8	(2012):	27–39.
--- Page 272 ---
forty-six	minutes	more:
	Mohamed	Boubekri	et	al.,	“Impact	of	Windows	and
Daylight	Exposure	on	Overall	Health	and	Sleep	Quality	of	Office	Workers:	A
Case-Control	Pilot	Study,”	
Journal	of	Clinical	Sleep	Medicine
	10	(June
2014):	603–11.
Google	has	determined:
	Adele	Peters,	“Google	Is	Trying	to	Improve	Its
Workplaces	with	Offices	Inspired	by	Nature,”	
Fast	Company,
	January	12,
2015.
the	energy	crisis	of	the	1970s:
	Lindsay	Baker,	
A	History	of	School	Design	and
Its	Indoor	Environmental	Standards,	1900	to	Today
	(Washington,	DC:
National	Institute	of	Building	Sciences,	2012).
“It	changes	the	whole	mood”:
	Lisa	Sarnicola,	quoted	in	Joann	Gonchar,
“Schools	of	the	21st	Century:	P.S.	62,	the	Kathleen	Grimm	School	for
Leadership	and	Sustainability	at	Sandy	Ground,”	
Architectural	Record,
January	2016.
gauging	the	“greenness”:
	Wing	Tuen	Veronica	Leung	et	al.,	“How	Is
Environmental	Greenness	Related	to	Students’	Academic	Performance	in
English	and	Mathematics?,”	
Landscape	and	Urban	Planning
	181	(January
2019):	118–24.
assigned	to	a	room:
	Dongying	Li	and	William	C.	Sullivan,	“Impact	of	Views	to
School	Landscapes	on	Recovery	from	Stress	and	Mental	Fatigue,”	
Landscape
and	Urban	Planning
	148	(April	2016):	149–58.
effects	of	window	access:
	Lisa	Heschong,	“Windows	and	Office	Worker
Performance:	The	SMUD	Call	Center	and	Desktop	Studies,”	in	
Creating	the
Productive	Workplace,
	ed.	Derek	Clements-Croome	(New	York:	Taylor	&
Francis,	2006),	277–309.
forty-second	“micro-break”:
	Kate	E.	Lee	et	al.,	“40-Second	Green	Roof	Views
Sustain	Attention:	The	Role	of	Micro-Breaks	in	Attention	Restoration,”
Journal	of	Environmental	Psychology
	42	(June	2015):	182–89.
“microrestorative	opportunities”:
	Rachel	Kaplan,	“The	Nature	of	the	View	from
Home:	Psychological	Benefits,”	
Environment	and	Behavior
	33	(July	2001):
507–42.
“Oh,	these	vast	calm”:
	John	Muir,	
My	First	Summer	in	the	Sierra
	(Boston:
Houghton	Mifflin,	1916),	82.
“The	first	night	we	camped”:
	Theodore	Roosevelt,	“John	Muir:	An
Appreciation,”	in	
The	Outlook:	A	Weekly	Newspaper,
	January	16,	1915,	28.
“I	hope	for	the	preservation”:
	Theodore	Roosevelt,	speech	given	at	the	Capitol
Building	in	Sacramento,	California,	on	May	19,	1903,	in	
A	Compilation	of	the
Messages	and	Speeches	of	Theodore	Roosevelt,	1901–1905,
	vol.	1,	ed.	Alfred
--- Page 273 ---
Henry	Lewis	(Washington,	DC:	Bureau	of	National	Literature	and	Art,	1906),
410.
delay	immediate	gratification:
	Meredith	S.	Berry	et	al.,	“Making	Time	for
Nature:	Visual	Exposure	to	Natural	Environments	Lengthens	Subjective	Time
Perception	and	Reduces	Impulsivity,”	
PLoS	One
	10	(November	2015).
restrain	their	impulse:
	Arianne	J.	van	der	Wal	et	al.,	“Do	Natural	Landscapes
Reduce	Future	Discounting	in	Humans?,”	
Proceedings	of	the	Royal	Society	B:
Biological	Sciences
	280	(December	2013).
capable	of	delaying	gratification:
	Rebecca	Jenkin	et	al.,	“The	Relationship
Between	Exposure	to	Natural	and	Urban	Environments	and	Children’s	Self-
Regulation,”	
Landscape	Research
	43	(April	2018):	315–28.
estimate	how	many	seconds:
	Berry	et	al.,	“Making	Time	for	Nature.”
overestimate	how	long:
	Maria	Davydenko	and	Johanna	Peetz,	“Time	Grows	on
Trees:	
The	Effect	of	Nature	Settings	on	Time	Perception,”	
Journal	of
Environmental	Psychology
	54	(December	2017):	20–26.
Children’s	play	is	more	imaginative:
	Kellie	Dowdell,	Tonia	Gray,	and	Karen
Malone,	“Nature	and	Its	Influence	on	Children’s	Outdoor	Play,”	
Journal	of
Outdoor	and	Environmental	Education
	15	(December	2011):	24–35.	See	also
Anne-Marie	Morrissey,	Caroline	Scott,	and	Mark	Rahimi,	“A	Comparison	of
Sociodramatic	Play	Processes	of	Preschoolers	in	a	Naturalized	and	a
Traditional	Outdoor	Space,”	
International	Journal	of	Play
	6	(May	2017):
177–97.
expansively	and	open-mindedly:
	Ethan	A.	McMahan	and	David	Estes,	“The
Effect	of	Contact	with	Natural	Environments	on	Positive	and	Negative	Affect:
A	Meta-Analysis,”	
Journal	of	Positive	Psychology
	10	(November	2015):	507–
19.	See	also	George	Mac
Kerron	and	Susana	Mourato,	“Happiness	Is	Greater
in	Natural	Environments,”	
Global	Environmental	Change
	23	(October	2013):
992–1000.
“three	day	effect”:
	David	Strayer,	quoted	in	Florence	Williams,	“This	Is	Your
Brain	on	Nature,”	
National	Geographic,
	January	2016.	See	also	Frank	M.
Ferraro	III,	“Enhancement	of	Convergent	Creativity	Following	a	Multiday
Wilderness	Experience,”	
Ecopsychology
	7	(March	2015):	7–11.
a	measure	of	creative	thinking:
	Ruth	Ann	Atchley,	David	L.	Strayer,	and	Paul
Atchley,	“Creativity	in	the	Wild:	Improving	Creative	Reasoning	Through
Immersion	in	Natural	Settings,”	
PLoS	One
	7	(December	2012).
makes	us	feel	tiny:
	Yang	Bai	et	al.,	“Awe,	the	Diminished	Self,	and	Collective
Engagement:	Universals	and	Cultural	Variations	in	the	Small	Self,”	
Journal	of
Personality	and	Social	Psychology
	113	(August	2017):	185–209.	See	also
Yannick	Joye	and	Jan	Willem	Bolderdijk,	“An	Exploratory	Study	into	the
--- Page 274 ---
Effects	of	Extraordinary	Nature	on	Emotions,	Mood,	and	Prosociality,”
Frontiers	in	Psychology
	5	(January	2015).
“in	the	upper	reaches	of	pleasure”:
	Dacher	Keltner	and	Jonathan	Haidt,
“Approaching	Awe,	a	Moral,	Spiritual,	and	Aesthetic	Emotion,”	
Cognition	&
Emotion
	17	(March	2003):	297–314.
we	must	work	to	accommodate:
	Michelle	Shiota	et	al.,	“Transcending	the	Self:
Awe,	Elevation,	and	Inspiration,”	in	
Handbook	of	Positive	Emotions,
	ed.
Michele	M.	Tugade,	Michelle	N.	Shiota,	and	Leslie	D.	Kirby	(New	York:
Guilford	Press,	2016),	362–77.
physical	behavior	that	accompanies	awe:
	Michelle	N.	Shiota,	Belinda	Campos,
and	Dacher	Keltner,	“The	Faces	of	Positive	Emotion:	Prototype	Displays	of
Awe,	Amusement,	and	Pride,”	
Annals	of	the	New	York	Academy	of	Science
1000	(December	2003):	296–99.	See	also	Belinda	Campos	et	al.,	“What	Is
Shared,	What	Is	Different?	Core	Relational	Themes	and	Expressive	Displays
of	Eight	Positive	Emotions,”	
Cognition	&	Emotion
	27	(January	2013):	37–52.
more	curious	and	open-minded:
	Michelle	N.	Shiota,	Dacher	Keltner,	and
Amanda	Mossman,	“The	Nature	of	Awe:	Elicitors,	Appraisals,	and	Effects	on
Self-Concept,”	
Cognition	&	Emotion
	21	(August	2007):	944–63.	See	also
Laura	L.	Carstensen,	Derek	M.	Isaacowitz,	and	Susan	Turk	Charles,	“Taking
Time	Seriously:	A	Theory	of	Socioemotional	Selectivity,”	
American
Psychologist
	54	(March	1999):	165–81.
more	willing	to	revise	and	update:
	Alexander	F.	Danvers	and	Michelle	N.
Shiota,	“Going	Off	Script:	Effects	of	Awe	on	Memory	for	Script-Typical	and
-Irrelevant	Narrative	Detail,”	
Emotion
	17	(September	2017):	938–52.
“a	reset	button”:
	Jonathan	Haidt,	
The	Righteous	Mind:	Why	Good	People	Are
Divided	by	Politics	and	Religion
	(New	York:	Pantheon	Books,	2012),	228.
more	prosocially:
	Jia	Wei	Zhang	et	al.,	“An	Occasion	for	Unselfing:	Beautiful
Nature	Leads	to	Prosociality,”	
Journal	of	Environmental	Psychology
	37
(March	2014):	61–72.	See	also	John	M.	Zelenski,	Raelyne	L.	Dopko,	and
Colin	A.	Capaldi,	“Cooperation	Is	in	Our	Nature:	Nature	Exposure	May
Promote	Cooperative	and	Environmentally	Sustainable	Behavior,”	
Journal	of
Environmental	Psychology
	42	(June	2015):	24–31.
more	altruistically:
	Nicolas	Guéguen	and	Jordy	Stefan,	“
 
‘Green	Altruism’:
Short	Immersion	in	Natural	Green	Environments	and	Helping	Behavior,”
Environment	and	Behavior
	48	(February	2016):	324–42.	See	also	Claire	Prade
and	Vassilis	Saroglou,	“Awe’s	Effects	on	Generosity	and	Helping,”	
Journal	of
Positive	Psychology
	11	(September	2016):	522–30.
The	“functional”	account	of	awe:
	Dacher	Keltner	and	James	J.	Gross,
“Functional	Accounts	of	Emotions,”	
Cognition	and	Emotion
	13	(September
--- Page 275 ---
1999):	467–80.
put	aside	their	individual	interests:
	Bai	et	al.,	“Awe,	the	Diminished	Self,	and
Collective	Engagement.”	See	also	Jennifer	E.	Stellar	et	al.,	“Self-Transcendent
Emotions	and	Their	Social	Functions:	Compassion,	Gratitude,	and	Awe	Bind
Us	to	Others	Through	Prosociality,”	
Emotion
	9	(July	2017):	200–207.
“the	overview	effect”:
	Frank	White,	
The	Overview	Effect:	Space	Exploration
and	Human	Evolution
	(Reston,	VA:	American	Institute	of	Aeronautics	and
Astronautics,	1998),	3–4.	See	also	David	B.	Yaden	et	al.,	“The	Overview
Effect:	Awe	and	Self-Transcendent	Experience	in	Space	Flight,”	
Psychology
of	Consciousness:	Theory,	Research,	and	Practice
	3	(March	2016):	1–11.
“If	somebody’d	said	before	the	flight”:
	Alan	Shepard,	quoted	in	Don	Nardo,	
The
Blue	Marble:	How	a	Photograph	Revealed	Earth’s	Fragile	Beauty
	(North
Mankato,	MN:	Compass	Point	Books,	2014),	46.
“you	identify	with	Houston”:
	Rusty	Schweikart,	quoted	in	White,	
The	Overview
Effect,
	11.
“explosion	of	awareness”:
	Edgar	Mitchell,	quoted	in	White,	
The	Overview
Effect,
	38.
“overwhelming	sense	of	oneness”:
	Edgar	Mitchell,	quoted	in	Yaden	et	al.,	
“The
Overview	Effect.”
preserve	the	psychological	well-being:
	Clay	Morgan,	“Long-Duration
Psychology:	The	Real	Final	Frontier?,”	in	
Shuttle	Mir:	The	United	States	and
Russia	Share	History’s	Highest	Stage
	(Houston:	Lyndon	B.	Johnson	Space
Center),	50–51.
“space	broccoli”:
	Monica	Edwards	and	Laurie	Abadie,	“Zinnias	from	Space!
NASA	Studies	the	Multiple	Benefits	of	Gardening,”	post	on	the	website	of	the
NASA	Human	Research	Program,	January	19,	2016.
“Farmer	Foale”:
	Morgan,	“Long-Duration	Psychology.”
“I	loved	the	greenhouse	experiment”:
	Michael	Foale,	quoted	in	“Mir-24	Mission
Interviews,”	October	29,	1997,	posted	on	the	website	of	NASA	History,
https://history.nasa.gov/SP-4225/documentation/mir-
summaries/mir24/interviews.htm
.
“homesick”:
	David	Jagneaux,	“Virtual	Reality	Could	Provide	Healthy	Escape
for	Homesick	Astronauts,”	
Vice,
	January	10,	2016.
“we	feel	‘at	home’
 
”:
	Harry	Francis	Mallgrave,	
Architecture	and	Embodiment:
The	Implications	of	the	New	Sciences	and	Humanities	for	Design
	(New	York:
Routledge,	2013),	74.
5.	THINKING	WITH	BUILT	SPACES
--- Page 276 ---
take	leave	of	the	lab:
	My	discussion	about	Jonas	Salk’s	visit	to	the	monastery	in
Assisi	draws	on	the	following	sources:	John	Paul	Eberhard,	“Architecture	and
Neuroscience:	
A	Double	Helix,”	in	
Mind	in	Architecture:	Neuroscience,
Embodiment,	and	the	Future	of	Design,
	ed.	Sarah	Robinson	and	Juhani
Pallasmaa	(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	2015),	123–36;	Nathaniel	Coleman,
Utopias	and	Architecture
	(New	York:	Routledge,	2007);	Norman	L.	Koonce,
“Stewardship:	An	Architect’s	Perspective,”	in	
Historic	Cities	and	Sacred
Sites:	Cultural	Roots	for	Urban	Futures,
	ed.	Ismail	Serageldin,	Ephim
Shluger,	and	Joan	Martin-Brown	(Washington,	DC:	World	Bank,	2001),	30–
32.
“The	spirituality	of	the	architecture”:
	Jonas	Salk,	quoted	in	Coleman,	
Utopias
and	Architecture,
	185.
build	an	intellectual	community:
	My	discussion	of	Jonas	Salk’s	collaboration
with	Louis	Kahn	draws	on	the	following	sources:	Wendy	Lesser,	
You	Say	to
Brick:	The	Life	of	Louis	Kahn
	(New	York:	Farrar,	Straus	and	Giroux,	2017);
Charlotte	DeCroes	Jacobs,	
Jonas	Salk:	A	Life
	(New	York:	Oxford	University
Press,	2015);	Jonathan	Salk,	“Reflections	on	the	Relationship	Between	Lou
Kahn	and	Jonas	Salk,”	talk	given	at	the	DFC	Technology	and	Innovation
Summit,	2015,	posted	on	the	DesignIntelligence	website,
https://www.di.net/articles/reflections-on-the-relationship-between-lou-kahn-
and-jonas-salk/
;	Stuart	W.	Leslie,	“A	Different	Kind	of	Beauty:	Scientific	and
Architectural	Style	in	I.	M.	Pei’s	Mesa	Laboratory	and	Louis	Kahn’s	Salk
Institute,”	
Historical	Studies	in	the	Natural	Sciences
	38	(Spring	2008):	173–
221;	Carter	Wiseman,	
Louis	I.	Kahn:	Beyond	Time	and	Style;	A	Life	in
Architecture
	(New	York:	W.	W.	Norton,	2007);	David	B.	Brownlee	and
David	G.	De	Long,	
Louis	I.	Kahn:	In	the	Realm	of	Architecture
	(New	York:
Rizzoli,	1991).
an	optimal	place	to	think:
	Carolina	A.	Miranda,	“Louis	Kahn’s	Salk	Institute,
the	Building	That	Guesses	Tomorrow,	Is	Aging—Very,	Very	Gracefully,”	
Los
Angeles	Times,
	November	22,	2016.
“I	would	say	the	building”:
	Jonas	Salk,	quoted	in	Wiseman,	
Louis	I.	Kahn,
	135.
tradition	of	folk	architecture:
	Christopher	Alexander,	Sara	Ishikawa,	and	Murray
Silverstein,	
A	Pattern	Language
	(New	York:	Oxford	University	Press,	1977).
“neuroarchitecture”:
	Alex	Coburn,	Oshin	Vartanian	and	Anjan	Chatterjee,
“Buildings,	Beauty,	and	the	Brain:	A	Neuroscience	of	Architectural
Experience,”	
Journal	of	Cognitive	Neuroscience
	29	(September	2017):	1521–
31.
it	was	a	disaster:
	Roger	N.	Goldstein,	“Architectural	Design	and	the
Collaborative	Research	Environment,”	
Cell
	127	(October	2006):	243–46.
--- Page 277 ---
Roger	Barker	had	set	out:
	Roger	G.	Barker,	
Habitats,	Environments,	and
Human	Behavior:	Studies	in	Ecological	Psychology	and	Eco-Behavioral
Science	from	the	Midwest	Psychological	Field	Station,	1947–1972
	(San
Francisco:	Jossey-Bass,	1978).	See	also	Harry	Heft,	
Ecological	Psychology	in
Context:	James	Gibson,	Roger	Barker,	and	the	Legacy	of	William	James
(Mahwah,	NJ:	Lawrence	Erlbaum	Associates,	2001).
“Barker	and	his	colleagues”:
	Benjamin	R.	Meagher,	“Ecologizing	Social
Psychology:	The	Physical	Environment	as	a	Necessary	Constituent	of	Social
Processes,”	
Personality	and	Social	Psychology	Review
	24	(February	2020):	3–
23.
“The	characteristics	of	the	behavior”:
	Roger	Barker,	
Ecological	Psychology:
Concepts	and	Methods	for	Studying	the	Environment	of	Human	Behavior
(Palo	Alto:	Stanford	University	Press,	1968),	152.
“the	arrogance	of	the	belief”:
	Christopher	Alexander,	
The	Timeless	Way	of
Building
	(New	York:	Oxford	University	Press,	1979),	106.
“The	wall	was	designed”:
	Colin	Ellard,	
Places	of	the	Heart:	The
Psychogeography	of	Everyday	Life
	(New	York:	Bellevue	Literary	Press,
2015),	24–25.
“Our	distant	ancestors”:
	John	L.	Locke,	
Eavesdropping:	An	Intimate	History
(Oxford:	Oxford	University	Press,	2010),	5.
the
	studiolo	
of	Federico	da	Montefeltro:
	Joscelyn	Godwin,	
The	Pagan	Dream	of
the	Renaissance
	(Boston:	Weiser	Books,	2005).
such	“thinking	rooms”	served	a	need:
	Philippe	Ariès	and	Georges	Duby,	eds.,	
A
History	of	Private	Life,
	vol.	2,	
Revelations	of	the	Medieval	World
	(Cambridge:
Belknap	Press	of	Harvard	University	Press,	1988).
“we	must	reserve	a	back	room”:
	Michel	de	Montaigne,	“Of	Solitude,”	in	
The
Essays	of	Michael	Seigneur	De	Montaigne,
	trans.	Peter	Coste	(London:	S.	and
E.	Ballard,	1759),	277.
70	to	80	percent	of	American	office	workers:
	Matthew	C.	Davis,	Desmond	J.
Leach,	and	Chris	W.	Clegg,	“The	Physical	Environment	of	the	Office:
Contemporary	and	Emerging	Issues,”	
International	Review	of	Industrial	and
Organizational	Psychology
	26	(2011):	193–237.
“fertilized	countless	Enlightenment-era	innovations”:
	Steven	Johnson,	
Where
Good	Ideas	Come	From:	A	Natural	History	of	Invention
	(New	York:
Riverhead	Books,	2010),	162–63.
many	hours	at	a	coffeehouse:
	Steven	Johnson,	
The	Invention	of	Air:	A	Story	of
Science,	Faith,	Revolution,	and	the	Birth	of	America
	(New	York:	Riverhead,
2008).
--- Page 278 ---
“There	should	be	a	plaque”:
	Steven	Johnson,	interviewed	by	Guy	Raz,	“How
Cafe	Culture	Helped	Make	Good	Ideas	Happen,”	
All	Things	Considered,
NPR,	October	17,	2010.
“Allen	curve”:
	Thomas	J.	Allen,	
Managing	the	Flow	of	Technology
	(Cambridge:
MIT	Press,	1977).	See	also	Peter	Dizikes,	“The	Office	Next	Door,”	
MIT
Technology	Review,
	October	2011.
MIThenge:
	“Infinite	Corridor,”	post	on	the	
Atlas	Obscura
	website,
https://www.atlasobscura.com/places/infinite-corridor
.
the	Allen	curve	still	applies:
	Thomas	J.	Allen	and	Gunter	W.	Henn,	
The
Organization	and	Architecture	of	Innovation
	(New	York:	Routledge,	2007).
See	also	Matthew	Claudel	et	al.,	“An	Exploration	of	Collaborative	Scientific
Production	at	MIT	Through	Spatial	Organization	and	Institutional
Affiliation,”	
PLoS	One
	12	(June	2017).
“ineluctably	break	through”:
	Fabrice	B.	R.	Parmentier,	“Deviant	Sounds	Yield
Distraction	Irrespective	of	the	Sounds’	Informational	Value,”	
Journal	of
Experimental	Psychology:	Human	Perception	and	Performance
	42	(June
2016):	837–46.
“involuntary	capture”:
	Fabrice	B.	R.	Parmentier,	Jacqueline	Turner,	and	Laura
Perez,	“A	Dual	Contribution	to	the	Involuntary	Semantic	Processing	of
Unexpected	Spoken	Words,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Psychology:	General
143	(February	2014):	38–45.
intelligible	speech	is	particularly	distracting:
	Niina	Venetjoki	et	al.,	“The	Effect
of	Speech	and	Speech	Intelligibility	on	Task	Performance,”	
Ergonomics
	49
(September	2006):	1068–91.	See	also	Valtteri	Hongisto,	“A	Model	Predicting
the	Effect	of	Speech	of	Varying	Intelligibility	on	Work	Performance,”	
Indoor
Air
	15	(December	2005):	458–68.
its	semantic	meaning	is	processed:
	Fabrice	B.	R.	Parmentier,	Jacqueline	Turner,
and	Laura	Perez,	“A	Dual	Contribution	to	the	Involuntary	Semantic
Processing	of	Unexpected	Spoken	Words,”	
Journal	of	Experimental
Psychology:	General
	143	(February	2014):	38–45.	See	also	Helena	Jahncke,
“Open-Plan	Office	Noise:	The	Susceptibility	and	Suitability	of	Different
Cognitive	Tasks	for	Work	in	the	Presence	of	Irrelevant	Speech,”	
Noise	Health
14	(November–December	2012),	315–20.
drawing	on	the	same	limited	resource:
	Marijke	Keus	van	de	Poll	and	Patrik
Sörqvist,	“Effects	of	Task	Interruption	and	Background	Speech	on	Word
Processed	Writing,”	
Applied	Cognitive	Psychology
	30	(May–June	2016):
430–39.
participants	were	asked	to	write:
	Marijke	Keus	van	de	Poll	et	al.,	“Disruption	of
Writing	by	Background	Speech:	The	Role	of	Speech	Transmission	Index,”
--- Page 279 ---
Applied	Acoustics
	81	(July	2014):	15–18.
tune	out	one-sided	conversations:
	John	E.	Marsh	et	al.,	Why	Are	Background
Telephone	Conversations	Distracting?,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Psychology:
Applied
	24	(June	2018):	222–35.	See	also	Veronica	V.	Galván,	Rosa	S.
Vessal,	and	Matthew	T.	Golley,	“The	Effects	of	Cell	Phone	Conversations	on
the	Attention	and	Memory	of	Bystanders,”	
PLoS	One
	8	(2013).
“halfalogue”:
	Lauren	L.	Emberson	et	al.,	“Overheard	Cell-Phone
Conversations:	When	Less	Speech	Is	More	Distracting,”	
Psychological
Science
	21	(October	2010):	1383–88.
competes	for	mental	resources:
	Nick	Perham	and	Harriet	Currie,	“Does
Listening	to	Preferred	Music	Improve	Reading	Comprehension
Performance?,”	
Applied	Cognitive	Psychology
	28	(March–April	2014):	279–
84.
tasks	that	are	difficult	or	complex:
	Manuel	F.	Gonzalez	and	John	R.	Aiello,
“More	Than	Meets	the	Ear:	Investigating	How	Music	Affects	Cognitive	Task
Performance,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Psychology:	Applied
	25	(September
2019):	431–44.
those	requiring	creativity:
	Emma	Threadgold	et	al.,	“Background	Music	Stints
Creativity:	Evidence	from	Compound	Remote	Associate	Tasks,”	
Applied
Cognitive	Psychology
	33	(September–October	2019):	873–88.
high	intensity,	fast	tempos:
	Peter	Tze-Ming	Chou,	“Attention	Drainage	Effect:
How	Background	Music	Effects	[
sic
]	Concentration	in	Taiwanese	College
Students,”	
Journal	of	the	Scholarship	of	Teaching	and	Learning
	(January
2010):	36–46.
frequent	variation:
	Nick	Perham	and	Martinne	Sykora,	“Disliked	Music	Can	Be
Better	for	Performance	Than	Liked	Music,”	
Applied	Cognitive	Psychology
	26
(June	2012):	550–55.
“attention	drainage	effect”:
	Chou,	“Attention	Drainage	Effect.”
disrupts	cognition	for	young	people:
	Martin	R.	Vasilev,	Julie	A.	Kirkby,	and
Bernhard	Angele,	“Auditory	Distraction	During	Reading:	A	Bayesian	Meta-
Analysis	of	a	Continuing	Controversy,”	
Perspectives	on	Psychological
Science
	12	(September	2018):	567–97.
while	listening	to	music	they	prefer:
	Perham	and	Sykora,	“Disliked	Music	Can
Be	Better	for	Performance	Than	Liked	Music.”
prioritizes	the	processing	of	faces:
	Romina	Palermo	and	Gillian	Rhodes,	“Are
You	Always	on	My	Mind?	A	Review	of	How	Face	Perception	and	Attention
Interact,”	
Neuropsychologia
	45	(2007):	75–92.
the
	gaze	
of	other	people:
	Takemasa	Yokoyama	et	al.,	“Attentional	Capture	by
Change	in	Direct	Gaze,”	
Perception
	40	(July	2011):	785–97.	See	also	Atsushi
--- Page 280 ---
Senju	and	Mark	H.	Johnson,	“The	Eye	Contact	Effect:	Mechanisms	and
Development,”	
Trends	in	Cognitive	Sciences
	13	(March	2009):	127–34.
the	processing	of	eye	contact:
	J.	Jessica	Wang	and	Ian	A.	Apperly,	“Just	One
Look:	Direct	Gaze	Briefly	Disrupts	Visual	Working	Memory,”	
Psychonomic
Bulletin	&	Review
	24	(2017):	393–99.	See	also	Laurence	Conty	et	al.,	“The
Cost	of	Being	Watched:	Stroop	Interference	Increases	Under	Concomitant
Eye	Contact,”	
Cognition
	115	(April	2010):	133–39.
increases	our	physiological	arousal:
	Laurence	Conty	et	al.,	“The	Mere
Perception	of	
Eye	Contact	Increases	Arousal	During	a	Word-Spelling	Task,”
Social	Neuroscience
	5	(2010):	171–86.	See	also	Terhi	M.	Helminen,	Suvi	M.
Kaasinen,	and	Jari	K.	Hietanen,	“Eye	Contact	and	Arousal:	The	Effects	of
Stimulus	Duration,”	
Biological	Psychology
	88	(September	2011):	124–30.
when	we	close	our	eyes:
	Annelies	Vredeveldt	and	Timothy	J.	Perfect,
“Reduction	of	Environmental	Distraction	to	Facilitate	Cognitive
Performance,”	
Frontiers	in	Psychology
	5	(August	2014).
“helps	people	to	disengage”:
	Arthur	M.	Glenberg,	Jennifer	L.	Schroeder,	and
David	A.	Robertson,	“Averting	the	Gaze	Disengages	the	Environment	and
Facilitates	Remembering,”	
Memory	&	Cognition
	26	(July	1998):	651–58.
experience	less	cognitive	load:
	Annelies	Vredeveldt,	Graham	J.	Hitch,	and	Alan
D.	Baddeley,	“Eyeclosure	Helps	Memory	by	Reducing	Cognitive	Load	and
Enhancing	Visualisation,”	
Memory	&	Cognition
	39	(April	2011):	1253–63.
retrieve	elusive	information:
	Rémi	Radel	and	Marion	Fournier,	“The	Influence
of	External	Stimulation	in	Missing	Knowledge	Retrieval,”	
Memory
	25
(October	2017):	1217–24.
both	visual	and	auditory:
	Timothy	J.	Perfect	et	al.,	“How	Can	We	Help
Witnesses	to	Remember	More?	It’s	an	(Eyes)	Open	and	Shut	Case,”	
Law	and
Human	Behavior
	32	(August	2008):	314–24.
a	23	percent	increase:
	Robert	A.	Nash	et	al.,	“Does	Rapport-Building	Boost	the
Eyewitness	Eyeclosure	Effect	in	Closed	Questioning?,”	
Legal	and
Criminological	Psychology
	21	(September	2016):	305–18.
“sensory	reduction”:
	Radel	and	Fournier,	“The	Influence	of	External
Stimulation	in	Missing	Knowledge	Retrieval.”
“Good	fences	make	good	neighbors”:
	Robert	Frost,	“Mending	Wall,”	in	
Robert
Frost:	Collected	Poems,	Prose,	and	Plays
	(New	York:	Library	of	America,
1995),	39–40.
putting	oneself	on	display:
	Kathleen	D.	Vohs,	Roy	F.	Baumeister,	and	Natalie	J.
Ciarocco,	“Self-Regulation	and	Self-Presentation:	Regulatory	Resource
Depletion	Impairs	Impression	Management	and	Effortful	Self-Presentation
--- Page 281 ---
Depletes	Regulatory	Resources,”	
Journal	of	Personality	and	Social
Psychology
	88	(April	2005):	632–57.
particularly	draining	for	members:
	Alison	Hirst	and	Christina	Schwabenland,
“Doing	Gender	in	the	‘New	Office,’
 
”	
Gender,	Work	&	Organization
	25
(March	2018):	159–76.
relieved	of	the	cognitive	load:
	Shira	Baror	and	Moshe	Bar,	“Associative
Activation	and	Its	Relation	to	Exploration	and	Exploitation	in	the	Brain,”
Psychological	Science
	27	(June	2016):	776–89.
“statistically	common”:
	Moshe	Bar,	“Think	Less,	Think	Better,”	
New	York
Times,
	June	17,	2016.
less	likely	to	try	new	approaches:
	Ethan	Bernstein,	“The	Transparency	Trap,”
Harvard	Business	Review,
	October	2014.	See	also	Julian	Birkinshaw	and	Dan
Cable,	“The	Dark	Side	of	Transparency,”	
McKinsey	Quarterly,
	February
2017.
a	mobile	phone	factory	in	China:
	Ethan	S.	Bernstein,	“The	Transparency
Paradox:	A	Role	for	Privacy	in	Organizational	Learning	and	Operational
Control,”	
Administrative	Science	Quarterly
	57	(June	2012):	181–216.
privacy	leads	to	feelings	of	empowerment:
	Darhl	M.	Pedersen,	“Psychological
Functions	of	Privacy,”	
Journal	of	Environmental	Psychology
	17	(June	1997):
147–56.
fewer	and	more	superficial	work-related	conversations:
	Anne-Laure	Fayard	and
John	Weeks,	“Who	Moved	My	Cube?,”	
Harvard	Business	Review,
	July–
August	2011.
interactions	among	employees	actually
	decrease:
	
Ben	Waber,	“Do	Open	Offices
Really	Increase	Collaboration?,”	
Quartz,
	April	13,	2018.
trust	and	cooperativeness	among	co-workers:
	Rachel	L.	Morrison	and	Keith	A.
Macky,	“The	Demands	and	Resources	Arising	from	Shared	Office	Spaces,”
Applied	Ergonomics
	60	(April	2017):	103–15.
exactly	the	kind	of	behavior:
	Rachel	Morrison,	“Open-Plan	Offices	Might	Be
Making	Us	Less	Social	and	Productive,	Not	More,”	
Quartz,
	September	19,
2016.
“hot-desking”	or	“hoteling”:
	Alison	Hirst,	“Settlers,	Vagrants	and	Mutual
Indifference:	Unintended	Consequences	of	Hot-Desking,”	
Journal	of
Organizational	Change
	24	(2011):	767–88.	See	also	Alison	Hirst,	“How	Hot-
Deskers	Are	Made	to	Feel	Like	the	Homeless	People	of	the	Office	World,”
The	Conversation,
	February	13,	2017.
“home	advantage”:
	Jeremy	P.	Jamieson,	“The	Home	Field	Advantage	in
Athletics:	A	Meta-Analysis,”	
Journal	of	Applied	Social	Psychology
	40	(July
2010):	1819–48.	See	also	Mark	S.	Allen	and	Marc	V.	Jones,	“The	‘Home
--- Page 282 ---
Advantage’	in	Athletic	Competitions,”	
Current	Directions	in	Psychological
Science
	23	(February	2014):	48–53.
play	more	aggressively:
	Kerry	S.	Courneya	and	Albert	V.	Carron,	“The	Home
Advantage	in	Sport	Competitions:	A	Literature	Review,”	
Journal	of	Sport	and
Exercise	Psychology
	14	(March	1992):	13–27.
higher	levels	of	testosterone:
	Nick	Neave	and	Sandy	Wolfson,	“Testosterone,
Territoriality,	and	the	‘Home	Advantage,’
 
”	
Physiology	&	Behavior
	78
(February	2003):	269–75.
more	confident	and	capable:
	Lorraine	E.	Maxwell	and	Emily	J.	Chmielewski,
“Environmental	Personalization	and	Elementary	School	Children’s	Self-
Esteem,”	
Journal	of	Environmental	Psychology
	28	(June	2008):	143–53.	See
also	Clare	Ulrich,	“A	Place	of	Their	Own:	Children	and	the	Physical
Environment,”	
Human	Ecology
	32	(October	2004):	11–14.
more	efficient	and	productive:
	David	C.	Glass	and	Jerome	E.	Singer,
“Experimental	Studies	of	Uncontrollable	and	Unpredictable	Noise,”
Representative	Research	in	Social	Psychology
	4	(1973):	165–83.	See	also
David	C.	Glass,	Jerome	E.	Singer,	and	Lucy	N.	Friedman,	“Psychic	Cost	of
Adaptation	to	an	Environmental	Stressor,”	
Journal	of	Personality	and	Social
Psychology
	12	(1969):	200–210.
more	focused	and	less	distractible:
	So	Young	Lee	and	Jay	L.	Brand,	“Can
Personal	Control	over	the	Physical	Environment	Ease	Distractions	in	Office
Workplaces?,”	
Ergonomics
	53	(March	2010):	324–35.	See	also	So	Young	Lee
and	Jay	L.	Brand,	“Effects	of	Control	over	Office	Workspace	on	Perceptions
of	the	Work	Environment	and	Work	Outcomes,”	
Journal	of	Environmental
Psychology
	25	(September	2005):	323–33.
advance	their	own	interests:
	Graham	Brown,	“Setting	(and	Choosing)	the	Table:
The	Influence	of	the	Physical	Environment	in	Negotiation,”	in	
Negotiation
Excellence:	Successful	Deal	Making,
	ed.	Michael	Benoliel	(Singapore:	World
Scientific	Publishing,	2015),	23–37.
60	and	160	percent	more	value:
	Graham	Brown	and	Markus	Baer,	“Location	in
Negotiation:	Is	There	a	Home	Field	Advantage?,”	
Organizational	Behavior
and	Human	Decision	Processes
	114	(March	2011):	190–200.
operate	more	efficiently:
	Meagher,	“Ecologizing	Social	Psychology.”
“our	cognition	is	distributed”:
	Benjamin	R.	Meagher,	“The	Emergence	of	Home
Advantage	from	Differential	Perceptual	Activity”	(PhD	diss.,	University	of
Connecticut,	July	2014).
volunteers	were	given	a	set	of	tasks:
	Craig	Knight	and	S.	Alexander	Haslam,
“The	Rela
tive	Merits	of	Lean,	Enriched,	and	Empowered	Offices:	An
Experimental	Examination	of	the	Impact	of	Workspace	Management
--- Page 283 ---
Strategies	on	Well-Being	and	Productivity,”	
Journal	of	Experimental
Psychology:	Applied
	16	(2010):	158–72.
“I	wanted	to	hit	you”:
	Study	participant,	quoted	in	Tim	Harford,	
Messy:	The
Power	of	Disorder	to	Transform	Our	Lives
	(New	York:	Riverhead	Books
2016),	66.
“intermittent	collaboration”:
	Ethan	Bernstein,	Jesse	Shore,	and	David	Lazer,
“How	Intermittent	Breaks	in	Interaction	Improve	Collective	Intelligence,”
Proceedings	of	the	National	Academy	of	Sciences
	115	(August	2018):	8734–
39.	See	also	Ethan	Bernstein,	Jesse	Shore,	and	David	Lazer,	“Improving	the
Rhythm	of	Your	Collaboration,”	
MIT	Sloan	Management	Review,
	September
2019.
“serves	as	the	key	element	of	connection”:
	Richard	D.	G.	Irvine,	“The
Architecture	of	Stability:	Monasteries	and	the	Importance	of	Place	in	a	World
of	Non-Places,”	
Etnofoor
	23	(2011):	29–49.
a	swaggering	motto:
	Una	Roman	D’Elia,	
Raphael’s	Ostrich
	(University	Park:
Pennsylvania	State	University	Press,	2015).
people	perform	better:
	Katharine	H.	Greenaway	et	al.,	“Spaces	That	Signal
Identity	Improve	Workplace	Productivity,”	
Journal	of	Personnel	Psychology
15	(2016):	35–43.
one-third	of	the	personal	tokens:
	Kris	Byron	and	Gregory	A.	Laurence,
“Diplomas,	Photos,	and	
Tchotchkes
	as	Symbolic	Self-Representations:
Understanding	Employees’	Individual	Use	of	Symbols,”	
Academy	of
Management	Journal
	58	(February	2015):	298–323.
it	is	in	fact	quite	fluid:
	Daphna	Oysterman,	Kristen	Elmore,	and	George	Smith,
“Self,	Self-Concept,	and	Identity,”	in	
Handbook	of	Self	and	Identity,
	ed.	Mark
R.	Leary	and	June	Price	Tangney	(New	York:	Guilford	Press,	2012),	69–104.
dependent	on	external	structure:
	Brandi	Pearce	et	al.,	“What	Happened	to	My
Office?	The	Role	of	Place	Identity	at	Work,”	
Academy	of	Management
Annual	Meeting	Proceedings
	(November	2017).	See	also	Russell	W.	Belk,
“Possessions	and	the	Extended	Self,”	
Journal	of	Consumer	Research
	15
(September	1988):	139–68.
“they	tell	us	things	about	ourselves”:
	Mihaly	Csikszentmihalyi,	“Why	We	Need
Things,”	in	
History	from	Things:	Essays	on	Material	Culture,
	ed.	Steven
Lubar	and	W.	David	Kingery	(Washington,	DC:	Smithsonian	Institution,
1993),	20–29.	See	also	Mihaly	Csikszentmihalyi,	“The	Symbolic	Function	of
Possessions:	Towards	a	Psychology	of	Materialism,”	paper	presented	at	the
90th	Annual	Convention	of	the	American	Psychological	Association,	August
1982.
--- Page 284 ---
“Which	identity	is	salient	in	the	moment”:
	Daphna	Oyserman	and	Mesmin
Destin,	“Identity-Based	Motivation:	Implications	for	Intervention,”	
The
Counseling	Psychologist
	38	(October	2010):	1001–43.
cues	that	remind	Asian-American	girls:
	Nalini	Ambady	et	al.,	“Stereotype
Susceptibility	in	Children:	Effects	of	Identity	Activation	on	Quantitative
Performance,”	
Psychological	Science
	12	(September	2001):	385–90.
“environmental	self-regulation”:
	Korpela,	“Place-Identity	as	a	Product	of
Environmental	Self-Regulation.”
“emotional	exhaustion”:
	Gregory	A.	Laurence,	Yitzhak	Fried,	and	Linda	H.
Slowik,	“
 
‘My	Space’:	A	Moderated	Mediation	Model	of	the	Effect	of
Architectural	and	Experienced	Privacy,”	
Journal	of	Environmental
Psychology
	36	(December	2013):	144–52.
an	ethnographic	study:
	Ryoko	Imai	and	Masahide	Ban,	“Disrupting	Workspace:
Designing	an	Office	That	Inspires	Collaboration	and	Innovation,”
Ethnographic	Praxis	in	
Industry	Conference,	Case	Studies	1:	Pathmaking
with	Ethnographic	Approaches	in	and	for	Organizations
	(November	2016):
444–64.
discourage	or	even	ban:
	Krystal	D’Costa,	“Resisting	the	Depersonalization	of
the	Work	Space,”	
Scientific	American,
	July	18,	2018.	See	also	Alex	Haslam
and	Craig	Knight,	“Your	Place	or	Mine?,”	BBC	News,	November	17,	2006.
bring	a	different	figure	to	mind:
	Knight	and	Haslam,	“The	Relative	Merits	of
Lean,	Enriched,	and	Empowered	Offices.”
“Making	people	feel”:
	Alexander	Haslam,	quoted	in	Richard	Webb,	“Sit	and
Arrange,”	
Ahmedabad	Mirror,
	February	5,	2019.
see	themselves	reflected	in	it:
	Craig	Knight	and	S.	Alexander	Haslam,	“Your
Place	or	Mine?	Organizational	Identification	and	Comfort	as	Mediators	of
Relationships	Between	the	Managerial	Control	of	Workspace	and	Employees’
Satisfaction	and	Well-Being,”	
British	Journal	of	Management
	21	(September
2010):	717–35.
especially	attuned	to	the	signals:
	Valerie	Purdie-Vaughns	et	al.,	“Social	Identity
Contingencies:	How	Diversity	Cues	Signal	Threat	or	Safety	for	African
Americans	in	Mainstream	Institutions,”	
Journal	of	Personality	and	Social
Psychology
	94	(April	2008):	615–30.
“When	we	think	of	prejudice”:
	Mary	C.	Murphy,	Kathryn	M.	Kroeper,	and	Elise
M.	Ozier,	“Prejudiced	Places:	How	Contexts	Shape	Inequality	and	How
Policy	Can	Change	Them,”	
Policy	Insights	from	the	Behavioral	and	Brain
Sciences
	5	(March	2018):	66–74.
“prejudiced	places”:
	Mary	C.	Murphy	and	Gregory	M.	Walton,	“From
Prejudiced	People	to	Prejudiced	Places:	A	Social-Contextual	Approach	to
--- Page 285 ---
Prejudice,”	in	
Stereotyping	and	Prejudice	(Frontiers	of	Social	Psychology),
ed.	Charles	Stangor	and	Christian	S.	Crandall	(New	York:	Psychology	Press,
2013),	181–203.
unimpressive	results:
	Frank	Dobbin	and	Alexandra	Kalev,	“Why	Doesn’t
Diversity	Training	Work?	The	Challenge	for	Industry	and	Academia,”
Anthropology	Now
	10	(September	2018):	48–55.
the	environments	Sapna	Cheryan	encountered:
	My	discussion	of	Sapna
Cheryan’s	personal	experiences	with	a	sense	of	belonging	draw	on	the
following	sources:	Sapna	Cheryan,	“Redesigning	Environments	Increases
Girls’	Interest	in	Computer	Science,”	video	presented	as	part	of	the	STEM	for
All	Video	Showcase:	Transforming	the	Educational	Landscape,	May	2018,
https://stemforall2018.videohall.com/presentations/1198
;	Sapna	Cheryan,
“Stereotypes	as	Gatekeepers,”	talk	given	at	TEDxSeattle,	Apr	27,	2010,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TYwI-qM20x4
;	Sapna	Cheryan,
interviewed	by	Manola	Secaira,	“This	Gender	and	Race	Researcher	Explains
Why	Techies	Don’t	Have	to	Be	Trekkies,”	;May	3,	2019,
https://crosscut.com/2019/05/gender-and-race-researcher-explains-why-
techies-dont-have-be-trekkies
.	Lisa	Grossman,	“Of	Geeks	and	Girls,”	
Science
Notes
	(2009).
“the	action	figures”:
	Cheryan,	“Stereotypes	as	Gatekeepers.”
Cheryan	commandeered	space:
	Sapna	Cheryan	et	al.,	“Ambient	Belonging:
How	Stereotypical	Cues	Impact	Gender	Participation	in	Computer	Science,”
Journal	of	Personality	and	Social	Psychology
	97	(December	2009):	1045–60.
more	likely	to	predict:
	Sapna	Cheryan,	Andrew	N.	Meltzoff,	and	Saenam	Kim,
“Classrooms	Matter:	The	Design	of	Virtual	Classrooms	Influences	Gender
Disparities	in	Computer	Science	Classes,”	
Computers	&	Education
	57
(September	2011):	1825–35.
“we	know	from	past	work”:
	Cheryan,	“Stereotypes	as	Gatekeepers.”
not	to
	eliminate	
stereotypes:
	Sapna	Cheryan,	Allison	Master,	and	Andrew	N.
Meltzoff,	“Cultural	Stereotypes	as	Gatekeepers:	Increasing	Girls’	Interest	in
Computer	Science	and	Engineering	by	Diversifying	Stereotypes,”	
Frontiers	in
Psychology
	6	(February	2015).
reached	32	percent:
	Sapna	Cheryan,	“A	New	Study	Shows	How	Star	Trek	Jokes
and	Geek	Culture	Make	Women	Feel	Unwelcome	in	Computer	Science,”
Quartz,
	October	31,	2016.
especially	attuned	to	cues	of	exclusion:
	Rene	F.	Kizilcec	et	al.,	“Welcome	to	the
Course:	Early	Social	Cues	Influence	Women’s	Persistence	in	Computer
Science,”	paper	presented	at	the	ACM	Conference	on	Human	Factors	in
Computing	Systems,	April	2020.
--- Page 286 ---
signals	of	non-belonging:
	Cheryan,	Meltzoff,	and	Kim,	“Classrooms	Matter.”
See	also	Danaë	Metaxa-Kakavouli	et	al.,	“Gender-Inclusive	Design:	Sense	of
Belonging	and	Bias	in	Web	Interfaces,”	paper	presented	at	the	CHI
Conference	on	Human	Factors	in	Computing	Systems,	April	2018.
how	actively	they	engage:
	Christopher	Brooks,	Josh	Gardner,	and	Kaifeng	Chen,
“How	Gender	Cues	in	Educational	Video	Impact	Participation	and	Retention,”
paper	presented	at	the	13th	International	Conference	of	the	Learning	Sciences,
June	2018.
“gender-inclusive”:
	René	F.	Kizilcec	and	Andrew	J.	Saltarelli,	“Psychologically
Inclusive	Design:	Cues	Impact	Women’s	Participation	in	STEM	Education,”
paper	presented	at	the	CHI	Conference	on	Human	Factors	in	Computing
Systems,	May	2019.
lower	socioeconomic	status:
	René	F.	Kizilcec	and	Andrew	J.	Saltarelli,	“Can	a
Diversity	Statement	Increase	Diversity	in	MOOCs?,”	paper	presented	at	the
6th	ACM	Conference	on	Learning	at	Scale,	June	2019.
“strategically	placing	content”:
	Kizilcec	and	Saltarelli,	“Psychologically
Inclusive	Design.”
“You	say	to	brick”:
	Louis	Kahn,	quoted	in	Lesser,	
You	Say	to	Brick,
	5.
“the	vision	of	an	artist”:
	Jonas	Salk,	quoted	in	Lesser,	
You	Say	to	Brick,
	33.
the	way	our	brains	respond:
	Amber	Dance,	“Science	and	Culture:	The	Brain
Within	Buildings,”	
Proceedings	of	the	National	Academy	of	Sciences
	114
(January	2017):	785–87.	See	also	Heeyoung	Choo	et	al.,	“Neural	Codes	of
Seeing	Architectural	Styles,”	
Scientific	Reports
	7	(January	2017).
high-ceilinged	places:
	Joan	Meyers-Levy	and	Rui	(Juliet)	Zhu,	“The	Influence
of	Ceiling	Height:	The	Effect	of	Priming	on	the	Type	of	Processing	That
People	Use,”	
Journal	of	Consumer	Research
	34	(August	2007):	174–86.
symmetrical	shapes:
	Sarah	Williams	Goldhagen,	
Welcome	to	Your	World:	How
the	Built	Environment	Shapes	Our	Lives
	(New	York:	HarperCollins,	2017).
See	also	Ann	Sussman	and	Justin	B.	Hollander,	
Cognitive	Architecture:
Designing	for	How	We	Respond	to	the	Built	Environment
	(New	York:
Routledge,	2015).
architectural	designs	that	resemble	faces:
	Sussman	and	Hollander,	
Cognitive
Architecture.
	See	also	Ann	Sussman,	“Why	Brain	Architecture	Matters	for
Built	Architecture,”	
Metropolis,
	August	19,	2015.
Curved	shapes:
	Oshin	Vartanian	et	al.,	“Impact	of	Contour	on	Aesthetic
Judgments	and	Approach-Avoidance	Decisions	in	Architecture,”	
Proceedings
of	the	National	Academy	of	Sciences
	110	(June	2013):	10446–53.	See	also
Letizia	Palumbo,	Nicole	Ruta,	and	Marco	Bertamini,	“Comparing	Angular
--- Page 287 ---
and	Curved	Shapes	in	Terms	of	Implicit	Associations	and
Approach/Avoidance	Responses,”	
PLoS	One
	10	(October	2015).
babies	as	young	as	one	week	old:
	Robert	L.	Fantz	and	Simon	B.	Miranda,
“Newborn	Infant	Attention	to	Form	of	Contour,”	
Child	Development
	46
(1975):	224–28.
even	across
	species:
	
Enric	Munar	et	al.,	“Common	Visual	Preference	for	Curved
Contours	in	Humans	and	Great	Apes,”	
PLoS	One
	10	(November	2015).
the	brains	of	rhesus	monkeys:
	Research	cited	in	Michael	Anft,	“This	Is	Your
Brain	on	Art,”	
Johns	Hopkins	Magazine,
	March	6,	2010.
Philip	Johnson	first	saw	it:
	Matt	Tyrnauer,	“Architecture	in	the	Age	of	Gehry,”
Vanity	Fair,
	August	2010.
“cognitive	deficiency	of	non-places”:
	Richard	Coyne,	“Thinking	Through
Virtual	Reality:	Place,	Non-Place	and	Situated	Cognition,”	
Technè:	Research
in	Philosophy	and	Technology
	10	(Spring	2007):	26–38.	See	also	Marc	Augé,
Non-Places:	Introduction	to	an	Anthropology	of	Supermodernity,
	trans.	John
Howe	(London:	Verso,	1995).
“rich	layering	of	custom”:
	Coyne,	“Thinking	Through	Virtual	Reality.”
“If	you	look	at	the	Baths	of	Caracalla”:
	Louis	Kahn,	quoted	in	“Marin	City
Redevelopment,”	
Progressive	Architecture
	41	(November	1960).
6.	THINKING	WITH	THE	SPACE	OF	IDEAS
He	was	prominently	featured:
	Joshua	Foer,	
Moonwalking	with	Einstein:	The	Art
and	Science	of	Remembering	Everything
	(New	York:	Penguin	Press,	2011).
his	“lucky	hat”:
	Sarah	Chalmers,	“Mindboggling—Meet	the	Forgetful	Memory
Champ	Who’s	Battling	for	Britain,”	
Daily	Mail,
	August	30,	2007.
“I	am	famously	bad”:
	Ben	Pridmore,	quoted	in	Adam	Lusher,	“World	Memory
Champion	Reveals	His	Secrets,”	
Sunday	Telegraph,
	August	5,	2007.
“method	of	loci”:
	Stephen	Robb,	“How	a	Memory	Champ’s	Brain	Works,”
BBC	News,	April	7,	2009.
a	venerable	technique:
	Kurt	Danziger,	
Marking	the	Mind:	A	History	of	Memory
(New	York:	Cambridge	University	Press,	2008).
“Using	neuropsychological	measures”:
	Eleanor	A.	Maguire	et	al.,	“Routes	to
Remembering:	The	Brains	Behind	Superior	Memory,”	
Nature	Neuroscience
	6
(January	2003):	90–95.
the	brain’s	built-in	navigational	system:
	Russell	A.	Epstein	et	al.,	“The
Cognitive	Map	in	Humans:	Spatial	Navigation	and	Beyond,”	
Nature
Neuroscience
	20	(October	2017):	1504–13.	See	also	Alexandra	O.
Constantinescu,	Jill	X.	O’Reilly,	and	Timothy	E.	J.	Behrens,	“Organizing
--- Page 288 ---
Conceptual	Knowledge	in	Humans	with	a	Gridlike	Code,”	
Science
	352	(June
2016):	1464–68.
reflected	in	the	language:
	George	Lakoff	and	Mark	Johnson,	“Conceptual
Metaphor	in	Everyday	Language,”	
Journal	of	Philosophy
	77	(August	1980):
453–86.	See	also	George	Lakoff	and	Mark	Johnson,	
Metaphors	We	Live	By
(Chicago:	University	of	Chicago	Press,	1980).
“We	are	far	better”:
	Barbara	Tversky,	
Mind	in	Motion:	How	Action	Shapes
Thought
	(New	York:	Basic	Books,	2019),	57.
maps	abstract	spaces:
	Arne	D.	Ekstrom	and	Charan	Ranganath,	“Space,	Time,
and	Episodic	Memory:	The	Hippocampus	Is	All	Over	the	Cognitive	Map,”
Hippocampus
	28	(September	2018):	680–87.	See	also	Mona	M.	Garvert,
Raymond	J.	Dolan,	and	Timothy	E.	J.	Behrens,	“A	Map	of	Abstract	Relational
Knowledge	in	the	Human	Hippocampal-Entorhinal	Cortex,”	
eLife
	6	(April
2017).
scanned	the	brains:
	Branka	Milivojevic	et	al.,	“Coding	of	Event	Nodes	and
Narrative	Context	in	the	Hippocampus,”	
Journal	of	Neuroscience
	36
(December	2016):	12412–24.	See	also	Vishnu	Sreekumar,	“Hippocampal
Activity	Patterns	Reflect	the	Topology	
of	Spaces:	Evidence	from	Narrative
Coding,”	
Journal	of	Neuroscience
	37	(June	2017):	5975–77.
“infantile	amnesia”:
	Arthur	M.	Glenberg	and	Justin	Hayes,	“Contribution	of
Embodiment	to	Solving	the	Riddle	of	Infantile	Amnesia,”	
Frontiers	in
Psychology
	7	(January	2016).
continue	to	be	tagged:
	Jessica	Robin,	Jordana	Wynn,	and	Morris	Moscovitch,
“The	Spatial	Scaffold:	The	Effects	of	Spatial	Context	on	Memory	for	Events,”
Journal	of	Experimental	Psychology:	Learning,	Memory,	and	Cognition
	42
(February	2016):	308–15.	See	also	Jonathan	F.	Miller	et	al.,	“Neural	Activity
in	Human	Hippocampal	Formation	Reveals	the	Spatial	Context	of	Retrieved
Memories,”	
Science
	342	(November	2013):	1111–14.
The	automatic	place	log:
	Timothy	P.	McNamara	and	Christine	M.	Valiquette,
“Remembering	Where	Things	Are,”	in	
Human	Spatial	Memory:
Remembering	Where,
	ed.	Gary	L.	Allen	(Mahwah,	NJ:	Lawrence	Erlbaum
Associates,	2004),	3–24.	See	also	Andrea	N.	Suarez	et	al.,	“Gut	Vagal
Sensory	Signaling	Regulates	Hippocampus	Function	Through	Multi-Order
Pathways,”	
Nature	Communications
	9	(June	2018):	1–15.
the	world’s	top	memory	competitors:
	Martin	Dresler	et	al.,	“Mnemonic	Training
Reshapes	Brain	Networks	to	Support	Superior	Memory,”	
Neuron
	93	(March
2017):	1227–35.
course	on	civil	liberties:
	Charles	(Trey)	Wilson,	“The	Chow	Hall	as	Mind
Palace,”	post	on	Teaching	Academic:	A	CTLL	Blog,	August	29,	2018,
--- Page 289 ---
https://blog.ung.edu/ctll/the-chow-hall-as-mind-palace-2/
.
the	work	of	historian	Robert	Caro:
	My	discussion	of	Robert	Caro	and	his
working	methods	draws	on	the	following	sources:	James	Santel,	“Robert
Caro,	the	Art	of	Biography,”	
Paris	Review,
	Spring	2016;	Scott	Porch,	“
 
‘The
Power	Broker’	Turns	40:	How	Robert	Caro	Wrote	a	Masterpiece,”	
Daily
Beast,
	September	16,	2014;	Charles	McGrath,	“Robert	Caro’s	Big	Dig,”	
New
York	Times	Magazine,
	April	12,	2012;	Chris	Jones,	“The	Big	Book,”	
Esquire,
April	12,	2012;	Scott	Sherman,	“Caro’s	Way,”	
Columbia	Journalism	Review,
May–June	2002;	Stephen	Harrigan,	“The	Man	Who	Never	Stops,”	
Texas
Monthly,
	April	1990;	William	Goldstein,	“Robert	Caro	Talks	About	His	Art,
His	Methods	and	LBJ,”	
Publishers	Weekly,
	November	25,	1983.
“It	was	so	big”:
	Robert	Caro,	quoted	in	Jones,	“The	Big	Book.”
“I	can’t	start	writing	a	book”:
	Robert	Caro,	quoted	in	Santel,	“Robert	Caro,	the
Art	of	Biography.”
“I	don’t	want	to	stop”:
	Robert	Caro,	quoted	in	Goldstein,	“Robert	Caro	Talks
About	His	Art,	His	Methods	and	LBJ.”
“When	thought	overwhelms	the	mind”:
	Barbara	Tversky	and	Angela	Kessell,
“Thinking	in	Action,”	
Pragmatics	&	Cognition
	22	(January	2014):	206–33.
“the	cognitive	congeniality	of	a	space”:
	David	Kirsh,	“Adapting	the
Environment	Instead	of	Oneself,”	
Adaptive	Behavior
	4	(1996):	415–52.
offload	
facts	and	ideas:
	Evan	F.	Risko	and	Sam	J.	Gilbert,	“Cognitive
Offloading,”	
Trends	in	Cognitive	Sciences
	20	(September	2016):	P676–88.
See	also	Andy	Clark,	“Minds	in	Space,”	in	
The	Spatial	Foundations	of
Language	and	Cognition,
	ed.	Kelly	S.	Mix,	Linda	B.	Smith,	and	Michael
Gasser	(New	York:	Oxford	University	Press,	2010),	7–15.
investigating	the	way	children	learn	science:
	Joseph	D.	Novak,	“A	Search	to
Create	a	Science	of	Education:	The	Life	of	an	Ivy	League	Professor,	Business
Consultant,	and	Research	Scientist,”	self-published	autobiography,
https://www.ihmc.us/files/JNovak-
ASearchToCreateAScienceOfEducation.pdf
.
“the	knowledge	structure	necessary	to	understand”:
	Joseph	D.	Novak,
Learning,	Creating,	and	Using	Knowledge:	Concept	Maps	as	Facilitative
Tools	in	Schools	and	Corporations
	(Mahwah,	NJ:	Lawrence	Erlbaum
Associates,	1998),	177.
“The	most	successful	cinematic	technologies”:
	David	A.	Kirby,	
Lab	Coats	in
Hollywood:	Science,	Scientists,	and	Cinema
	(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	2010),
200.
Spielberg	invited	computer	scientists:
	John	Underkoffler,	“Pointing	to	the	Future
of	UI,”	TED	Talk,	February	2010,
--- Page 290 ---
https://www.ted.com/talks/john_underkoffler_pointing_to_the_future_of_ui?
language=en
.
“Is	that	real?”:
	John	Underkoffler,	quoted	in	Kirby,	
Lab	Coats	in	Hollywood,
201.
increase	by	more	than	tenfold:
	Robert	Ball	and	Chris	North,	“Realizing
Embodied	Interaction	for	Visual	Analytics	Through	Large	Displays,”
Computers	&	Graphics
	31	(June	2007):	380–400.
When	using	a	large	display:
	Robert	Ball	and	Chris	North,	“The	Effects	of
Peripheral	Vision	and	Physical	Navigation	on	Large	Scale	Visualization,”
paper	presented	at	the	34th	Annual	Graphics	Interface	Conference,	May	2008.
See	also	Khairi	Reda	et	al.,	“Effects	of	Display	Size	and	Resolution	on	User
Behavior	and	Insight	Acquisition	in	Visual	Exploration,”	
Proceedings	of	the
33rd	Annual	ACM	Conference	on	Human	Factors	in	Computing	Systems
(April	2015):	2759–68.
everyone	
who	engages	with	the	larger	display:
	Robert	Ball,	“Three	Ways	Larger
Monitors	Can	Improve	Productivity,”	
Graziadio	Business	Review
	13	(January
2010):	1–5.
“physical	embodied	resources”:
	Ball	and	North,	“Realizing	Embodied
Interaction	for	Visual	Analytics	Through	Large	Displays.”	See	also	Alex
Endert	et	al.,	“Visual	Encodings	That	Support	Physical	Navigation	on	Large
Displays,”	
Proceedings	of	Graphics	Interface	2011
	(May	2011):	103–10.
enables	us	to	gather	more	knowledge:
	Ball	and	North,	“The	Effects	of	Peripheral
Vision	and	Physical	Navigation	on	Large	Scale	Visualization.”	See	also	Reda
et	al.,	“Effects	of	Display	Size	and	Resolution	on	User	Behavior	and	Insight
Acquisition	in	Visual	Exploration.”
allows	us	to	be	more	efficient:
	Ball	and	North,	“Realizing	Embodied	Interaction
for	Visual	Analytics	Through	Large	Displays.”
encourage	a	narrower	visual	focus:
	Ball	and	North,	“The	Effects	of	Peripheral
Vision	and	Physical	Navigation	on	Large	Scale	Visualization.”
our
	spatial	memory:
	Yvonne	Jansen,	Jonas	Schjerlund,	and	Kasper	Hornbæk,
“Effects	of	Locomotion	and	Visual	Overview	on	Spatial	Memory	When
Interacting	with	Wall	Displays,”	
Proceedings	of	the	2019	CHI	Conference	on
Human	Factors	in	Computing	Systems
	(May	2019):	1–12.	See	also	Joey	Scarr,
Andy	Cockburn,	and	Carl	Gutwin,	“Supporting	and	Exploiting	Spatial
Memory	in	User	Interfaces,”	
Foundations	and	Trends	in	Human-Computer
Interaction,
	December	2013.
56	percent	more	information:
	Desney	S.	Tan	et	al.,	“The	Infocockpit:	Providing
Location	and	Place	to	Aid	Human	Memory,”	
Proceedings	of	the	2001
Workshop	on	Perceptive	User	Interfaces
	(November	2001):	1–4.
--- Page 291 ---
Other	embodied	resources:
	Ball	and	North,	“Realizing	Embodied	Interaction	for
Visual	Analytics	Through	Large	Displays.”	See	also	Endert	et	al.,	“Visual
Encodings	That	Support	Physical	Navigation	on	Large	Displays.”
the	mental	version	of	our	map:
	Carl	Gutwin	and	Andy	Cockburn,	“A	Field
Experiment	of	Spatially-Stable	Overviews	for	Document	Navigation,”
Proceedings	of	the	2017	CHI	Conference	on	Human	Factors	in	Computing
Systems
	(May	2017):	5905–16.
more	intuitive
	physical	
navigation:
	Mikkel	R.	Jakobsen	and	Kasper	Hornbæk,
“Is	Moving	Improving?	Some	Effects	of	Locomotion	in	Wall-Display
Interaction,”	
Proceedings	of	the	33rd	Annual	ACM	Conference	on	Human
Factors	in	Computing	Systems
	(April	2015):	4169–78.	See	also	Roman	Rädle
et	al.,	“The	Effect	of	Egocentric	Body	Movements	on	Users’	Navigation
Performance	and	Spatial	Memory	in	Zoomable	User	Interfaces,”	
Proceedings
of	the	2013	ACM	International	Conference	on	Interactive	Tabletops	and
Surfaces
	(October	2013):	23–32.
as	display	size	increases:
	Ball	and	North,	“Realizing	Embodied	Interaction	for
Visual	Analytics	Through	Large	Displays.”
90	percent	less	“window	management”:
	Ball,	“Three	Ways	Larger	Monitors
Can	Improve	Productivity.”
“will	most	likely	be	more	productive”:
	Ball,	“Three	Ways	Larger	Monitors	Can
Improve	Productivity.”
expedition	aboard	the	HMS
	Beagle:
	
My	discussion	of	Charles	Darwin	and	his
field	notebooks	draws	on	the	following	sources:	Charles	Darwin,	
The	Beagle
Record:	Selections	from	the	Original	Pictorial	Records	and	Written	Accounts
of	the	Voyage	of	HMS	Beagle,
	ed.	Richard	Darwin	Keynes	(New	York:
Cambridge	University	Press,	1979);	Charles	Darwin,	
The	Complete	Work	of
Charles	Darwin	Online,
	ed.	John	van	Wyhe,	
http://darwin-online.org.uk
;	E.
Janet	Browne,	
Charles	Darwin:	Voyaging
	(Princeton:	Princeton	University
Press,	1995);	John	Gribbin	and	Mary	Gribbin,	
FitzRoy:	The	Remarkable	Story
of	Darwin’s	Captain	and	the	Invention	of	the	Weather	Forecast
	(New	Haven:
Yale	University	Press,	2004);	National	Archives,	
Tales	from	the	Captain’s
Log
	(London:	Bloomsbury,	2017).
“In	keeping	such	copious	records”:
	Browne,	
Charles	Darwin,
	194.
“I	must	confess	however”:
	Charles	Darwin,	quoted	in	Gordon	Chancellor,
“Darwin’s	Geological	Diary	from	the	Voyage	of	the	Beagle,”	post	on	Darwin
Online,	
http://darwin-
online.org.uk/EditorialIntroductions/Chancellor_GeologicalDiary.html
.
“acquire	the	habit	of	writing”:
	Chancellor,	“Darwin’s	Geological	Diary	from
the	Voyage	of	the	Beagle.”
--- Page 292 ---
throughout	his	long	career:
	Erick	Greene,	“Why	Keep	a	Field	Notebook?,”	in
Field	Notes	on	Science	and	Nature,
	ed.	Michael	Canfield	(Cambridge:
Harvard	University	Press,	2011),	251–76.
what	psychologists	call	their	“affordances”:
	James	J.	Gibson,	
The	Senses
Considered	as	Perceptual	Systems
	(New	York:	Houghton	Mifflin,	1966),	285.
a	classic	thought	experiment:
	Daniel	C.	Dennett,	
Content	and	Consciousness
(London:	Routledge,	1969),	154.
becomes	maddeningly	slippery:
	Daniel	Reisberg,	“External	Representations	and
the	Advantages	of	Externalizing	One’s	Thoughts,”	paper	presented	at	the	9th
Annual	Conference	of	the	Cognitive	Science	Society,	July	1987.
“detachment	gain”:
	Daniel	Reisberg,	“The	Detachment	Gain:	The	Advantage	of
Thinking	Out	Loud,”	in	
Perception,	Cognition,	and	Language:	Essays	in
Honor	of	Henry	and	Lila	Gleitman,
	ed.	Barbara	Landau	et	al.	(Cambridge:
MIT	Press,	2000),	139–56.
experimenters	asked	eighth-grade	students:
	Eliza	Bobek	and	Barbara	Tversky,
“Creating	Visual	Explanations	Improves	Learning,”	
Cognitive	Research:
Principles	and	Implications
	1	(December	2016).
“check	for	completeness”:
	Bobek	and	Tversky,	“Creating	Visual	Explanations
Improves	
Learning.”	See	also	Barbara	Tversky,	“Some	Ways	of	Thinking,”	in
Model-Based	Reasoning	in	Science	and	Technology:	Theoretical	and
Cognitive	Issues,
	ed.	Lorenzo	Magnani	(New	York:	Springer,	2014),	3–8.
“there	can	be	neither	doubt”:
	Reisberg,	“External	Representations	and	the
Advantages	of	Externalizing	One’s	Thoughts.”
“discover”	elements	in	their	own	work:
	Masaki	Suwa,	John	Gero,	and	Terry
Purcell,	“Unexpected	Discoveries	and	S-Invention	of	Design	Requirements:
Important	Vehicles	for	a	Design	Process,”	
Design	Studies
	21	(November
2000):	539–67.	See	also	Masaki	Suwa	et	al.,	“Seeing	into	Sketches:
Regrouping	Parts	Encourages	New	Interpretations,”	in	
Visual	and	Spatial
Reasoning	in	Design	II,
	ed.	John	S.	Gero,	Barbara	Tversky,	and	Terry	Purcell
(Sydney:	Key	Centre	of	Design	Computing	and	Cognition,	2001),	207–19.
“One	reads	off	the	sketch”:
	Gabriela	Goldschmidt,	“On	Visual	Design
Thinking:	The	Vis	Kids	of	Architecture,”	
Design	Studies
	15	(April	1994):
158–74.
a	“conversation”	carried	on:
	Barbara	Tversky,	“Multiple	Models:	In	the	Mind
and	in	the	World,”	
Historical	Social	Research
	31	(2018):	59–65.
“the	backtalk	of	self-generated	sketches”:
	Gabriela	Goldschmidt,	“The	Backtalk
of	Self-Generated	Sketches,”	
Design	Issues
	19	(Winter	2003):	72–88.
expert	architects	are	far	more	adept:
	Barbara	Tversky	and	Masaki	Suwa,
“Thinking	with	Sketches,”	in	
Tools	for	Innovation:	The	Science	Behind	the
--- Page 293 ---
Practical	Methods	That	Drive	New	Ideas,
	ed.	Arthur	B.	Markman	and	Kristin
L.	Wood	(New	York:	Oxford	University	Press,	2009),	75–84.	See	also
Barbara	Tversky,	“The	Cognitive	Design	of	Tools	of	Thought,”	
Review	of
Philosophy	and	Psychology
	6	(2015):	99–116.
some	promising	prescriptions:
	Andrea	Kantrowitz,	Michelle	Fava,	and	Angela
Brew,	“Drawing	Together	Research	and	Pedagogy,”	
Art	Education
	70	(May
2017):	50–60.
their	skillful	use	of	externalization:
	David	Kirsh	and	Paul	Maglio,	“On
Distinguishing	Epistemic	from	Pragmatic	Action,”	
Cognitive	Science
	18
(October	1994):	513–49.	See	also	Paul	P.	Maglio,	Michael	J.	Wenger,	and
Angelina	M.	Copeland,	“Evidence	for	the	Role	of	Self-Priming	in	Epistemic
Action:	Expertise	and	the	Effective	Use	of	Memory,”	
Acta	Psychologica
	127
(January	2008):	72–88.
“Better	players	use	the	world	better”:
	Paul	P.	Maglio	and	David	Kirsh,
“Epistemic	Action	Increases	with	Skill,”	paper	presented	at	the	18th	Annual
Conference	of	the	Cognitive	Science	Society,	July	1996.
“they	are	literally	thinking”:
	Daniel	Smithwick	and	David	Kirsh,	“Let’s	Get
Physical:	Thinking	with	Things	in	Architectural	Design,”	paper	presented	at
the	37th	Annual	Conference	of	the	Cognitive	Science	Society,	July	2015.	See
also	Daniel	Smithwick,	Larry	Sass,	and	David	Kirsh,	“Creative	Interaction
with	Blocks	and	Robots,”	paper	presented	at	the	38th	Annual	Conference	of
the	Cognitive	Science	Society,	August	2016.
“enable	forms	of	thought”:
	Smithwick	and	Kirsh,	“Let’s	Get	Physical.”
James	Watson	in	low	spirits:
	My	discussion	of	James	Watson	and	his	discovery
of	the	structure	of	DNA	draws	from	the	following	sources:	James	D.	Watson,
The	Double	Helix:	A	Personal	Account	of	the	Discovery	of	the	Structure	of
DNA
	(New	York:	Scribner,	1996);	James	Watson,	“Discovering	the	Double
Helix	Structure	of	DNA,”	interview	transcript	posted	on	the	website	of	Cold
Spring	Harbor	Laboratory,	
https://www.cshl.edu/dnalcmedia/discovering-the-
double-helix-structure-of-dna-james-watson-video-with-3d-animation-and-
narration/#transcript;
	
Cavendish	Laboratory	Educational	Outreach,	“The
Structure	of	DNA:	Crick	and	Watson,	1953,”	post	on	CambridgePhysics.org,
http://www.cambridgephysics.org/dna/dna_index.htm
;	US	National	Library	of
Medicine,	“The	Discovery	of	the	Double	Helix,	1951–1953,”	post	on	the
website	of	the	US	National	Library	of	Medicine,
https://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/spotlight/sc/feature/doublehelix
.
“not	to	waste	any	more	time”:
	Watson,	
The	Double	Helix,
	192.
“in	desperation”:
	Watson,	“Discovering	the	Double	Helix	Structure	of	DNA.”
“When	I	got	to	our	still	empty	office”:
	Watson,	
The	Double	Helix,
	194–96.
--- Page 294 ---
“implies	that	simulating	a	situation”:
	Gaëlle	Vallée-Tourangeau	and	Frédéric
Vallée-Tourangeau,	“Why	the	Best	Problem-Solvers	Think	with	Their	Hands,
as	Well	as	Their	Heads,”	
The	Conversation,
	November	10,	2016.
follow	a	similar	pattern:
	Frédéric	Vallée-Tourangeau	and	Gaëlle	Vallée-
Tourangeau,	“Diagrams,	Jars,	and	Matchsticks:	A	Systemicist’s	Toolkit,”	in
Diagrammatic	Reasoning,
	ed.	Riccardo	Fusaroli	and	Kristian	Tylén
(Philadelphia:	John	Benjamins	Publishing,	2014),	187–205.
“inevitably	benefits	performance”:
	Vallée-Tourangeau	and	Vallée-Tourangeau,
“Why	the	Best	Problem-Solvers	Think	with	Their	Hands,	as	Well	as	Their
Heads.”
basic	arithmetic:
	Lisa	G.	Guthrie	and	Frédéric	Vallée-Tourangeau,	“Interactivity
and	Mental	Arithmetic:	Coupling	Mind	and	World	Transforms	and	Enhances
Performance,”	
Studies	in	Logic,
	
Grammar	and	Rhetoric
	41	(2015):	41–59.
See	also	Wendy	Ross,	Frédéric	Vallée-Tourangeau,	and	Jo	Van	Herwegen,
“Mental	Arithmetic	and	Interactivity:	The	Effect	of	Manipulating	External
Number	Representations	on	Older	Children’s	Mental	Arithmetic	Success,”
International	Journal	of	Science	and	Mathematics	Education
	(June	2019).
complex	reasoning:
	Gaëlle	Vallée-Tourangeau,	Marlène	Abadie,	and	Frédéric
Vallée-Tourangeau,	“Interactivity	Fosters	Bayesian	Reasoning	Without
Instruction,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Psychology:	General
	144	(June	2015):
581–603.
planning	for	future	events:
	Emma	Henderson,	Gaëlle	Vallée-Tourangeau,	and
Frédéric	Vallée-Tourangeau,	“Planning	in	Action:	Interactivity	Improves
Planning	Performance,”	paper	presented	at	the	39th	Annual	Conference	of	the
Cognitive	Science	Society,	July	2017.
solving	creative	“insight”	problems:
	Anna	Weller,	Gaëlle	Villejoubert,	and
Frédéric	Vallée-Tourangeau,	“Interactive	Insight	Problem	Solving,”	
Thinking
&	Reasoning
	17	(2011):	424–39.	See	also	Lisa	G.	Guthrie	et	al.,	“Learning
and	Interactivity	in	Solving	a	Transformation	Problem,”	
Memory	&	Cognition
43	(July	2015):	723–35.
enjoy	increased	working	memory:
	Frédéric	Vallée-Tourangeau,	Miroslav	Sirota,
and	Gaëlle	Vallée-Tourangeau,	“Interactivity	Mitigates	the	Impact	of
Working	Memory	Depletion	on	Mental	Arithmetic	Performance,”	
Cognitive
Research:	Principles	and	Implications
	1	(December	2016).
they	learn	more:
	Mariana	Lozada	and	Natalia	Carro,	“Embodied	Action
Improves	Cognition	in	Children:	Evidence	from	a	Study	Based	on	Piagetian
Conservation	Tasks,”	
Frontiers	in	Psychology
	7	(March	2016).
better	able	to	transfer	their	learning:
	Guthrie	et	al.,	“Learning	and	Interactivity
in	Solving	a	Transformation	Problem.”
--- Page 295 ---
less	likely	to	engage	in	“symbol	pushing”:
	Daniel	L.	Schwartz,	Jessica	M.
Tsang,	and	
Kristen	P.	Blair,	
The	ABCs	of	How	We	Learn:	26	Scientifically
Proven	Approaches,	How	They	Work,	and	When	to	Use	Them
	(New	York:	W.
W.	Norton,	2016),	86–101.
more	motivated	and	engaged:
	Guthrie	and	Vallée-Tourangeau,	“Interactivity	and
Mental	Arithmetic:	Coupling	Mind	and	World	Transforms	and	Enhances
Performance.”
experience	less	anxiety:
	Michael	Allen	and	Frédéric	Vallée-Tourangeau,
“Interactivity	Defuses	the	Impact	of	Mathematics	Anxiety	in	Primary	School
Children,”	
International	Journal	of	Science	and	Mathematics	Education
	14
(July	2015):	1553–66.
“Moves	in	the	World”:
	Frédéric	Vallée-Tourangeau,	Lisa	Guthrie,	and	Gaëlle
Villejoubert,	“Moves	in	the	World	Are	Faster	Than	Moves	in	the	Head:
Interactivity	in	the	River	Crossing	Problem,”	paper	presented	at	the	35th
Annual	Conference	of	the	Cognitive	Science	Society,	July–August	2013.
“a	record	of	the	day-to-day	work”:
	My	discussion	of	Richard	Feynman’s
exchange	with	Charles	Weiner	is	drawn	from	the	account	in	James	Gleick,
Genius:	The	Life	and	Science	of	Richard	Feynman
	(New	York:	Pantheon
Books,	1992),	409.
“Feynman	was	actually
	thinking	
”:
	Clark,	
Supersizing	the	Mind,
	xxv.
“It	is	because	we	are	so	prone	to	think”:
	Clark,	
Natural-Born	Cyborgs,
	5.
“put	brain,	body,	and	world”:
	Clark,	
Supersizing	the	Mind,
	23.
7.	THINKING	WITH	EXPERTS
half	a	million	young	Germans:
	John	Ydstie,	“Robust	Apprenticeship	Program
Key	to	Germany’s	Manufacturing	Might,”	
Morning	Edition,
	NPR,	January	4,
2018.
course	on	theoretical	computer	science:
	Maria	Knobelsdorf,	Christoph	Kreitz,
and	Sebastian	Böhne,	“Teaching	Theoretical	Computer	Science	Using	a
Cognitive	Apprenticeship	Approach,”	paper	presented	at	the	45th	ACM
Technical	Symposium	on	Computer	Science	Education,	March	2014.
cognitive	apprenticeship:
	Allan	Collins,	John	Seely	Brown,	and	Ann	Holum,
“Cognitive	Apprenticeship:	Making	Thinking	Visible,”	
American	Educator,
Winter	1991.
Inside	the	Hôpital	Universitaire	Pitié-Salpêtrière:
	“Les	Étudiants	Miment	les
Maladies	Neurologiques	pour	Mieux	les	Appréhender	[Students	Mimic
Neurological	Diseases	to	Better	Understand	Them],”	video	posted	on	the
website	of	Assistance	Hôpitaux	Publique	de	Paris,
--- Page 296 ---
https://www.aphp.fr/contenu/avec-allodocteurs-les-etudiants-miment-les-
maladies-neurologiques-pour-mieux-les-apprehender
.
“mime-based	role-play	training	program”:
	Emmanuel	Roze	et	al.,	“Miming
Neurological	Syndromes	Improves	Medical	Students’	Long-Term	Retention
and	Delayed	Recall	of	Neurology,”	
Journal	of	the	Neurological	Sciences
	391
(August	2018):	143–48.	See	also	Emmanuel	Roze	et	al.,	“
 
‘The	Move,’	an
Innovative	Simulation-Based	Medical	Education	Program	Using	Roleplay	to
Teach	Neurological	Semiology:	Students’	and	Teachers’	Perceptions,”	
Revue
Neurologique
	172	(April–May	2016):	289–94.
had	become	concerned:
	Emmanuel	Roze,	interviewed	in	“
 
‘The	Move’	Program
Presented	in	Dublin,”	video	posted	on	the	website	of	the	Institut	du	Cerveau,
December	19,	2016,	
https://icm-institute.org/en/actualite/the-move-program-
presented-in-dublin/
.
recalled	neurological	signs	and	symptoms:
	Roze	et	al.,	“Miming	Neurological
Syndromes	Improves	Medical	Students’	Long-Term	Retention	and	Delayed
Recall	of	Neurology.”
deepened	their	understanding:
	Joshua	A.	Cuoco,	“Medical	Student
Neurophobia:	A	
Review	of	the	Current	Pandemic	and	Proposed	Educational
Solutions,”	
European	Journal	of	Educational	Sciences
	3	(September	2016):
41–46.
intentionally	imitating	someone’s	accent:
	Patti	Adank,	Peter	Hagoort,	and
Harold	Bekkering,	“Imitation	Improves	Language	Comprehension,”
Psychological	Science
	21	(December	2010):	1903–09.
come	to	feel	more	positive:
	Patti	Adank	et	al.,	“Accent	Imitation	Positively
Affects	Language	Attitudes,”	
Frontiers	in	Psychology
	4	(May	2013).
an	art	in	its	own	right:
	Edward	P.	J.	Corbett,	“The	Theory	and	Practice	of
Imitation	in	Classical	Rhetoric,”	
College	Composition	and	Communication
	22
(October	1971):	243–50.	See	also	James	J.	Murphy,	“Roman	Writing	as
Described	by	Quintilian,”	in	
A	Short	History	of	Writing	Instruction:	From
Ancient	Greece	to	Contemporary	America,
	ed.	James	J.	Murphy	(New	York:
Routledge,	2012),	36–76.
students	would	begin:
	James	J.	Murphy,	“The	Modern	Value	of	Ancient	Roman
Methods	of	Teaching	Writing,	with	Answers	to	Twelve	Current	Fallacies,”
Writing	on	the	Edge
	1	(Fall	1989):	28–37.	See	also	J.	Scott	Shields,	“The	Art
of	Imitation,”	
The	English	Journal
	96	(July	2007):	56–60.
“worthy	of	our	study”:
	
The	Institutio	Oratoria	of	Quintilian,
	trans.	H.	E.	Butler
(New	York:	G.	P.	Putnam’s	Sons,	1922),	75.
“Nature	has	fashioned	man”:
	Juan	Luis	Vives,	cited	in	Don	Paul	Abbott,
“Reading,	Writing,	and	Rhetoric	in	the	Renaissance,”	in	
A	Short	History	of
--- Page 297 ---
Writing	Instruction:	From	Ancient	Greece	to	Contemporary	America,
	ed.
James	J.	Murphy	(New	York:	Routledge,	2012),	148–71.
the	Romantics	arrived:
	Jessica	Millen,	“Romantic	Creativity	and	the	Ideal	of
Originality:	A	Contextual	Analysis,”	
Cross-Sections
	6	(2010):	91–104.	See
also	Elaine	K.	Gazda,	
The	Ancient	Art	of	Emulation:	Studies	in	Artistic
Originality	and	Tradition	from	the	Present	to	Classical	Antiquity
	(Ann	Arbor:
University	of	Michigan	Press,	2002).
“the	burden	of	the	past”:
	Walter	Jackson	Bate,	
The	Burden	of	the	Past	and	the
English	Poet
	(Cambridge:	Harvard	University	Press,	2013).
a	technique	he	had	invented	himself:
	Robert	N.	Essick	and	Joseph	Viscomi,	“An
Inquiry	into	William	Blake’s	Method	of	Color	Printing,”	
Blake:	An	Illustrated
Quarterly
	35	(Winter	2002):	74–103.
“I	must	create	a	system”:
	William	Blake,	
Jerusalem:	The	Emanation	of	the
Giant	Albion
	(Princeton:	Princeton	University	Press,	1991),	144.
children,	women,	and	“savages”:
	Bennett	Galef,	“Breathing	New	Life	into	the
Study	of	Imitation	by	Animals:	What	and	When	Do	Chimpanzees	Imitate?,”
in	
Perspectives	on	Imitation:	Mechanisms	of	Imitation	and	Imitation	in
Animals,
	ed.	Susan	L.	Hurley	and	Nick	Chater	(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	2005),
295–96.
“Here’s	to	the	crazy	ones”:
	The	commercial	from	Apple	can	be	viewed	at
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tjgtLSHhTPg
.
the	“proudest	moment”:
	Kevin	N.	Laland,	
Darwin’s	Unfinished	Symphony:
How	Culture	Made	the	Human	Mind
	(Princeton:	Princeton	University	Press,
2017),	50.
“We	were	expecting	someone”:
	Luke	Rendell,	quoted	in	Sarah	Boesveld,	“Post-
Grad	Copycats	Prove	That	Innovation	Is	Highly	Overrated,”	
Globe	and	Mail,
April	16,	2010.
how	valuable	imitation	can	be:
	Luke	Rendell	et	al.,	“Cognitive	Culture:
Theoretical	and	Empirical	Insights	into	Social	Learning	Strategies,”	
Trends	in
Cognitive	Sciences
	15	(February	2011):	68–76.	See	also	R.	Alexander
Bentley,	Mark	Earls,	and	Michael	J.	O’Brien,	
I’ll	Have	What	She’s	Having:
Mapping	Social	Behavior
	(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	2011).
most	efficient	and	effective	route:
	Peter	Duersch,	Jörn	Oechssler,	and	Burkhard
C.	Schipper,	“Unbeatable	Imitation,”	
Games	and	Economic	Behavior
	76
(September	2012):	88–96.
did	nothing	but	copy:
	Gerald	S.	Martin	and	John	Puthenpurackal,	“Imitation	Is
the	Sincerest	Form	of	Flattery:	Warren	Buffett	and	Berkshire	Hathaway,”
paper	posted	on	the	Social	Science	Research	Network,	September	2005.
--- Page 298 ---
“Zara	is	engaged	in	a	permanent	quest”:
	Enrique	Badía,	
Zara	and	Her	Sisters:
The	Story	of	the	World’s	Largest	Clothing	Retailer
	(New	York:	Palgrave
Macmillan,	2009),	23.
copies	its	own
	customers:
	Patricia	Kowsmann,	“Fast	Fashion:	How	a	Zara	Coat
Went	from	Design	to	Fifth	Avenue	in	25	Days,”	
Wall	Street	Journal,
December	6,	2016.
“depends	on	a	constant	exchange”:
	Kasra	Ferdows,	Michael	A.	Lewis,	and	José
A.	D.	Machuca,	“Rapid-Fire	Fulfillment,”	
Harvard	Business	Review,
November	2004.
a	historical	analysis:
	Gerard	J.	Tellis	and	Peter	N.	Golder,	“First	to	Market,	First
to	Fail?	Real	Causes	of	Enduring	Market	Leadership,”	
MIT	Sloan
Management	Review,
	January	15,	1996.
“honest	signals”:
	Alex	(Sandy)	Pentland,	
Honest	Signals:	How	They	Shape	Our
World
	(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	2008).
competitive	interactions	among	yachts:
	Jan-Michael	Ross	and	Dmitry	Sharapov,
“When	the	Leader	Follows:	Avoiding	Dethronement	Through	Imitation,”
Academy	of	Management	Journal
	58	(2015):	658–79.
sailors	often	engaged	in	“covering”:
	Jan-Michael	Ross,	“The	Highest	Form	of
Flattery?	What	Imitation	in	the	America’s	Cup	Can	Teach	Business,”	posted
on	the	website	of	Imperial	College	Business	School,	May	25,	2017,
https://www.imperial.ac.uk/business-school/blogs/ib-knowledge/highest-
form-flattery-what-imitation-americas-cup-can-teach-business/
.
the	imitator’s	costs:
	Oded	Shenkar,	
Copycats:	How	Smart	Companies	Use
Imitation	to	Gain	a	Strategic	Edge
	(Cambridge:	Harvard	Business	Press,
2010),	9.
the	“correspondence	problem”:
	Chrystopher	L.	Nehaniv	and	Kerstin
Dautenhahn,	“The	Correspondence	Problem,”	in	
Imitation	in	Animals	and
Artifacts,
	ed.	Kerstin	Dautenhahn	and	Chrystopher	L.	Nehaniv	(Cambridge:
MIT	Press,	2002),	41–62.
a	landmark	report:
	Institute	of	Medicine,	
To	Err	Is	Human:	Building	a	Safer
Health	System,
	ed.	Linda	T.	Kohn,	Janet	M.	Corrigan,	and	Molla	S.
Donaldson	(Washington,	DC:	National	Academies	Press,	2000).
the	moments	of	highest	risk:
	Valerie	E.	Barnes	and	William	P.	Monan,	“Cockpit
Distractions:	Precursors	to	Emergencies,”	
Proceedings	of	the	Human	Factors
and	Ergonomics	Society	Annual	Meeting
	34	(October	1990):	1142–44.
the	riskiest	moments	happen:
	Magdalena	Z.	Raban	and	Johanna	I.	Westbrook,
“Are	Interventions	to	Reduce	Interruptions	and	Errors	During	Medication
Administration	Effective?	A	Systematic	Review,”	
BMJ	Quality	&	Safety
	23
(May	2014):	414–21.
--- Page 299 ---
distractions	and	interruptions	of	the	pilot:
	William	P.	Monan,	“Distraction—A
Human	Factor	in	Air	Carrier	Hazard	Events,”	Technical	Memorandum	78608
(Washington,	DC:	National	Aeronautics	and	Space	Administration,	1979).
interruptions	of	health	care	professionals:
	Kyle	Anthony	et	al.,	“No
Interruptions	Please:	Impact	of	a	No	Interruption	Zone	on	Medication	Safety
in	Intensive	Care	Units,”	
Critical	Care	Nurse
	30	(June	2010):	21–29.
one	nurse,	dispensing	one	medication:
	Lew	McCreary,	“Kaiser	Permanente’s
Innovation	on	the	Front	Lines,”	
Harvard	Business	Review,
	September	2010.
the	“sterile	cockpit	rule”:
	Robert	L.	Sumwalt,	“Accident	and	Incident	Reports
Show	Importance	of	‘Sterile	Cockpit’	Compliance,”	
Flight	Safety	Digest
	13
(July	1994):	1–8.
her	2002	dissertation:
	Theresa	M.	Pape,	“The	Effect	of	Nurses’	Use	of	a
Focused	Protocol	to	Reduce	Distractions	During	Medication	Administration”
(PhD	diss.,	Texas	Woman’s	University,	2002).
“The	key	to	preventing	medication	errors”:
	Theresa	M.	Pape,	“Applying	Airline
Safety	Practices	to	Medication	Administration,”	
MEDSURG	Nursing
	12
(April	2003):	77–93.
“virtual	elimination	of	nurse	distractions”:
	Agency	for	Healthcare	Research	and
Quality,	“AHRQ	Health	Care	Innovations	Exchange:	Checklists	with
Medication	Vest	or	Sash	Reduce	Distractions	During	Medication
Administration”	(2009).
a	golden	“age	of	imitation”:
	Shenkar,	
Copycats,
	41.
Shenkar	would	like	to	see:
	Oded	Shenkar,	“The	Challenge	of	Imovation,”	
Ivey
Business	Journal,
	March–April	2011.
led	hospitals	to	imitate:
	Paul	F.	Nunes,	Narendra	P.	Mulani,	and	Trevor	J.
Gruzin,	“Leading	by	Imitation,”	
Accenture	Outlook,
	2007,	1–9.
the	onboard	“checklist”:
	Ellen	Barlow,	“A	Simple	Checklist	That	Saves	Lives,”
Harvard	Public	Health	Magazine,
	Fall	2008.
a	nineteen-item	checklist:
	Alex	B.	Haynes	et	al.,	“A	Surgical	Safety	Checklist	to
Reduce	Morbidity	and	Mortality	in	a	Global	Population,”	
New	England
Journal	of	Medicine
	360	(January	2009):	491–99.
“peer-to-peer	assessment	technique”:
	Elizabeth	Mort	et	al.,	“Improving	Health
Care	Quality	and	Patient	Safety	Through	Peer-to-Peer	Assessment:
Demonstration	Project	in	Two	Academic	Medical	Centers,”	
American	Journal
of	Medical	Quality
	32	(September	2017):	472–79.	See	also	Peter	J.	Pronovost
and	Daniel	W.	Hudson,	“Improving	Healthcare	Quality	Through
Organisational	Peer-to-Peer	Assessment:	Lessons	from	the	Nuclear	Power
Industry,”	
BMJ	Quality	&	Safety
	21	(October	2012):	872–75.
--- Page 300 ---
on	a	visit	to	Xerox	PARC:
	My	discussion	of	Steve	Jobs’s	imitation	of
innovations	he	first	saw	at	Xerox	PARC	is	drawn	from	Walter	Isaacson,	
Steve
Jobs
	(New	York:	Simon	&	Schuster,	2011),	92–101.
three	steps:
	Oded	Shenkar,	“Just	Imitate	It!	A	Copycat	Path	to	Strategic
Agility,”	
Ivey	Business	Journal,
	May–June	2012.
our	success	as	a
	species:
	
Andrew	N.	Meltzoff	and	Peter	J.	Marshall,	“Human
Infant	Imitation	as	a	Social	Survival	Circuit,”	
Current	Opinion	in	Behavioral
Sciences
	24	(December	2018):	130–36.
“one-shot	imitation	learning”:
	Hyacinth	Mascarenhas,	“Elon	Musk’s	OpenAI	Is
Teaching	Robots	How	to	Imitate	Humans	After	Seeing	Them	Do	a	Task
Once,”	
International	Business	Times,
	May	17,	2017.
“are	still	far	from	being	able”:
	Alison	Gopnik,	“AIs	Versus	Four-Year-Olds,”	in
Possible	Minds:	Twenty-Five	Ways	of	Looking	at	AI,
	ed.	John	Brockman
(New	York:	Penguin	Press,	2019),	219–30.
their	mimicry	differs:
	Zanna	Clay	and	Claudio	Tenie,	“Is	Overimitation	a
Uniquely	Human	Phenomenon?	Insights	from	Human	Children	as	Compared
to	Bonobos,”	
Child	Development
	89	(September–October	2018):	1535–44.
children	are	quite	selective:
	Emily	R.	R.	Burdett	et	al.,	“Do	Children	Copy	an
Expert	or	a	Majority?	Examining	Selective	Learning	in	Instrumental	and
Normative	Contexts,”	
PLoS	One
	11	(October	2016).	See	also	Diane	Poulin-
Dubois,	Ivy	Brooker,	and	Alexan
dra	Polonia,	“Infants	Prefer	to	Imitate	a
Reliable	Person,”	
Infant	Behavior	and	Development
	34	(April	2011):	303–9.
copy	their	mothers:
	Amanda	J.	Lucas,	Emily	R.	R.	Burdett	et	al.,	“The
Development	of	Selective	Copying:	Children’s	Learning	from	an	Expert
Versus	Their	Mother,”	
Child	Development
	88	(November	2017):	2026–42.
strikingly	unselective:
	Francys	Subiaul,	“What’s	Special	About	Human
Imitation?	A	Comparison	with	Enculturated	Apes,”	
Behavioral	Sciences
	6
(September	2016).	See	also	Mark	Nielsen	and	Cornelia	Blank,	“Imitation	in
Young	Children:	When	Who	Gets	Copied	Is	More	Important	Than	What	Gets
Copied,”	
Developmental	Psychology
	47	(July	2011):	1050–53.
“high-fidelity”	copiers:
	Francys	Subiaul	et	al.,	“Becoming	a	High-Fidelity-
Super-Imitator:	What	Are	the	Contributions	of	Social	and	Individual
Learning?,”	
Developmental	Science
	18	(November	2015):	1025–35.
faithfully	imitate	every	step:
	Andrew	Whiten	et	al.,	“Emulation,	Imitation,	Over-
Imitation	and	the	Scope	of	Culture	for	Child	and	Chimpanzee,”	
Philosophical
Transactions	of	the	Royal	Society	B:	Biological	Sciences
	364	(August	2009):
2417–28.
Humans’	tendency	to	“overimitate”:
	Clay	and	Tenie,	“Is	Overimitation	a
Uniquely	Human	Phenomenon?”
--- Page 301 ---
“cognitively	opaque”:
	Derek	E.	Lyons	et	al.,	“The	Scope	and	Limits	of
Overimitation	in	the	Transmission	of	Artefact	Culture,”	
Philosophical
Transactions	of	the	Royal	Society	B:	Biological	Sciences
	366	(Aparil	2011):
1158–67.
the	customs	of	one’s	culture:
	Joseph	Henrich,	“A	Cultural	Species:	How	Culture
Drove	Human	Evolution,”	
Psychological	Science	Agenda,
	November	2011.
See	also	Mark	Nielsen	and	Keyan	Tomaselli,	“Overimitation	in	Kalahari
Bushman	Children	and	the	Origins	of	Human	Cultural	Cognition,”
Psychological	Science
	21	(May	2010):	729–36.
more	likely	to	overimitate:
	Yue	Yu	and	Tamar	Kushnir,	“Social	Context	Effects
in	2-	and	4-Year-Olds’	Selective	Versus	Faithful	Imitation,”	
Developmental
Psychology
	50	(March	2014):	922–33.
continues	to	increase	across	development:
	Nicola	McGuigan,	Jenny	Makinson,
and	Andrew	Whiten,	“From	Over-Imitation	to	Super-Copying:	Adults	Imitate
Causally	Irrelevant	Aspects	of	Tool	Use	with	Higher	Fidelity	Than	Young
Children,”	
British	Journal	of	Psychology
	102	(February	2011):	1–18.	See	also
Andrew	Whiten	et	al.,	“Social	Learning	in	the	Real-World:	‘Over-Imitation’
Occurs	in	Both	Children	and	Adults	Unaware	of	Participation	in	an
Experiment	and	Independently	of	Social	Interaction,”	
PLoS	One
	11	(July
2016).
babies	who	were	days	or	even	hours	old:
	Andrew	N.	Meltzoff	and	M.	Keith
Moore,	“Newborn	Infants	Imitate	Adult	Facial	Gestures,”	
Child	Development
54	(June	1983):	702–09.
Mayan	children	from	Guatemala:
	Maricela	Correa-Chávez	and	Barbara	Rogoff,
“Children’s	Attention	to	Interactions	Directed	to	Others:	Guatemalan	Mayan
and	European	American	Patterns,”	
Developmental	Psychology
	45	(May
2009):	630–41.
American	children	aren’t	granted:
	Alison	Gopnik,	“What’s	Wrong	with	the
Teenage	Mind?,”	
Wall	Street	Journal,
	January	28,	2012.
towed	around	a	rolling	suitcase:
	Ron	Berger,	“Deeper	Learning:	Highlighting
Student	Work,”	
Edutopia,
	January	3,	2013.	See	also	Ron	Berger,	“Models	of
Excellence:	What	Do	Standards	Really	Look	Like?,”	post	on	the	website	of
Education	Week,
	
April	20,	2015,
http://blogs.edweek.org/edweek/learning_deeply/2015/04/models_of_excellence_what_do_standards_really_look_like.html
a	picture	he	calls	“Austin’s	Butterfly”:
	Ron	Berger,	featured	in	the	video
“Austin’s	Butterfly:	Building	Excellence	in	Student	Work,”	posted	on	the
website	of	EL	Education,
https://modelsofexcellence.eleducation.org/resources/austins-butterfly
.
--- Page 302 ---
teachers	of	composition	and	rhetoric:
	Paul	Butler,	“Imitation	as	Freedom:
(Re)Forming	Student	Writing,”	
The	Quarterly
	24	(Spring	2002):	25–32.	See
also	Donna	Gorrell,	“Freedom	to	Write—Through	Imitation,”	
Journal	of
Basic	Writing
	6	(Fall	1987):	53–59.
who	never	relinquished:
	Tom	Pace,	“Style	and	the	Renaissance	of	Composition
Studies,”	in	
Refiguring	Prose	Style:	Possibilities	for	Writing	Pedagogy,
	ed.	T.
R.	Johnson	and	Tom	Pace	(Logan:	Utah	State	University	Press,	2005),	3–22.
“Imitate,	that	you	may	be	different”:
	Corbett,	“The	Theory	and	Practice	of
Imitation	in	Classical	Rhetoric.”
write	within	particular	academic	genres:
	Davida	H.	Charney	and	Richard	A.
Carlson,	“Learning	to	Write	in	a	Genre:	What	Student	Writers	Take	from
Model	Texts,”	
Research	in	the	Teaching	of	English
	29	(February	1995):	88–
125.
“disciplinary	writing”:
	Fredricka	L.	Stoller	et	al.,	“Demystifying	Disciplinary
Writing:	A	Case	Study	in	the	Writing	of	Chemistry,”	
Across	the	Disciplines
	2
(2005).
“authentic	texts”:
	Stoller	et	al.,	“Demystifying	Disciplinary	Writing.”
teaching	legal	writing:
	Terrill	Pollman,	“The	Sincerest	Form	of	Flattery:
Examples	and	Model-Based	Learning	in	the	Classroom,”	
Journal	of	Legal
Education
	64	(November	2014):	298–333.
It	was	too	much:
	Terri	L.	Enns	and	Monte	Smith,	“Take	a	(Cognitive)	Load	Off:
Creating	Space	to	Allow	First-Year	Legal	Writing	Students	to	Focus	on
Analytical	and	Writing	Processes,”	
Legal	Writing:	The	Journal	of	the	Legal
Writing	Institute
	20	(2015):	109–40.
skill	has	become	“automatized”:
	David	F.	Feldon,	“The	Implications	of
Research	on	Expertise	for	Curriculum	and	Pedagogy,”	
Educational
Psychology	Review
	19	(June	2006):	91–110.
expert	trauma	surgeons:
	Richard	E.	Clark	et	al.,	“The	Use	of	Cognitive	Task
Analysis	to	Improve	Instructional	Descriptions	of	Procedures,”	
Journal	of
Surgical	Research
	173	(March	2012):	e37–42.
expert	experimental	psychologists:
	David	F.	Feldon,	“Do	Psychology
Researchers	Tell	It	Like	It	Is?	A	Microgenetic	Analysis	of	Research	Strategies
and	Self-Report	Accuracy,”	
Instructional	Science
	38	(July	2010):	395–415.
expert	computer	programmers:
	Chin-Jung	Chao	and	Gavriel	Salvendy,
“Percentage	of	Procedural	Knowledge	Acquired	as	a	Function	of	the	Number
of	Experts	from	Whom	Knowledge	Is	Acquired	for	Diagnosis,	Debugging,
and	Interpretation	Tasks,”	
International	Journal	of	Human-Computer
Interaction
	6	(July	1994):	221–33.
--- Page 303 ---
“re-enactive	empathy”:
	Karsten	Stueber,	
Rediscovering	Empathy:	Agency,	Folk
Psychology,	and	the	Human	Sciences
	(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	2006),	21.
stage	such	a	reenactment:
	Ting	Zhang,	“Back	to	the	Beginning:	Rediscovering
Inexperience	Helps	Experts	Give	Advice,”	
Academy	of	Management
Proceedings
	2015	(November	2017).	See	also	Carmen	Nobel,	“How	to	Break
the	Expert’s	Curse,”	
Harvard	Business	School	Working	Knowledge,
	February
23,	2015.
experts	habitually	engage	in	“chunking”:
	Fernand	Gobet,	“Chunking	Models	of
Exper
tise:	Implications	for	Education,”	
Applied	Cognitive	Psychology
	19
(March	2005):	183–204.
math	education	expert	John	Mighton:
	My	discussion	of	John	Mighton	and
JUMP	draws	on	the	following	sources:	John	Mighton,	“If	You	Want	to	Make
Math	Appealing	to	Children,	Think	Like	a	Child,”	
New	York	Times,
December	10,	2013;	John	Mighton,	interviewed	by	Ingrid	Wickelgren,	“Kids
JUMP	for	Math,”	
Scientific	American
	podcast,	August	7,	2013;	John	Mighton,
The	End	of	Ignorance:	Multiplying	Our	Human	Potential
	(Toronto:	Alfred	A.
Knopf	Canada,	2007);	John	Mighton,	
The	Myth	of	Ability:	Nurturing
Mathematical	Talent	in	Every	Child
	(New	York:	Walker	&	Company,	2003);
Jenny	Anderson,	“A	Mathematician	Has	Created	a	Teaching	Method	That’s
Proving	There’s	No	Such	Thing	as	a	Bad	Math	Student,”	
Quartz,
	February	15,
2017;	David	Bornstein,	“A	Better	Way	to	Teach	Math,”	
New	York	Times,
April	18,	2011;	Sue	Ferguson,	“The	Math	Motivator,”	
Maclean’s,
	September
22,	2003.
evaluation	of	the	JUMP	program:
	Tracy	Solomon	et	al.,	“A	Cluster-Randomized
Controlled	Trial	of	the	Effectiveness	of	the	JUMP	Math	Program	of	Math
Instruction	for	Improving	Elementary	Math	Achievement,”	
PLoS	One
	14
(October	2019).
digitally	morphing	the	outlines:
	Itiel	E.	Dror,	Sarah	V.	Stevenage,	and	Alan	R.
S.	Ashworth,	“Helping	the	Cognitive	System	Learn:	Exaggerating
Distinctiveness	and	Uniqueness,”	
Applied	Cognitive	Psychology
	22	(May
2008):	573–84.
“the	caricature	advantage”:
	Gillian	Rhodes,	Susan	Brennan,	and	Susan	Carey,
“Identification	and	Ratings	of	Caricatures:	Implications	for	Mental
Representations	of	Faces,”	
Cognitive	Psychology
	19	(October	1987):	473–97.
A	classic	experiment:
	Michelene	T.	H.	Chi,	Paul	J.	Feltovich,	and	Robert	Glaser,
“Categorization	and	Representation	of	Physics	Problems	by	Experts	and
Novices,”	
Cognitive	Science
	5	(April	1981):	121–52.
“I	heard	the	same	questions”:
	Joshua	Wesson,	quoted	by	Adam	Fiore	in	“Wine
Talk:	The	Taste	and	Flavor	Guru,”	
Jerusalem	Post,
	May	9,	2012.
--- Page 304 ---
in	ways	different	from	novices:
	Andreas	Gegenfurtner,	Erno	Lehtinen,	and	Roger
Säljö,	“Expertise	Differences	in	the	Comprehension	of	Visualizations:	A
Meta-Analysis	of	Eye-Tracking	Research	in	Professional	Domains,”
Educational	Psychology	Review
	23	(December	2011):	523–52.
even	high	school	teachers:
	Charlotte	E.	Wolff	et	al.,	“Teacher	Vision:	Expert
and	Novice	Teachers’	Perception	of	Problematic	Classroom	Management
Scenes,”	
Instructional	Science
	44	(June	2016):	243–65.
how	they	engage	in	looking:
	Ellen	M.	Kok	and	Halszka	Jarodzka,	“Before	Your
Very	Eyes:	The	Value	and	Limitations	of	Eye	Tracking	in	Medical
Education,”	
Medical	Education
	51	(January	2017):	114–22.
guiding	their	gaze	with	unobtrusive	cues:
	Reynold	J.	Bailey	et	al.,	“Subtle	Gaze
Direction,”	
ACM	Transactions	on	Graphics
	28	(September	2009):	1–22.	See
also	Brett	Roads,	Michael	C.	Mozer,	and	Thomas	A.	Busey,	“Using
Highlighting	to	Train	Attentional	Expertise,”	
PLoS	One
	11	(January	2016).
a	way	of	“cheating	experience”:
	Samuel	J.	Vine	et	al.,	“Cheating	Experience:
Guiding	Novices	to	Adopt	the	Gaze	Strategies	of	Experts	Expedites	the
Learning	of	Technical	Laparoscopic	Skills,”	
Surgery
	152	(July	2012):	32–40.
reduce	cognitive	load	and	improve	performance:
	Janet	van	der	Linden	et	al.,
“Buzzing	to	Play:	Lessons	Learned	from	an	In	the	Wild	Study	of	Real-Time
Vibrotactile	Feed
back,”	paper	presented	at	the	SIGCHI	Conference	on	Human
Factors	in	Computing	Systems,	May	2011.	See	also	Jeff	Lieberman	and
Cynthia	Breazeal,	“TIKL:	Development	of	a	Wearable	Vibrotactile	Feedback
Suit	for	Improved	Human	Motor	Learning,”	
IEEE	Transactions	on	Robotics
23	(October	2007):	919–26.
“the	trade,	art,	and	mystery”:
	United	States	Bureau	of	Apprenticeship	and
Training,	
Apprenticeship:	Past	and	Present
	(Washington,	DC:	United	States
Department	of	Labor,	1969).
8.	THINKING	WITH	PEERS
did	not	extend	to	the	classroom:
	My	discussion	of	Wieman’s	efforts	to	improve
physics	teaching,	including	his	own,	are	drawn	from	the	following	sources:
Wieman,	“The	‘Curse	of	Knowledge’
 
”;	Carl	E.	Wieman,	“Expertise	in
University	Teaching	&	the	Implications	for	Teaching	Effectiveness,
Evaluation	&	Training,”	
Dædalus
	148	(Fall	2019):	47–78;	Carl	Wieman,
Improving	How	Universities	Teach	Science:	Lessons	from	the	Science
Education	Initiative
	(Cambridge:	Harvard	University	Press,	2017);	Susanne
Dambeck,	“Carl	Wieman:	Teaching	Science	More	Effectively,”	post	on	the
website	of	the	Lindau	Nobel	Laureate	Meetings,	July	7,	2016,
https://www.lindau-nobel.org/carl-wieman-teaching-science-more-
--- Page 305 ---
effectively/
;	Carl	E.	Wieman,	“Ideas	for	Improving	Science	Education,”	
New
York	Times,
	September	2,	2013;	Carl	Wieman,	“Why	Not	Try	a	Scientific
Approach	to	Science	Education?,”	
Change:	The	Magazine	of	Higher	Learning
39	(September–October	2007):	9–15.
more	the	rule	than	the	exception:
	M.	Mitchell	Waldrop,	“Why	We	Are	Teaching
Science	Wrong,	and	How	to	Make	It	Right,”	
Nature
	523	(July	2015).
work	carried	out	in	his	lab:
	Carl	E.	Wieman,	
Collected	Papers	of	Carl	Wieman
(Singapore:	World	Scientific,	2008).
“sing	in	unison”:
	The	Royal	Swedish	Academy	of	Sciences,	“New	State	of
Matter	Revealed:	Bose-Einstein	Condensate,”	post	on	website	of	the	Nobel
Prize,	October	9,	2001,	
https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/physics/2001/press-
release/
.
“It	was	clear	to	me”:
	Wieman,	
Collected	Papers,
	4.
A	2019	study:
	David	F.	Feldon	et	al.,	“Postdocs’	Lab	Engagement	Predicts
Trajectories	of	PhD	Students’	Skill	Development,”	
Proceedings	of	the
National	Academy	of	Sciences
	116	(October	2019):	20910–16.
“multiple	brief	small-group	discussions”:
	Wieman,	
Improving	How	Universities
Teach	Science.
“active	learning”	approach:
	Scott	Freeman	et	al.,	“Active	Learning	Increases
Student	Performance	in	Science,	Engineering,	and	Mathematics,”	
Proceedings
of	the	National	Academy	of	Sciences
	111	(June	2014):	8410–15.
students	who	engage	in	active	learning:
	Louis	Deslauriers,	Ellen	Schelew,	and
Carl	Wieman,	“Improved	Learning	in	a	Large-Enrollment	Physics	Class,”
Science
	332	(May	2011):	862–64.
“this	big	pot	of	money”:
	Carl	Wieman,	“Why	I	Donated	to	PhET,”	video	posted
on	the	website	of	PhET	Interactive	Simulations/University	of	Colorado
Boulder,	
https://phet.colorado.edu/en/about
.
a	kind	of	internalized	conversation:
	Charles	Fernyhough,	“Dialogic	Thinking,”
in	
Private	Speech,	Executive	Functioning,	and	the	Development	of	Verbal
Self-Regulation,
	ed.	Adam	Winsler,	Charles	Fernyhough,	and	Ignacio
Montego	(New	York:	Cambridge	University	Press,	2009),	42–52.
the	brain	stores	social	information:
	Jason	P.	Mitchell	et	al.,	“Thinking	About
Others:	The	Neural	Substrates	of	Social	Cognition,”	in	
Social	Neuroscience:
People	Thinking	About	Thinking	People,
	ed.	Karen	T.	Litfin	(Cambridge:	MIT
Press,	2006),	63–82.
remember	social	information	more	accurately:
	Jason	P.	Mitchell,	C.	Neil
Macrae,	and	Mahzarin	R.	Banaji,	“Encoding-Specific	Effects	of	Social
Cognition	on	the	Neural	Correlates	of	Subsequent	Memory,”	
Journal	of
Neuroscience
	24	(May	2004):	4912–17.
--- Page 306 ---
“social	encoding	advantage”:
	Matthew	D.	Lieberman,	
Social:	Why	Our	Brains
Are	Wired	to	Connect
	(New	York:	Crown,	2013),	284.
served	to	reinforce	this	notion:
	Thalia	Wheatley	et	al.,	“Beyond	the	Isolated
Brain:	The	Promise	and	Challenge	of	Interacting	Minds,”	
Neuron
	103	(July
2019):	186–88.
hampered	by	technical	constraints:
	James	McPartland	and	Joy	Hirsch,	“Imaging
of	Social	Brain	Enters	Real	World,”	
Spectrum,
	January	31,	2017.
the	“interactive	brain	hypothesis”:
	Ezequiel	Di	Paolo	and	Hanne	De	Jaegher,
“The	Interactive	Brain	Hypothesis,”	
Frontiers	of	Human	Neuroscience
	6
(June	2012).
experiments	that	track	brain	activity:
	Joy	Hirsch	et	al.,	“Frontal	Temporal	and
Parietal	Systems	Synchronize	Within	and	Across	Brains	During	Live	Eye-To-
Eye	Contact,”	
Neuroimage
	157	(August	2017):	314–30.
people	playing	poker:
	Matthew	Piva	et	al.,	“Distributed	Neural	Activity	Patterns
During	Human-to-Human	Competition,”	
Frontiers	in	Human	Neuroscience
11	(November	2017).
Other	studies	have	found:
	For	example,	Sören	Krach	et	al.,	“Are	Women	Better
Mindreaders?	Sex	Differences	in	Neural	Correlates	of	Mentalizing	Detected
with	Functional	MRI,”	
BMC	Neuroscience
	10	(February	2009).
brain	regions	associated	with	reward:
	Jari	Kätsyri	et	al.,	“The	Opponent
Matters:	Elevated	fMRI	Reward	Responses	to	Winning	Against	a	Human
Versus	a	Computer	Opponent	During	Interactive	Video	Game	Playing,”
Cerebral	Cortex
	23	(December	2013):	2829–39.
it	was	applied	in	a	study:
	Barbara	T.	Conboy	et	al.,	“Social	Interaction	in
Infants’	Learning	of	Second-Language	Phonetics:	An	Exploration	of	Brain-
Behavior	Relations,”	
Developmental	Neuropsychology
	40	(April	2015):	216–
29.
the	Wason	Selection	Task:
	Peter	C.	Wason,	“Reasoning,”	in	
New	Horizons	in
Psychology,
	ed.	Brian	M.	Foss	(Harmondsworth:	Penguin	Books,	1966),	135–
51.
“Take	a	look	at	the	cards”:
	Raymond	S.	Nickerson,	
Conditional	Reasoning:	The
Unruly	Syntactics,	Semantics,	Thematics,	and	Pragmatics	of	“If”
	(New	York:
Oxford	University	Press,	2015),	33.
People’s	performance	on	this	task:
	Philip	N.	Johnson-Laird	and	Peter	C.	Wason,
“Insight	into	a	Logical	Relation,”	
Quarterly	Journal	of	Experimental
Psychology
	22	(1970):	49–61.
only	about	10	percent	of	subjects:
	Dan	Sperber	and	Hugo	Mercier,	“Reasoning
as	a	Social	Competence,”	in	
Collective	Wisdom:	Principles	and	Mechanisms,
--- Page 307 ---
ed.	Hélène	Landemore	and	Jon	Elster	(New	York:	Cambridge	University
Press,	2012),	368–92.
the	language	of	the	task	is	rephrased:
	Leda	Cosmides,	“The	Logic	of	Social
Exchange:	Has	Natural	Selection	Shaped	How	Humans	Reason?	Studies	with
the	Wason	Selection	Task,”	
Cognition
	31	(April	1989):	187–276.
one	particular	aspect	of	the	task:
	Leda	Cosmides	and	John	Tooby,	“Cognitive
Adaptations	for	Social	Exchange,”	in	
The	Adapted	Mind:	Evolutionary
Psychology	and	the	Generation	of	Culture,
	ed.	Jerome	H.	Barkow,	Leda
Cosmides,	and	John	Tooby	(New	York:	Oxford	University	Press,	1995),	163–
228.
Make	it
	social:
	Richard	A.	Griggs	and	James	R.	Cox,	“The	Elusive	Thematic-
Materials	Effect	in	Wason’s	Selection	Task,”	
British	Journal	of	Social
Psychology
	73	(August	1982):	407–20.	See	also	Ken	I.	Manktelow	and	David
E.	Over,	“Social	Roles	and	Utilities	in	Reasoning	with	Deontic	Conditionals,”
Cognition
	39	(May	1991):	85–105.
the	social	version	of	the	task:
	Christopher	Badcock,	“Making	Sense	of	Wason,”
post	on	the	website	of	
Psychology	Today,
	May	5,	2012,
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-imprinted-
brain/201205/making-sense-wason
.
evolutionary	psychologists	have	speculated:
	Cosmides	and	Tooby,	“Cognitive
Adaptations	for	Social	Exchange.”
simply	because	it	is	social	in	nature:
	Nicola	Canessa	et	al.,	“The	Effect	of	Social
Content	on	Deductive	Reasoning:	An	fMRI	Study,”	
Human	Brain	Mapping
26	(September	2005):	30–43.
developed	our	oversized	brains:
	Robin	I.	M.	Dunbar,	“The	Social	Brain
Hypothesis,”	
Evolutionary	Anthropology
	6	(December	1998):	178–90.
a	specialized	“social	brain”:
	Lieberman,	
Social,
	31.
The	social	brain	with	its	“superpowers”:
	Matthew	D.	Lieberman,	“The	Social
Brain	and	Its	Superpowers,”	post	on	the	website	of	
Psychology	Today,
October	8,	2013,	
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/social-brain-
social-mind/201310/the-social-brain-and-its-superpowers
.
powerfully	driven	to	form	bonds:
	Sarah-Jayne	Blakemore	and	Kathryn	L.	Mills,
“Is	Adolescence	a	Sensitive	Period	for	Sociocultural	Processing?,”	
Annual
Review	of	Psychology
	65	(2014):	187–207.
teens’	brains	become	more	sensitive:
	This	development	in	teenagers	has	been
found	in	a	number	of	studies,	including	Maya	L.	Rosen	et	al.,	“Salience
Network	Response	to	Changes	in	Emotional	Expressions	of	Others	Is
Heightened	During	Early	Adolescence:	Relevance	for	Social	Functioning,”
Developmental	Science
	21	(May	2018);	William	E.	Moore	III	et	al.,	“Facing
--- Page 308 ---
Puberty:	Associations	Between	Pubertal	Development	and	Neural	Responses
to	Affective	Facial	Displays,”	
Social	Cognitive	and	Affective	Neuroscience
	7
(January	2012):	35–43;	Jennifer	H.	Pfeifer	et	al.,	“Entering	Adolescence:
Resistance	to	Peer	Influence,	Risky	Behavior,	and	Neural	Changes	in	Emotion
Reactivity,”	
Neuron
	69	(March	2011):	1029–36.
become	more	attuned	to	reward:
	Linda	Van	Leijenhorst	et	al.,	“What	Motivates
the	Adolescent?	Brain	Regions	Mediating	Reward	Sensitivity	Across
Adolescence,”	
Cerebral	Cortex
	20	(January	2010):	61–69.	See	also	Monique
Ernst	et	al.,	“Amygdala	and	Nucleus	Accumbens	in	Responses	to	Receipt	and
Omission	of	Gains	in	Adults	and	Adolescents,”	
NeuroImage
	25	(May	2005):
1279–91.
the	sweetest	reward	for	a	teen:
	Jason	Chein	et	al.,	“Peers	Increase	Adolescent
Risk	Taking	by	Enhancing	Activity	in	the	Brain’s	Reward	Circuitry,”
Developmental	Science
	14	(March	2011):	F1–10.
appears	to	be	“turned	on”:
	Iroise	Dumontheil	et	al.,	“Developmental
Differences	in	the	Control	of	Action	Selection	by	Social	Information,”
Journal	of	Cognitive	Neuroscience
	24	(October	2012):	2080–95.
“What	the	brain	really	wants”:
	Matthew	D.	Lieberman,	“Education	and	the
Social	Brain,”	
Trends	in	Neuroscience	and	Education
	1	(December	2012):	3–
9.
leverage	their	burgeoning	sociability:
	Mary	Helen	Immordino-Yang	and
Antonio	Damasio,	“We	Feel,	Therefore	We	Learn:	The	Relevance	of
Affective	and	Social	Neuroscience	to	Education,”	
Mind,	Brain	and	Education
1	(March	2007):	3–10.
did	not	evolve	to	care:
	David	C.	Geary	and	Daniel	B.	Berch,	“Evolution	and
Children’s	Cognitive	and	Academic	Development,”	in	
Evolutionary
Perspectives	on	Child	Development	and	Education,
	ed.	David	C.	Geary	and
Daniel	B.	Berch	(New	York:	Springer,	2016),	217–49.	See	also	David	C.
Geary,	“An	Evolutionarily	Informed	Education	Science,”	
Educational
Psychologist
	43	(October	2008):	179–95.
Evidence	of	teaching	has	been	found:
	Jamshid	J.	Tehrani	and	Felix	Riede,
“Towards	an	Archaeology	of	Pedagogy:	Learning,	Teaching	and	the
Generation	of	Material	Culture	Traditions,”	
World	Archaeology
	40
(September	2008):	316–31.
the	act	of	teaching	has	been	observed:
	Gergely	Csibra	and	György	Gergely,
“Natural	Pedagogy	as	Evolutionary	Adaptation,”	
Philosophical	Transactions
of	the	Royal	Society	B:	Biological	Sciences
	366	(April	2011):	1149–57.	See
also	Barry	S.	Hewlett	and	Casey	J.	Roulette,	“Teaching	in	Hunter-Gatherer
Infancy,”	
Royal	Society	Open	Science
	3	(January	2016).
--- Page 309 ---
“teaching	instinct”:
	Cecilia	I.	Calero,	A.	P.	Goldin,	and	M.	Sigman,	“The
Teaching	Instinct,”	
Review	of	Philosophy	and	Psychology
	9	(December	2018):
819–30.
we	unconsciously	offer	cues:
	György	Gergely	and	Gergely	Csibra,	“Natural
Pedagogy,”	in	
Navigating	the	Social	World:	What	Infants,	Children,	and
Other	Species	Can	Teach	Us,
	ed.	Mahzarin	R.	Banaji	and	Susan	A.	Gelman
(New	York:	Oxford	University	Press,	2013),	127–32.	See	also	György
Gergely,	Katalin	Egyed,	and	Ildikó	Király,	“On	Pedagogy,”	
Developmental
Science
	10	(January	2007):	139–46.
start	speaking	to	their	infants:
	Anne	Fernald	and	Thomas	Simon,	“Expanded
Intonation	Contours	in	Mothers’	Speech	to	Newborns,”	
Developmental
Psychology
	20	(January	1984):	104–13.
learn	new	words	more	readily:
	Nairán	Ramírez-Esparza,	Adrián	García-Sierra,
and	Patricia	K.	Kuhl,	“Look	Who’s	Talking:	Speech	Style	and	Social	Context
in	Language	Input	to	Infants	Are	Linked	to	Concurrent	and	Future	Speech
Development,”	
Developmental	Science
	17	(November	2014):	880–91.
teaching	behavior	has	been	observed:
	Sidney	Strauss,	Margalit	Ziv,	and	Adi
Stein,	“Teaching	as	a	Natural	Cognition	and	Its	Relations	to	Preschoolers’
Developing	Theory	of	Mind,”	
Cognitive	Development
	17	(September–
December	2002):	1473–87.
an	area	of	the	social	brain	was	activated:
	Joy	Hirsch	et	al.,	“A	Two-Person
Neural	Mechanism	for	Sharing	Social	Cues	During	Real	Eye	Contact,”	paper
presented	at	the	49th	Annual	Meeting	of	the	Society	for	Neuroscience,
October	2019.
“Eye	contact	opens	the	gate”:
	Joy	Hirsch,	quoted	in	Sarah	Deweerdt,	“Looking
Directly	in	the	Eyes	Engages	Region	of	the	Social	Brain,”	
Spectrum,
	October
20,	2019.
Another	factor	that	seems	to	“gate”:
	Patricia	K.	Kuhl,	“Is	Speech	Learning
‘Gated’	by	the	Social	Brain?,”	
Developmental	Science
	10	(January	2007):
110–20.
pick	up	almost	nothing:
	Judy	S.	DeLoache	et	al.,	“Do	Babies	Learn	from	Baby
Media?,”	
Psychological	Science
	21	(November	2010):	1570–74.	See	also
Patricia	K.	Kuhl,	Feng-Ming	Tsao,	and	Huei-Mei	Liu,	“Foreign-Language
Experience	in	Infancy:	Effects	of	Short-Term	Exposure	and	Social	Interaction
on	Phonetic	Learning,”	
Proceedings	of	the	National	Academy	of	Sciences
	100
(July	2003):	9096–9101.
the	“video	deficit”:
	Daniel	R.	Anderson	and	Tiffany	A.	Pempek,	“Television
and	Very	Young	Children,”	
American	Behavioral	Scientist
	48	(January	2005):
505–22.
--- Page 310 ---
firstborn	children	have	an	IQ:
	Petter	Kristensen	and	Tor	Bjerkedal,	“Explaining
the	Relation	Between	Birth	Order	and	Intelligence,”	
Science
	316	(June	2007):
1717.
benefits	for	all	involved:
	Cynthia	A.	Rohrbeck	et	al.,	“Peer-Assisted	Learning
Interven
tions	with	Elementary	School	Students:	A	Meta-Analytic	Review,”
Journal	of	Educational	Psychology
	95	(June	2003):	240–57.	See	also	Peter	A.
Cohen,	James	A.	Kulik,	and	Chen-Lin	C.	Kulik,	“Educational	Outcomes	of
Tutoring:	A	Meta-Analysis	of	Findings,”	
American	Educational	Research
Journal
	19	(January	1982):	237–48.
One	such	process	kicks	in:
	John	F.	Nestojko	et	al.,	“Expecting	to	Teach
Enhances	Learning	and	Organization	of	Knowledge	in	Free	Recall	of	Text
Passages,”	
Memory	&	Cognition
	42	(October	2014):	1038–48.	See	also	John
A.	Bargh	and	Yaacov	Schul,	“On	the	Cognitive	Benefits	of	Teaching,”
Journal	of	Educational	Psychology
	72	(1980):	593–604.
More	learning	happens:
	Logan	Fiorella	and	Richard	E.	Mayer,	“The	Relative
Benefits	of	Learning	by	Teaching	and	Teaching	Expectancy,”	
Contemporary
Educational	Psychology
	38	(October	2013):	281–88.	See	also	Stewart	Ehly,
Timothy	Z.	Keith,	and	Barry	Bratton,	“The	Benefits	of	Tutoring:	An
Exploration	of	Expectancy	and	Outcomes,”	
Contemporary	Educational
Psychology
	12	(April	1987):	131–34.
When	explaining	academic	content:
	Jonathan	Galbraith	and	Mark	Winterbottom,
“Peer-Tutoring:	What’s	in	It	for	the	Tutor?,”	
Educational	Studies
	37	(July
2011):	321–32.
to	the	most	important	aspects:
	Rod	D.	Roscoe	and	Michelene	T.	H.	Chi,
“Understanding	Tutor	Learning:	Knowledge-Building	and	Knowledge-Telling
in	Peer	Tutors’	Explanations	and	Questions,”	
Review	of	Educational	Research
77	(December	2007):	534–74.
fielding	the	pupil’s	questions:
	Rod	D.	Roscoe	and	Michelene	T.	H.	Chi,	“Tutor
Learning:	The	Role	of	Explaining	and	Responding	to	Questions,”
Instructional	Science
	36	(July	2008):	321–50.
explain	academic	content	on	camera:
	Vincent	Hoogerheide,	Sofie	M.	M.
Loyens,	and	Tamara	van	Gog,	“Effects	of	Creating	Video-Based	Modeling
Examples	on	Learning	and	Transfer,”	
Learning	and	Instruction
	33	(October
2014):	108–19.	See	also	Vincent	Hoogerheide	et	al.,	“Generating	an
Instructional	Video	as	Homework	Activity	Is	Both	Effective	and	Enjoyable,”
Learning	and	Instruction
	64	(December	2019).
does	not	generate	the	same	gains:
	Vincent	Hoogerheide	et	al.,	“Gaining	from
Explaining:	Learning	Improves	from	Explaining	to	Fictitious	Others	on
--- Page 311 ---
Video,	Not	from	Writing	to	Them,”	
Contemporary	Educational	Psychology
44–45	(January–April	2016):	95–106.
increases	the	explainers’	physiological	arousal:
	Vincent	Hoogerheide	et	al.,
“Enhancing	Example-Based	Learning:	Teaching	on	Video	Increases	Arousal
and	Improves	Problem-Solving	Performance,”	
Journal	of	Educational
Psychology
	111	(January	2019):	45–56.
positively	affect	students’	identity:
	Marika	D.	Ginsburg-Block,	Cynthia	A.
Rohrbeck,	and	John	W.	Fantuzzo,	“A	Meta-Analytic	Review	of	Social,	Self-
Concept,	and	Behavioral	Outcomes	of	Peer-Assisted	Learning,”	
Journal	of
Educational	Psychology
	98	(November	2006):	732–49.
Valued	Youth	Partnership:
	Formerly	named	the	Coca-Cola	Valued	Youth
Program;	see	
https://www.idra.org/valued-youth/
.
does	just	the	opposite:
	Nurit	Bar-Eli	and	Amiram	Raviv,	“Underachievers	as
Tutors,”	
Journal	of	Educational	Research
	75	(1982):	139–43.	See	also
Vernon	L.	Allen	and	Robert	S.	Feldman,	“Learning	Through	Tutoring:	Low-
Achieving	Children	as	Tutors,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Education
	42	(1973):
1–5.
Evaluations	of	the	program:
	Robert	E.	Slavin,	“Evidence-Based	Reform:
Advancing	the	Education	of	Students	at	Risk,”	report	prepared	by	Renewing
Our	Schools,	Securing	Our	Future:	A	National	Task	Force	on	Public
Education,	March	2005.	See	also	Olatokunbo	S.	Fashola	and	Robert	E.	Slavin,
“Effective	Dropout	Prevention	and	College	
Attendance	Programs	for	Students
Placed	at	Risk,”	
Journal	of	Education	for	Students	Placed	at	Risk
	3	(1998):
159–83.
“productive	agency”:
	Sandra	Y.	Okita	and	Daniel	L.	Schwartz,	“Learning	by
Teaching	Human	Pupils	and	Teachable	Agents:	The	Importance	of	Recursive
Feedback,”	
Journal	of	the	Learning	Sciences
	22	(2013):	375–412.	See	also
Daniel	L.	Schwartz	and	Sandra	Okita,	“The	Productive	Agency	in	Learning
by	Teaching,”	working	paper,	available	at
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?
doi=10.1.1.90.5549&rep=rep1&type=pdf
.
the	program	has	been	shown:
	Behnoosh	Afghani	et	al.,	“A	Novel	Enrichment
Program	Using	Cascading	Mentorship	to	Increase	Diversity	in	the	Health	Care
Professions,”	
Academic	Medicine
	88	(September	2013):	1232–38.
sharing	job-related	knowledge:
	Yu-Qian	Zhu,	Holly	Chiu,	and	Eduardo	Jorge
Infante	Holguin-Veras,	“It	Is	More	Blessed	to	Give	Than	to	Receive:
Examining	the	Impact	of	Knowledge	Sharing	on	Sharers	and	Recipients,”
Journal	of	Knowledge	Management
	22	(2018):	76–91.
--- Page 312 ---
Family	Playlists:
	PowerMyLearning,	“Engage	Families	Using	Family	Playlists,”
post	on	the	website	of	PowerMyLearning,
https://powermylearning.org/learn/connect/family-playlists/
.	See	also	David
Bornstein,	“When	Parents	Teach	Children	(and	Vice	Versa),”	
New	York
Times,
	March	13,	2018.
devilish	in	its	design:
	Emmanuel	Trouche	et	al.,	“The	Selective	Laziness	of
Reasoning,”	
Cognitive	Science
	40	(November	2016):	2122–36.
Thinking	Skills	Assessment:
	Fabio	Paglieri,	“A	Plea	for	Ecological	Argument
Technologies,”	
Philosophy	&	Technology
	30	(June	2017):	209–38.
Cognitive	Reflection	Test:
	Shane	Frederick,	“Cognitive	Reflection	and	Decision
Making,”	
Journal	of	Economic	Perspectives
	19	(Fall	2005):	25–42.
confirmation	bias:
	Peter	C.	Wason,	“On	the	Failure	to	Eliminate	Hypotheses	in	a
Conceptual	Task,”	
Quarterly	Journal	of	Experimental	Psychology
	12	(July
1960):	129–40.
“Contrary	to	the	rules”:
	Kahneman,	
Thinking,	Fast	and	Slow,
	81.
a	“flawed	superpower”:
	Hugo	Mercier	and	Dan	Sperber,	
The	Enigma	of	Reason
(Cambridge:	Harvard	University	Press,	2017),	1.
We	did	not	evolve	to	solve:
	Hugo	Mercier,	“Why	So	Smart?	Why	So	Dumb?,”
post	on	the	website	of	
Psychology	Today,
	July	28,	2011,
https://www.psychologytoday.com/intl/blog/social-design/201107/why-so-
smart-why-so-dumb?
“argumentative	theory	of	reasoning”:
	Hugo	Mercier	and	Dan	Sperber,	“Why
Do	Humans	Reason?	Arguments	for	an	Argumentative	Theory,”	
Behavioral
and	Brain	Sciences
	34	(April	2011):	57–74.
makes	specific	predictions:
	Hugo	Mercier,	“The	Argumentative	Theory:
Predictions	and	Empirical	Evidence,”	
Trends	in	Cognitive	Sciences
	20
(September	2016):	689–700.
how	thinking	is	usually	done:
	Hugo	Mercier	et	al.,	“Experts	and	Laymen	Grossly
Underestimate	the	Benefits	of	Argumentation	for	Reasoning,”	
Thinking	&
Reasoning
	21	(July	2015):	341–55.
urge	a	different	approach:
	Emmanuel	Trouche,	Emmanuel	Sander,	and	Hugo
Mercier,	“Arguments,	More	Than	Confidence,	Explain	the	Good	Performance
of	Reasoning	Groups,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Psychology:	General
	143
(October	2014):	1958–71.	See	also	Hugo	Mercier,	“Making	Science
Education	More	Natural—Some	Ideas	from	the	Argumentative	Theory	of
Reasoning,”	
Zeitschrift	für	Pädagogische	Psychologie
	30	(2016):	151–53.
“famous	for	fighting	openly”:
	Brad	Bird,	quoted	in	Hayagreeva	Rao,	Robert
Sutton,	and	Allen	P.	Webb,	“Innovation	Lessons	from	Pixar:	An	Interview
with	Oscar-Winning	Director	Brad	Bird,”	
McKinsey	Quarterly,
	April	2008.
--- Page 313 ---
“a	vigorous	practitioner”:
	Robert	I.	Sutton,	
Good	Boss,	Bad	Boss:	How	to	Be
the	Best	.
 
.
 
.	and	Learn	from	the	Worst
	(New	York:	Hachette	Book	Group,
2010),	85,	83.	See	also	Robert	I.	Sutton,	“It’s	Up	to	You	to	Start	a	Good
Fight,”	
Harvard	Business	Review,
	August	3,	2010.
“a	general	rule	of	teaching”:
	David	W.	Johnson,	Roger	T.	Johnson,	and	Karl	A.
Smith,	“Constructive	Controversy:	The	Educative	Power	of	Intellectual
Conflict,”	
Change:	The	Magazine	of	Higher	Learning
	32	(January–February
2000):	28–37.	See	also	David	W.	Johnson	and	Roger	T.	Johnson,	“Energizing
Learning:	The	Instructional	Power	of	Conflict,”	
Educational	Researcher
	38
(January	2009):	37–51.
“the	accountability	effect”:
	Philip	E.	Tetlock,	“Accountability	and	Complexity
of	Thought,”	
Journal	of	Personality	and	Social	Psychology
	45	(July	1983):
74–83.	See	also	Jennifer	S.	Lerner	and	Philip	E.	Tetlock,	“Accounting	for	the
Effects	of	Accountability,”	
Psychological	Bulletin,
	125	(March	1999):	255–
75.
relieves	cognitive	load:
	Baruch	B.	Schwarz,	“Argumentation	and	Learning,”	in
Argumentation	and	Education:	Theoretical	Foundations	and	Practices,
	ed.
Nathalie	Muller	Mirza	and	Anne-Nelly	Perret-Clermont	(New	York:	Springer,
2009),	91–126.
Children	as	young	as	two	or	three:
	Nancy	L.	Stein	and	Elizabeth	R.	Albro,	“The
Origins	and	Nature	of	Arguments:	Studies	in	Conflict	Understanding,
Emotion,	and	Negotiation,”	
Discourse	Processes
	32	(2001):	113–33.	See	also
Nancy	Stein	and	Ronan	S.	Bernas,	“The	Early	Emergence	of	Argumentative
Knowledge	and	Skill,”	in	
Foundations	of	Argumentative	Text	Processing,
	ed.
Jerry	Andriessen	and	Pierre	Courier	(Amsterdam:	Amsterdam	University
Press,	1999),	97–116.
critically	evaluate	others’	arguments:
	Thomas	Castelain,	Stéphane	Bernard,	and
Hugo	Mercier,	“Evidence	That	Two-Year-Old	Children	Are	Sensitive	to
Information	Presented	in	Arguments,”	
Infancy
	23	(January	2018):	124–35.
See	also	Hugo	Mercier,	Stéphane	Bernard,	and	Fabrice	Clément,	“Early
Sensitivity	to	Arguments:	How	Preschoolers	Weight	Circular	Arguments,”
Journal	of	Experimental	Child	Psychology
	125	(September	2014):	102–9.
“natural-born	arguers”:
	Hugo	Mercier	et	al.,	“Natural-Born	Arguers:	Teaching
How	to	Make	the	Best	of	Our	Reasoning	Abilities,”	
Educational	Psychologist
52	(2017):	1–16.
“strong	opinions,	weakly	held”:
	Sutton,	
Good	Boss,	Bad	Boss,
	273,	98.
study	of	educational	methods:
	Diana	J.	Arya	and	Andrew	Maul,	“The	Role	of
the	Scientific	Discovery	Narrative	in	Middle	School	Science	Education:	An
Experimental	Study,”	
Journal	of	Educational	Psychology,
	104	(November
--- Page 314 ---
2012):	1022–32.	See	also	Diana	Jaleh	Arya,	“Discovery	Stories	in	the	Science
Classroom”	(PhD	diss.,	University	of	California,	Berkeley,	2010).
this	“depersonalized”	approach:
	Janet	Ahn	et	al.,	“Motivating	Students’	STEM
Learning	Using	Biographical	Information,”	
International	Journal	of	Designs
for	Learning
	7	(February	2016):	71–85.
wielded	by	narrative:
	Karen	D.	Larison,	“Taking	the	Scientist’s	Perspective:	The
Nonfiction	Narrative	Engages	Episodic	Memory	to	Enhance	Students’
Understanding	of	Scientists	and	Their	Practices,”	
Science	&	Education
	27
(March	2018):	133–57.
“psychologically	privileged”:
	Daniel	T.	Willingham,	
Why	Don’t	Students	Like
School?	A	
Cognitive	Scientist	Answers	Questions	About	How	the	Mind	Works
and	What	It	Means	for	the	Classroom
	(San	Francisco:	Jossey-Bass,	2009),
51–58.
we	attend	to	stories	more	closely:
	Daniel	T.	Willingham,	“The	Privileged	Status
of	Story,”	
American	Educator,
	Summer	2004.
evidence	of	causal	relationships:
	Willingham,	“The	Privileged	Status	of	Story.”
hear	about	characters	emoting:
	Paul	J.	Zak,	“Why	Inspiring	Stories	Make	Us
React:	The	Neuroscience	of	Narrative,”	
Cerebrum
	2	(January–February
2015).
hear	about	characters	moving	vigorously:
	Nicole	K.	Speer	et	al.,	“Reading
Stories	Activates	Neural	Representations	of	Visual	and	Motor	Experiences,”
Psychological	Science
	20	(August	2009):	989–99.
We	even	tend	to	remember:
	Danielle	N.	Gunraj	et	al.,	“Simulating	a	Story
Character’s	Thoughts:	Evidence	from	the	Directed	Forgetting	Task,”	
Journal
of	Memory	and	Language
	96	(October	2017):	1–8.
running	a	simulation:
	Diana	I.	Tamir	et	al.,	“Reading	Fiction	and	Reading
Minds:	The	Role	of	Simulation	in	the	Default	Network,”	
Social	Cognitive	and
Affective	Neuroscience
	11	(February	2016):	215–24.
watching	medical	transport	teams:
	Christopher	G.	Myers,	“The	Stories	We	Tell:
Organizing	for	Vicarious	Learning	in	Medical	Transport	Teams,”	working
paper,	November	2015.	See	also	Christopher	G.	Myers,	“That	Others	May
Learn:	Three	Views	on	Vicarious	Learning	in	Organizations”	(PhD	diss.,
University	of	Michigan,	2015).
“I	don’t	want	to	read”:
	Transport	nurse,	quoted	in	Myers,	“That	Others	May
Learn.”
“I	had	never	actually	seen”:
	Transport	nurse,	quoted	in	Myers,	“The	Stories	We
Tell.”
vicarious	learning	is	increasingly	necessary:
	Christopher	G.	Myers,
“Performance	Benefits	of	Reciprocal	Vicarious	Learning	in	Teams,”	
Academy
--- Page 315 ---
of	Management	Journal
	(in	press),	published	online	April	2020.
“fourteen	hundred	experiences	a	year”:
	Transport	nurse,	quoted	in	Myers,	“That
Others	May	Learn.”
“There’s	too	much	going	on”:
	Transport	nurse,	quoted	in	Myers,	“That	Others
May	Learn.”
1	percent	reduction:
	Ben	Waber,	“How	Tracking	Worker	Productivity	Could
Actually	Make	Amazon	Warehouses	Less	Efficient,”	
Quartz,
	April	26,	2018.
“But	what	is	gossip?”:
	Sandy	Pentland,	quoted	in	Larry	Hardesty,	“Social
Studies,”	
MIT	News,
	November	1,	2010.
a	ten-by-fifteen-foot	area:
	Christopher	G.	Myers,	“Is	Your	Company
Encouraging	Employees	to	Share	What	They	Know?,”	
Harvard	Business
Review,
	November	6,	2015.
“cleaner,”	he	reports:
	Myers,	“That	Others	May	Learn.”
“tacit	knowledge”:
	Philippe	Baumard,	
Tacit	Knowledge	in	Organizations,
	trans.
Samantha	Wauchope	(Thousand	Oaks,	CA:	Sage	Publications,	1999).
“Much	of	the	knowledge	needed”:
	Christopher	Myers,	“Try	Asking	the	Person
at	the	Next	Desk,”	
Medium,
	January	16,	2017.
“I	use	the	knowledge	management	system”:
	Tech	employee,	interviewed	by
Christopher	Myers	and	quoted	in	Michael	Blanding,	“Knowledge	Transfer:
You	Can’t	Learn	Surgery	by	Watching,”	
Harvard	Business	School	Working
Knowledge,
	September	8,	2015.
9.	THINKING	WITH	GROUPS
After	several	days	conducting	military	drills:
	Details	of	this	incident	are	drawn
from	Edwin	Hutchins,	
Cognition	in	the	Wild
	(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	1995).
The	
name	of	the	ship,	and	the	names	of	the	crew	members,	are	pseudonyms
devised	by	Hutchins.
“Bridge,	Main	Control”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild,	1.
“Shutting	throttles,	aye”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild.
“Captain,	the	engineer	is	losing	steam”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild.
“Sir,	I	have	no	helm”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild,	3.
“Come	on,	damn	it”
:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild.
a	“casualty”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild,	2.
“anything	but	routine”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild.
“socially	distributed	cognition”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild,	xiii.
“move	the	boundaries”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild,	xiv.
“may	have	interesting	cognitive	properties”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild,
xiii.
“subvocally	rehearsed”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild,	233.
--- Page 316 ---
“external	memory”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild,	328.
“Normally	the
	Palau”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild,	4.
“basically	a	bicycle	pump”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild.
“Sailboat	crossing
	Palau	
’s	bow”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild,	5.
“a	consistent	pattern	of	action”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild,	322.
“they	perform	what	will	be”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in	the	Wild,	339.
“Twenty-five	minutes	after	the	engineering	casualty”:
	Hutchins,	Cognition	in
the	Wild,	5.
“cognitive	individualism”:
	Eviatar	Zerubavel	and	Eliot	R.	Smith,	“Transcending
Cognitive	Individualism,”	
Social	Psychology	Quarterly
	73	(December	2010):
321–25.	See	also	Stephen	M.	Downes,	“Socializing	Naturalized	Philosophy	of
Science,”	
Philosophy	of	Science
	60	(September	1993):	452–68.
“only	accessible	to	crowds”:
	Gustave	Le	Bon,	
The	Crowd:	A	Study	of	the
Popular	Mind
	(New	York:	Macmillan,	1896),	51.
“Not	only	mobs”:
	William	McDougall,	
The	Group	Mind:	A	Sketch	of	the
Principles	of	Collective	Psychology,	with	Some	Attempt	to	Apply	Them	to	the
Interpretation	of	National	Life	and	Character
	(New	York:	G.	P.	Putnam’s
Sons,	1920),	58.
This	conception	of	the	group	mind:
	My	discussion	of	early	notions	about	the
“group	mind”	draws	on	the	following	sources:	Georg	Theiner,	“A	Beginner’s
Guide	to	Group	Minds,”	in	
New	Waves	in	Philosophy	of	Mind,
	ed.	Mark
Sprevak	and	Jesper	Kallestrup	(New	York:	Palgrave	Macmillan,	2014),	301–
22;	Georg	Theiner,	Colin	Allen,	and	Robert	L.	Goldstone,	“Recognizing
Group	Cognition,”	
Cognitive	Systems	Research
	11	(December	2010):	378–95;
Georg	Theiner	and	Timothy	O’Connor,	“The	Emergence	of	Group
Cognition,”	in	
Emergence	in	Science	and	Philosophy,
	ed.	Antonella	Corradini
and	Timothy	O’Connor	(New	York:	Routledge,	2010):	78–120;	Daniel	M.
Wegner,	“Transactive	Memory:	A	Contemporary	Analysis	of	the	Group
Mind,”	in	
Theories	of	Group	Behavior,
	ed.	Brian	Mullen	and	George	R.
Goethals	(Berlin:	Springer	Verlag,	1987),	185–208;	Daniel	M.	Wegner,	Toni
Giuliano,	and	Paula	T.	Hertel,	“Cognitive	Interdependence	in	Close
Relationships,”	in	
Compatible	and	Incompatible	Relationships,
	ed.	William
Ickes	(New	York:	Springer,	1985),	253–76.
“magnetic	influence”:
	Le	Bon,	
The	Crowd,
	10–11.
“telepathic	communication”:
	McDougall,	
The	Group	Mind,
	41.
“genetic	ectoplasm”:
	Carl	Jung,	cited	in	Theiner	and	O’Connor,	“The
Emergence	of	Group	Cognition.”
“slipped	ignominiously	into	the	history”:
	Wegner,	Giuliano,	and	Hertel,
“Cognitive	Interdependence	in	Close	Relationships.”
--- Page 317 ---
“banished	from	the	realm”:
	Theiner,	“A	Beginner’s	Guide	to	Group	Minds.”
staging	a	surprising	comeback:
	Jay	J.	Van	Bavel,	Leor	M.	Hackel,	and	Y.	Jenny
Xiao,	“The	Group	Mind:	The	Pervasive	Influence	of	Social	Identity	on
Cognition,”	in	
New	Frontiers	in	Social	Neuroscience,
	ed.	Jean	Decety	and
Yves	Christen	(New	York:	Springer,	2014),	41–56.
the	program	starts	up:
	For	a	sense	of	what	the	routine	looks	like,	see	“Radio
Taiso	Exercise	Routine,”	video	posted	on	YouTube,	January	7,	2017,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I6ZRH9Mraqw
.
broadcast	daily	in	Japan:
	Justin	McCurry,	“Listen,	Bend	and	Stretch:	How
Japan	Fell	in	Love	with	Exercise	on	the	Radio,”	
The	Guardian,
	July	20,	2019.
See	also	Agence	France-Presse,	“Japan	Limbers	Up	with	Monkey	Bars,	Radio
Drills	for	Company	Employees,”	
Straits	Times,
	June	15,	2017.
pairs	of	four-year-old	children:
	Tal-Chen	Rabinowitch	and	Andrew	N.	Meltzoff,
“Synchronized	Movement	Experience	Enhances	Peer	Cooperation	in
Preschool	Children,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Child	Psychology
	160	(August
2017):	21–32.
Comparable	results	were	found:
	Tal-Chen	Rabinowitch	and	Ariel	Knafo-Noam,
“Synchronous	Rhythmic	Interaction	Enhances	Children’s	Perceived	Similarity
and	Closeness	Towards	Each	Other,”	
PLoS	One
	10	(April	2015).
makes	us	better	collaborators:
	Scott	S.	Wiltermuth	and	Chip	Heath,	“Synchrony
and	Cooperation,”	
Psychological	Science
	20	(January	2009):	1–5.
synchrony	sends	a	tangible	signal:
	Günther	Knoblich	and	Natalie	Sebanz,
“Evolving	Intentions	for	Social	Interaction:	From	Entrainment	to	Joint
Action,”	
Philosophical	Transactions	of	the	Royal	Society	B:	Biological
Sciences
	363	(June	2008):	2021–31.
The	recognition	that	we’re	moving:
	Edward	H.	Hagen	and	Gregory	A.	Bryant,
“Music	and	Dance	as	a	Coalition	Signaling	System,”	
Human	Nature
	14
(February	2003):	21–51.
others	are	making	motions:
	Thalia	Wheatley	et	al.,	“From	Mind	Perception	to
Mental	Connection:	Synchrony	as	a	Mechanism	for	Social	Understanding,”
Social	and	Personality	Psychology	Compass
	6	(August	2012):	589–606.
more	apt	to	“mentalize”:
	Adam	Baimel,	Susan	A.	J.	Birch,	and	Ara	Norenzayan,
“Coordinating	Bodies	and	Minds:	Behavioral	Synchrony	Fosters
Mentalizing,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Social	Psychology
	74	(January	2018):
281–90.	See	also	Adam	Baimel	et	al.,	“Enhancing	‘Theory	of	Mind’	Through
Behavioral	Synchrony,”	
Frontiers	in	Psychology
	6	(June	2015).
alters	the	nature	of	our	perception:
	Piercarlo	Valdesolo,	Jennifer	Ouyang,	and
David	DeSteno,	“The	Rhythm	of	Joint	Action:	Synchrony	Promotes
--- Page 318 ---
Cooperative	Ability,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Social	Psychology
	46	(July
2010):	693–95.
we	form	more	accurate	memories:
	Lynden	K.	Miles	et	al.,	“Moving	Memories:
Behavioral	Synchrony	and	Memory	for	Self	and	Others,”	
Journal	of
Experimental	Social	Psychology
	46	(March	2010):	457–60.	See	also	C.	Neil
Macrae	et	al.,	“A	Case	of	Hand	Waving:	Action	Synchrony	and	Person
Perception,”	
Cognition
	109	(October	2008):	152–56.
We	learn	from	them:
	Patricia	A.	Herrmann	et	al.,	“Stick	to	the	Script:	The	Effect
of	Witnessing	Multiple	Actors	on	Children’s	Imitation,”	
Cognition
	129
(December	2013):	536–43.
We	communicate	with	them:
	Rabinowitch	and	Meltzoff,	“Synchronized
Movement	Experience	Enhances	Peer	Cooperation	in	Preschool	Children.”
we	pursue	shared	goals:
	Valdesolo,	Ouyang,	and	DeSteno,	“The	Rhythm	of
Joint	Action.”	See	also	Martin	Lang	et	al.,	“Endorphin-Mediated	Synchrony
Effects	on	Cooperation,”	
Biological	Psychology
	127	(July	2017):	191–97.
seem	a	bit	like	friends:
	Bahar	Tunçgenç	and	Emma	Cohen,	“Movement
Synchrony	Forges	Social	Bonds	Across	Group	Divides,”	
Frontiers	in
Psychology
	7	(May	2016).	See	also	Piercarlo	Valdesolo	and	David	DeSteno,
“Synchrony	and	the	Social	Tuning	of	Compassion,”	
Emotion
	11	(April	2011):
262–66.
We	feel	more	warmly:
	Tanya	Vacharkulksemsuk	and	Barbara	L.	Fredrickson,
“Strangers	in	Sync:	Achieving	Embodied	Rapport	Through	Shared
Movements,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Social	Psychology
	48	(January	2012):
399–402.	See	also	Michael	J.	Hove	and	Jane	L.	Risen,	“It’s	All	in	the	Timing:
Interpersonal	Synchrony	Increases	Affiliation,”	
Social	Cognition
	27
(December	2009):	949–61.
more	willing	to	help	them	out:
	Bahar	Tunçgenç	and	Emma	Cohen,
“Interpersonal	Movement	Synchrony	Facilitates	Pro-Social	Behavior	in
Children’s	Peer-Play,”	
Developmental	Science,
	21	(January	2018):	1–9.	See
also	Laura	K.	Cirelli,	“How	Interpersonal	Synchrony	Facilitates	Early
Prosocial	Behavior,”	
Current	Opinion	in	Psychology
	20	(April	2018):	35–39.
a	blurring	of	the	boundaries:
	Maria-Paola	Paladino	et	al.,	“Synchronous
Multisensory	Stimulation	Blurs	Self-Other	Boundaries,”	
Psychological
Science
	21	(September	2010):	1202–7.	See	also	Elisabeth	Pacherie,	“How
Does	It	Feel	to	Act	Together?,”	
Phenomenology	and	the	Cognitive	Sciences
13	(2014):	25–46.
the	perception	of	physical	pain:
	Bronwyn	Tarr	et	al.,	“Synchrony	and	Exertion
During	Dance	Independently	Raise	Pain	Threshold	and	Encourage	Social
Bonding,”	
Biology	Letters
	11	(October	2015).	See	also	Emma	E.	A.	Cohen	et
--- Page 319 ---
al.,	“Rowers’	High:	Behavioural	Synchrony	Is	Correlated	with	Elevated	Pain
Thresholds,”	
Biology	Letters
	6	(February	2010):	106–8.
a	“social	eddy”:
	Kerry	L.	Marsh,	“Coordinating	Social	Beings	in	Motion,”	in
People	Watching:	Social,	Perceptual,	and	Neurophysiological	Studies	of	Body
Perception,
	ed.	Kerri	Johnson	and	Maggie	Shiffrar	(New	York:	Oxford
University	Press,	2013),	234–55.
In	every	culture:
	Barbara	Ehrenreich,	
Dancing	in	the	Streets:	A	History	of
Collective	Joy
	(New	York:	Metropolitan	Books,	2006).	See	also	William
Hardy	McNeill,	
Keeping	Together	in	Time:	Dance	and	Drill	in	Human
History
	(Cambridge:	Harvard	University	Press,	1995).
“biotechnology	of	group	formation”:
	Walter	Freeman,	“A	Neurobiological	Role
of	Music	in	Social	Bonding,”	in	
The	Origins	of	Music,
	ed.	Nils	Lennart
Wallin,	Björn	Merker,	and	Steven	Brown	(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	2000),
411–24.
“human	nature	is	90	percent	chimp”:
	Jonathan	Haidt,	
The	Righteous	Mind:	Why
Good	People	Are	Divided	by	Politics	and	Religion
	(New	York:	Pantheon
Books,	2012),	223.
from	“I”	mode	to	“we”	mode:
	Mattia	Gallotti	and	Chris	D.	Frith,	“Social
Cognition	in	the	We-Mode,”	
Trends	in	Cognitive	Science
	17	(April	2013):
160–65.
“muscular	bonding”:
	McNeill,	
Keeping	Together	in	Time,
	2.
“to	simulate	conditions”:
	Joshua	Conrad	Jackson	et	al.,	“Synchrony	and
Physiological	Arousal	Increase	Cohesion	and	Cooperation	in	Large
Naturalistic	Groups,”	
Scientific	Reports
	8	(January	2018).
an	experience	of	heightened	emotion:
	Dmitry	Smirnov	et	al.,	“Emotions	Amplify
Speaker-Listener	Neural	Alignment,”	
Human	Brain	Mapping
	40	(November
2019):	4777–88.	See	also	Lauri	Nummenmaa	et	al.,	“Emotional	Speech
Synchronizes	Brains	Across	Listeners	and	Engages	Large-Scale	Dynamic
Brain	Networks,”	
Neuroimage
	102	(November	2014):	498–509.
a	group	of	individuals	to	cohere:
	Gün	R.	Semin,	“Grounding	Communication:
Synchrony,”	in	
Social	Psychology:	Handbook	of	Basic	Principles,
	ed.	Arie	W.
Kruglanski	and	E.	Tory	Higgins	(New	York:	Guilford	Press,	2007),	630–49.
generate	greater	cognitive	synchrony:
	Yong	Ditch,	Joseph	Reilly,	and	Betrand
Schneider,	“Using	Physiological	Synchrony	as	an	Indicator	of	Collaboration
Quality,	Task	Performance	and	Learning,”	paper	presented	at	the	19th
International	Conference	on	Artificial	Intelligence	in	Education,	June	2018.
See	also	Dan	Mønster	et	al.,	“Physiological	Evidence	of	Interpersonal
Dynamics	in	a	Cooperative	Production	Task,”	
Physiology	&	Behavior
	156
(March	2016):	24–34.
--- Page 320 ---
“neural	synchrony”:
	Frank	A.	Fishburn	et	al.,	“Putting	Our	Heads	Together:
Interpersonal	Neural	Synchronization	as	a	Biological	Mechanism	for	Shared
Intentionality,”	
Social	Cognitive	and	Affective	Neuroscience
	13	(August
2018):	841–49.
a	certain	kind	of	group	experience:
	Kyongsik	Yun,	“On	the	Same	Wavelength:
Face-to-Face	Communication	Increases	Interpersonal	Neural
Synchronization,”	Jou	
rnal	of	Neuroscience
	33	(March	2013):	5081–82.	See
also	Jing	Jiang	et	al.,	“Neural	Synchronization	During	Face-to-Face
Communication,”	
Journal	of	Neuroscience
	32	(November	2012):	16064–69.
“shared	attention”:
	Garriy	Shteynberg,	“Shared	Attention,”	
Perspectives	on
Psychological	Science
	10	(August	2015):	579–90.
along	with	other	people:
	Garriy	Shteynberg,	“A	Social	Host	in	the	Machine?
The	Case	of	Group	Attention,”	
Journal	of	Applied	Research	in	Memory	and
Cognition
	3	(December	2014):	307–11.	See	also	Garriy	Shteynberg,	“A	Silent
Emergence	of	Culture:	The	Social	Tuning	Effect,”	
Journal	of	Personality	and
Social	Psychology
	99	(October	2010):	683–89.
“cognitive	prioritization”:
	Garriy	Shteynberg,	“A	Collective	Perspective:
Shared	Attention	and	the	Mind,”	
Current	Opinion	in	Psychology
	23	(October
2018):	93–97.
we	use	shared	attention:
	Garriy	Shteynberg	and	Evan	P.	Apfelbaum,	“The
Power	of	Shared	Experience:	Simultaneous	Observation	with	Similar	Others
Facilitates	Social	Learning,”	
Social	Psychological	and	Personality	Science
	4
(November	2013):	738–44.
we
	learn	
things	better:
	Shteynberg	and	Apfelbaum,	“The	Power	of	Shared
Experience.”
We
	remember	
things	better:
	Samantha	E.	A.	Gregory	and	Margaret	C.	Jackson,
“Joint	Attention	Enhances	Visual	Working	Memory,”	
Journal	of
Experimental	Psychology:	Learning,	Memory,	and	Cognition
	43	(February
2017):	237–49.	See	also	Ullrich	Wagner	et	al.,	“The	Joint	Action	Effect	on
Memory	as	a	Social	Phenomenon:	The	Role	of	Cued	Attention	and
Psychological	Distance,”	
Frontiers	in	Psychology
	8	(October	2017).
more	likely	to
	act	upon:
	
Garriy	Shteynberg	et	al.,	“Feeling	More	Together:
Group	Attention	Intensifies	Emotion,”	
Emotion
	14	(December	2014):	1102–
14.	See	also	Garriy	Shteynberg	and	Adam	D.	Galinsky,	“Implicit
Coordination:	Sharing	Goals	with	Similar	Others	Intensifies	Goal	Pursuit,”
Journal	of	Experimental	Social	Psychology
	47	(November	2011):	1291–94.
starts	in	infancy:
	Stefanie	Hoehl	et	al.,	“What	Are	You	Looking	At?	Infants’
Neural	Processing	of	an	Adult’s	Object-Directed	Eye	Gaze,”	
Developmental
Science
	11	(January	2008):	10–16.	See	also	Tricia	Striano,	Vincent	M.	Reid,
--- Page 321 ---
and	Stefanie	Hoehl,	“Neu
ral	Mechanisms	of	Joint	Attention	in	Infancy,”
European	Journal	of	Neuroscience
	23	(May	2006):	2819–23.
a	baby	begins	to	look:
	Rechele	Brooks	and	Andrew	N.	Meltzoff,	“The
Development	of	Gaze	Following	and	Its	Relation	to	Language,”
Developmental	Science
	8	(November	2005):	535–43.
Infants	will	gaze	longer:
	Catalina	Suarez-Rivera,	Linda	B.	Smith,	and	Chen	Yu,
“Multimodal	Parent	Behaviors	Within	Joint	Attention	Support	Sustained
Attention	in	Infants,”	
Developmental	Psychology
	55	(January	2019):	96–109.
See	also	Chen	Yu	and	Linda	B.	Smith,	“The	Social	Origins	of	Sustained
Attention	in	One-Year-Old	Human	Infants,”	
Current	Biology
	26	(May	2016):
1235–40.
more	likely	to	recognize:
	Sebastian	Wahl,	Vesna	Marinović,	and	Birgit	Träuble,
“Gaze	Cues	of	Isolated	Eyes	Facilitate	the	Encoding	and	Further	Processing
of	Objects	in	4-Month-Old	Infants,”	
Developmental	Cognitive	Neuroscience
36	(April	2019).	See	also	Vincent	M.	Reid	et	al.,	“Eye	Gaze	Cueing
Facilitates	Neural	Processing	of	Objects	in	4-Month-Old	Infants,”
NeuroReport
	15	(November	2004):	2553–55.
continually	instructing	their	offspring:
	Louis	J.	Moses	et	al.,	“Evidence	for
Referential	Understanding	in	the	Emotions	Domain	at	Twelve	and	Eighteen
Months,”	
Child	Development
	72	(May–June	2001):	718–35.
a	baby	will	reliably	look:
	Michael	Tomasello	et	al.,	“Reliance	on	Head	Versus
Eyes	in	the	Gaze	Following	of	Great	Apes	and	Human	Infants:	The
Cooperative	Eye	Hypothesis,”	
Journal	of	Human	Evolution
	52	(March	2007):
314–20.
visible	whites	of	the	eyes:
	Hiromi	Kobayashi	and	Shiro	Kohshima,	“Unique
Morphology	of	the	Human	Eye	and	Its	Adaptive	Meaning:	Comparative
Studies	on	External	Morphology	of	the	Primate	Eye,”	
Journal	of	Human
Evolution
	40	(May	2001):	419–35.
“cooperative	eye	hypothesis”:
	Tomasello	et	al.,	“Reliance	on	Head	Versus	Eyes
in	the	Gaze	Following	of	Great	Apes	and	Human	Infants.”	See	also	Hiromi
Kobayashi	and	Kazuhide	Hashiya,	“The	Gaze	That	Grooms:	Contribution	of
Social	Factors	to	the	Evolution	of	Primate	Eye	Morphology,”	
Evolution	and
Human	Behavior
	32	(May	2011):	157–65.
“Our	eyes	see”:
	Ker	Than,	“Why	Eyes	Are	So	Alluring,”	
LiveScience,
November	7,	2006.
makes	all	human	achievements	possible:
	Michael	Tomasello,	
The	Cultural
Origins	of	Human	Cognition
	(Cambridge:	Harvard	University	Press,	1999).
remains	important	among	adults:
	Shteynberg,	“A	Collective	Perspective”;
Shteynberg	and	Apfelbaum,	“The	Power	of	Shared	Experience.”
--- Page 322 ---
our	mental	models	of	the	world:
	Garriy	Shteynberg	et	al.,	“The	Broadcast	of
Shared	Attention	and	Its	Impact	on	Political	Persuasion,”	
Journal	of
Personality	and	Social	Psychology
	111	(November	2016):	665–73.
laboring	on	a	shared	task:
	Bertrand	Schneider,	“Unpacking	Collaborative
Learning	Processes	During	Hands-On	Activities	Using	Mobile	Eye-Trackers,”
paper	presented	at	the	13th	International	Conference	on	Computer	Supported
Collaborative	Learning,	June	2019.	See	also	Nasim	Hajari	et	al.,	“Spatio-
Temporal	Eye	Gaze	Data	Analysis	to	Better	Understand	Team	Cognition,”
paper	presented	at	the	1st	International	Conference	on	Smart	Multimedia,
August	2018.
the	gaze	of	experienced	surgeons:
	Ross	Neitz,	“U	of	A	Lab	Testing
Technologies	to	Better	Train	Surgeons,”	
Folio,
	April	25,	2019.
aren’t
	always	
looking	at	the	same	place:
	Schneider,	“Unpacking	Collaborative
Learning	Processes	During	Hands-On	Activities	Using	Mobile	Eye-Trackers.”
common	conceptualizations	of	motivation:
	Duckworth,	
Grit.
a	potent	source	of	motivation:
	Gregory	M.	Walton	and	Geoffrey	L.	Cohen,
“Sharing	Motivation,”	in	
Social	Motivation,
	ed.	David	Dunning	(New	York:
Psychology	Press,	2011),	79–102.	See	also	Allison	Master	and	Gregory	M.
Walton,	“Minimal	Groups	Increase	Young	Children’s	Motivation	and
Learning	on	Group-Relevant	Tasks,”	
Child	Development
	84	(March–April
2013):	737–51.
a	form	of
	intrinsic	
motivation:
	Priyanka	B.	Carr	and	Gregory	M.	Walton,	“Cues
of	Working	Together	Fuel	Intrinsic	Motivation,”	
Journal	of	Experimental
Social	Psychology
	53	(July	2014):	169–84.
and	more	easily	maintained:
	Edward	L.	Deci	and	Richard	M.	Ryan,	
Intrinsic
Motivation	and	Self-Determination	in	Human	Behavior
	(New	York:	Plenum
Press,	1985).
“entitativity”:
	Brian	Lickel	et	al.,	“Varieties	of	Groups	and	the	Perception	of
Group	Entitativity,”	
Journal	of	Personality	and	Social	Psychology
	78
(February	2000):	223–46.	See	also	Donald	T.	Campbell,	“Common	Fate,
Similarity,	and	Other	Indices	of	the	Status	of	Aggregates	of	Persons	as	Social
Entities,”	
Behavioral	Science
	3	(January	1958):	14–25.
“They	were	pecking	away”:
	Paul	Barnwell,	“My	Students	Don’t	Know	How	to
Have	a	Conversation,”	
The	Atlantic,
	April	22,	2014.
asynchronous	communication:
	For	an	informative	take	on	this	topic,	see	Cal
Newport,	“Was	E-Mail	a	Mistake?,”	
The	New	Yorker,
	August	6,	2019.
teams	that	trained	as	a	group:
	Richard	L.	Moreland	and	Larissa	Myaskovsky,
“Exploring	the	Performance	Benefits	of	Group	Training:	Transactive	Memory
or	Improved	Communication?,”	
Organizational	Behavior	and	Human
--- Page 323 ---
Decision	Processes
	82	(May	2000):	117–33.	See	also	Diane	Wei	Liang,
Richard	Moreland,	and	Linda	Argote,	“Group	Versus	Individual	Training	and
Group	Performance:	The	Mediating	Factor	of	Transactive	Memory,”
Personality	and	Social	Psychology	Bulletin
	21	(April	1995):	384–93.
“silo	effect”:
	Gillian	Tett,	
The	Silo	Effect:	The	Peril	of	Expertise	and	the
Promise	of	Breaking	Down	Barriers
	(New	York:	Simon	&	Schuster,	2015).
training	together	is	not	the	norm:
	For	a	first-person	perspective,	see	Dhruv
Khullar,	“Doctors	and	Nurses,	Not	Learning	Together,”	
New	York	Times,
April	30,	2015.
group	training	across	disciplinary	lines:
	Maja	Djukic,	“Nurses	and	Physicians
Need	to	Learn	Together	in	Order	to	Work	Together,”	post	on	the	website	of
the	Robert	Wood	Johnson	Foundation,	May	11,	2015,
https://www.rwjf.org/en/blog/2015/05/nurses_and_physician.html
.	See	also
Andrew	Schwartz,	“Training	Nurse	Practitioners	and	Physicians	for	the	Next
Generation	of	Primary	Care,”	post	on	the	website	of	the	University	of
California-San	Francisco,	January	2013,
https://scienceofcaring.ucsf.edu/future-nursing/training-nurse-practitioners-
and-physicians-next-generation-primary-care
.
“escape	room”:
	Cheri	Friedrich	et	al.,	“Escaping	the	Professional	Silo:	An
Escape	Room	Implemented	in	an	Interprofessional	Education	Curriculum,”
Journal	of	Interprofessional	Care
	33	(September–October	2019):	573–75.	See
also	Cheri	Friedrich	et	al.,	“Interprofessional	Health	Care	Escape	Room	for
Advanced	Learners,”	
Journal	of	Nursing	Education
	59	(January	2020):	46–
50.
case	study	of	a	fictional	patient:
	Hilary	Teaford,	“Escaping	the	Professional	Silo:
Implementing	An	Interprofessional	Escape	Room,”	post	on	the	blog
MinneSOTL,	
https://wcispe.wordpress.com/2017/12/01/escaping-the-
professional-silo-implementing-an-interprofessional-escape-room/
.
“social	glue”:
	Brock	Bastian,	Jolanda	Jetten,	and	Laura	J.	Ferris,	“Pain	as	Social
Glue:	
Shared	Pain	Increases	Cooperation,”	
Psychological	Science
	25
(November	2014):	2079–85.	See	also	Shawn	Achor,	“The	Right	Kind	of
Stress	Can	Bond	Your	Team	Together,”	
Harvard	Business	Review,
	December
14,	2015.
share	their	thoughts:
	Frederick	G.	Elias,	Mark	E.	Johnson,	and	Jay	B.	Fortman,
“Task-Focused	Self-Disclosure:	Effects	on	Group	Cohesiveness,	Commitment
to	Task,	and	Productivity,”	
Small	Group	Research
	20	(February	1989):	87–96.
“That’s	a	very	different	question”:
	Tony	Schwartz,	“How	Are	You	Feeling?,”
Harvard	Business	Review,
	February	22,	2011.
--- Page 324 ---
searching	or	even	wrenching:
	Tony	Schwartz,	“The	Importance	of	Naming	Your
Emotions,”	
New	York	Times,
	April	3,	2015.
“What’s	the	most	important	thing”:
	Tony	Schwartz,	“What	If	You	Could	Truly
Be	Yourself	at	Work?,”	
Harvard	Business	Review,
	January	23,	2013.
engage	in	rituals	
together:
	Cristine	H.	Legare	and	Nicole	Wen,	“The	Effects	of
Ritual	on	the	Development	of	Social	Group	Cognition,”	
Bulletin	of	the
International	Society	for	the	Study	of	Behavioral	Development
	2	(2014):	9–12.
See	also	Ronald	Fischer	et	al.,	“How	Do	Rituals	Affect	Cooperation?	An
Experimental	Field	Study	Comparing	Nine	Ritual	Types,”	
Human	Nature
	24
(June	2013):	115–25.
synchronized	movement	or	shared	physiological	arousal:
	Kerry	L.	Marsh,
Michael	J.	Richardson,	and	R.	C.	Schmidt,	“Social	Connection	Through	Joint
Action	and	Interpersonal	Coordination,”	
Topics	in	Cognitive	Science
	1	(April
2009):	320–39.
“Morning	Mile”:
	Jenny	Berg,	“Students	at	Clearview	Go	the	Extra	(Morning)
Mile	Every	Day	Before	School,”	
St.	Cloud	Times,
	January	17,	2019.	See	also
Sarah	D.	Sparks,	“Why	Lunch,	Exercise,	Sleep,	and	Air	Quality	Matter	at
School,”	
Education	Week,
	March	12,	2019.
match	up	their	bodily	movements:
	Christine	E.	Webb,	Maya	Rossignac-Milon,
and	E.	Tory	Higgins,	“Stepping	Forward	Together:	Could	Walking	Facilitate
Interpersonal	Conflict	Resolution?,”	
American	Psychologist
	72	(May–June
2017):	374–85.	See	also	Ari	Z.	Zivotofsky	and	Jeffrey	M.	Hausdorff,	“The
Sensory	Feedback	Mechanisms	Enabling	Couples	to	Walk	Synchronously:	An
Initial	Investigation,”	
Journal	of	NeuroEngineering	and	Rehabilitation
	4
(August	2008).
role-play	executives:
	Lakshmi	Balachandra,	“Should	You	Eat	While	You
Negotiate?,”	
Harvard	Business	Review,
	January	29,	2013.
dine	“family	style”:
	Kaitlin	Woolley	and	Ayelet	Fishbach,	“A	Recipe	for
Friendship:	Similar	Food	Consumption	Promotes	Trust	and	Cooperation,”
Journal	of	Consumer	Psychology
	27	(January	2017):	1–10.
consuming	such	food:
	Shinpei	Kawakami	et	al.,	“The	Brain	Mechanisms
Underlying	the	Perception	of	Pungent	Taste	of	Capsaicin	and	the	Subsequent
Autonomic	Responses,”	
Frontiers	of	Human	Neuroscience
	9	(January	2016).
greater	economic	cooperation:
	Bastian,	Jetten,	and	Ferris,	“Pain	as	Social	Glue.”
“eating	together	is	a	more	intimate	act”:
	Kevin	Kniffin,	quoted	in	Susan	Kelley,
“Groups	That	Eat	Together	Perform	Better	Together,”	
Cornell	Chronicle,
November	19,	2015.
teams	of	firefighters:
	Kevin	M.	Kniffin	et	al.,	“Eating	Together	at	the	Firehouse:
How	Workplace	Commensality	Relates	to	the	Performance	of	Firefighters,”
--- Page 325 ---
Human	Performance
	28	(August	2015):	281–306.
“Coworkers	who	eat	together”:
	Kevin	Kniffin,	“Upbeat	Music	Can	Make
Employees	More	Cooperative,”	
Harvard	Business	Review,
	August	30,	2016.
“rapport	detection”:
	Philipp	Müller,	Michael	Xuelin	Huang,	and	Andreas
Bulling,	“De
tecting	Low	Rapport	During	Natural	Interactions	in	Small	Groups
from	Non-Verbal	Behaviour,”	paper	presented	at	the	23rd	International
Conference	on	Intelligent	User	Interfaces,	March	2018.
When	rapport	falls:
	Andrea	Stevenson	Won,	Jeremy	N.	Bailenson,	and	Joris	H.
Janssen,	“Automatic	Detection	of	Nonverbal	Behavior	Predicts	Learning	in
Dyadic	Interactions,”	
IEEE	Transactions	on	Affective	Computing
	5	(April–
June	2014):	112–25.	See	also	Juan	Lorenzo	Hagad	et	al.,	“Predicting	Levels
of	Rapport	in	Dyadic	Interactions	Through	Automatic	Detection	of	Posture
and	Posture	Congruence,”	paper	presented	at	the	IEEE	3rd	International
Conference	on	Social	Computing,	October	2011.
“smart	meeting	rooms”:
	Indrani	Bhattacharya	et	al.,	“A	Multimodal-Sensor-
Enabled	Room	for	Unobtrusive	Group	Meeting	Analysis,”	paper	presented	at
the	20th	ACM	International	Conference	on	Multimodal	Interaction,	October
2018.	See	also	Prerna	Chikersal	et	al.,	“Deep	Structures	of	Collaboration:
Physiological	Correlates	of	Collective	Intelligence	and	Group	Satisfaction,”
paper	presented	at	the	ACM	Conference	on	Computer	Supported	Cooperative
Work	and	Social	Computing,	February	2017.
“We	set	out	to	design”:
	Katherine	Isbister	et	al.,	“Yamove!	A	Movement
Synchrony	Game	That	Choreographs	Social	Interaction,”	
Human	Technology
12	(May	2016):	74–102.
“how	being	physically	‘in	sync’
 
”:
	Katherine	Isbister,	quoted	in	“The	Future	Is
Now:	Innovation	Square	Comes	to	NYU-Poly,”	article	posted	on	the	website
of	the	NYU	Tandon	School	of	Engineering	Polytechnic	Institute,	June	12,
2012,	
https://engineering.nyu.edu/news/future-now-innovation-square-comes-
nyu-poly
.
her	game,	called	Yamove!:
	Isbister	et	al.,	“Yamove!”	See	also	Katherine	Isbister,
Elena	Márquez	Segura,	and	Edward	F.	Melcer,	“Social	Affordances	at	Play:
Game	Design	Toward	Socio-Technical	Innovation,”	paper	presented	at	the
Conference	on	Human	Factors	in	Computing	Systems,	April	2018.
“The	more	players	look	at	each	other”:
	Katherine	Isbister,	
How	Games	Move
Us:	Emotion	by	Design
	(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	2016),	96.
“engaging,”	“motivating,”	and	even	“fun”:
	Jesús	Sánchez-Martín,	Mario
Corrales-Serrano,	Amalia	Luque-Sendra,	and	Francisco	Zamora-Polo,	“Exit
for	Success.	Gamifying	Science	and	Technology	for	University	Students
Using	Escape-Room.	A	Preliminary	Approach,”	Heliyon	6	(July	2020).
--- Page 326 ---
“grouphate”:
	Scott	A.	Myers	and	Alan	K.	Goodboy,	“A	Study	of	Grouphate	in	a
Course	on	Small	Group	Communication,”	
Psychological	Reports
	97	(October
2005):	381–86.
“Respected	Sir”:
	Satyendra	Nath	Bose,	in	a	letter	written	to	Albert	Einstein,	in
The	Collected	Papers	of	Albert	Einstein,
	vol.	14,
The	Berlin	Years:	Writings	&
Correspondence,	April	1923–May	1925,
	ed.	Diana	Kormos	Buchwald	et	al.,
(Princeton:	Princeton	University	Press,	2015),	399.
The	paper	he	was	sending:
	A.	Douglas	Stone,	
Einstein	and	the	Quantum:	The
Quest	of	the	Valiant	Swabian
	(Princeton:	Princeton	University	Press,	2015),
215.
“some	combination	of	veneration	and	chutzpah”:
	Stone,	
Einstein	and	the
Quantum,
	215.
Bose	had	solved	a	problem:
	John	Stachel,	“Einstein	and	Bose,”	in	
Satyendra
Nath	Bose:	His	Life	and	Times;	Selected	Works	(with	Commentary),
	ed.
Kameshwar	C.	Wali	(Singapore:	World	Scientific,	2009),	422–41.
“a	beautiful	step	forward”:
	Albert	Einstein,	quoted	in	Stachel,	“Einstein	and
Bose.”
“I	wanted	to	know	how	to	grapple”:
	Satyendra	Nath	Bose,	quoted	in	Stachel,
“Einstein	and	Bose.”
the	course	of	scientific	history:
	Stone,	
Einstein	and	the	Quantum.
	See	also	A.
Douglas	Stone,	“What	Is	a	Boson?	Einstein	Was	the	First	to	Know,”	
HuffPost,
October	1,	2012.
a	newly	precise	measurement:
	Georges	Aad	et	al.,	“Combined	Measurement	of
the	Higgs	Boson	Mass	in	
pp
	Collisions	at	√s	=	7	and	8	TeV	with	the	ATLAS
and	CMS	Experiments,”	
Physical	Review	Letters
	114	(May	2015).
The	shift	is	easiest	to	see:
	Stefan	Wuchty,	Benjamin	F.	Jones,	and	Brian	Uzzi,
“The	Increasing	Dominance	of	Teams	in	Production	of	Knowledge,”	
Science
316	(May	2007):	1036–39.	See	also	Brad	Wible,	“Science	as	Team	Sport,”
Kellogg	Insight,
	October	10,	2008.
fewer	than	10	percent:
	National	Research	Council,	
Enhancing	the	Effectiveness
of	Team	Science
	(Washington,	DC:	National	Academies	Press,	2015).
“a	sharp	decline”:
	Truyken	L.	B.	Ossenblok,	Frederik	T.	Verleysen,	and	Tim	C.
E.	Engels,	“Coauthorship	of	Journal	Articles	and	Book	Chapters	in	the	Social
Sciences	and	Humanities	(2000–2010),”	
Journal	of	the	Association	for
Information	Science	and	Technology
	65	(January	2014):	882–97.	See	also
Dorte	Henriksen,	“The	Rise	in	Co-Authorship	in	the	Social	Sciences	(1980–
2013),”	
Scientometrics
	107	(May	2016):	455–76.
solo-authored	articles:
	Lukas	Kuld	and	John	O’Hagan,	“Rise	of	Multi-Authored
Papers	in	Economics:	Demise	of	the	‘Lone	Star’	and	Why?,”	
Scientometrics
--- Page 327 ---
114	(March	2018):	1207–25.	See	also	Lukas	Kuld	and	John	O’Hagan,	“The
Trend	of	Increasing	Co-Authorship	in	Economics:	New	Evidence,”	posted	on
the	VOX	CEPR	Policy	Portal,	December	16,	2017,
https://voxeu.org/article/growth-multi-authored-journal-articles-economics
.
“team	authors	dominate”:
	Christopher	A.	Cotropia	and	Lee	Petherbridge,	“The
Dominance	of	Teams	in	the	Production	of	Legal	Knowledge,”	
Yale	Law
Journal
	124	(June	2014):	18–28.
each	US	patent	application:
	Mark	Roth,	“Groups	Produce	Collective
Intelligence,	Study	Says,”	
Pittsburgh	Post-Gazette,
	January	10,	2011.
“It	suggests	that	the	process	of	knowledge	creation”:
	Wuchty,	Jones,	and	Uzzi,
“The	Increasing	Dominance	of	Teams	in	Production	of	Knowledge.”
“almost	everything	that	human	beings	do	today”:
	Brian	Uzzi,	quoted	in	Roberta
Kwok,	“For	Teams,	What	Matters	More:	Raw	Talent	or	a	History	of	Success
Together?,”	
Kellogg	Insight,
	June	3,	2019.
“collective	intelligence”:
	Anita	Williams	Woolley	et	al.,	“Evidence	for	a
Collective	Intelligence	Factor	in	the	Performance	of	Human	Groups,”	
Science
330	(October	2010):	686–88.
“uniquely-held	information”:
	Garold	Stasser	and	William	Titus,	“Pooling	of
Unshared	Information	in	Group	Decision	Making:	Biased	Information
Sampling	During	Discussion,”	
Journal	of	Personality	and	Social	Psychology
48	(June	1985):	1467–78.
“often	hold	back	in	meetings”:
	Steven	G.	Rogelberg	and	Liana	Kreamer,	“The
Case	for	More	Silence	in	Meetings,”	
Harvard	Business	Review,
	June	14,
2019.
“What	do	you	all	think?”:
	Cass	Sunstein,	“What	Makes	Teams	Smart	(or
Dumb),”	
HBR	IdeaCast,
	Episode	440,	December	18,	2014.
engage	in	“self-silencing”:
	Cass	R.	Sunstein	and	Reid	Hastie,	
Wiser:	Getting
Beyond	Groupthink	to	Make	Groups	Smarter
	(Cambridge:	Harvard	Business
Review	Press,	2015),	33.
“more	likely	to	silence	themselves”:
	Cass	R.	Sunstein,	“Group	Judgments:
Deliberation,	
Statistical	Means,	and	Information	Markets,”	University	of
Chicago	Public	Law	and	Legal	Theory	Working	Paper,	number	72,	2004.
“inquisitive	and	self-silencing”:
	Sunstein	and	Hastie,	
Wiser,
	105.
“the	mind	is	just	less	and	less”:
	Clark,	
Natural-Born	Cyborgs,
	5.
a	specific	sequence	of	actions:
	Annelies	Vredeveldt,	Alieke	Hildebrandt,	and
Peter	J.	van	Koppen,	“Acknowledge,	Repeat,	Rephrase,	Elaborate:	Witnesses
Can	Help	Each	Other	Remember	More,”	
Memory
	24	(2016):	669–82.
engaging	in	this	kind	of	communication:
	Romain	J.	G.	Clément	et	al.,
“Collective	Cognition	in	Humans:	Groups	Outperform	Their	Best	Members	in
--- Page 328 ---
a	Sentence	Reconstruction	Task,”	
PLoS	One
	8	(October	2013).
“error	pruning”:
	Suparna	Rajaram	and	Luciane	P.	Pereira-Pasarin,
“Collaborative	Memory:	Cognitive	Research	and	Theory,”	
Perspectives	on
Psychological	Science
	5	(November	2010):	649–63.
a	study	of	airplane	pilots:
	Michelle	L.	Meade,	Timothy	J.	Nokes,	and	Daniel	G.
Morrow,	“Expertise	Promotes	Facilitation	on	a	Collaborative	Memory	Task,”
Memory
	17	(January	2009):	39–48.
“shared	artifacts”:
	Gary	M.	Olson	and	Judith	S.	Olson,	“Distance	Matters,”
Human-Computer	Interaction
	15	(September	2000):	139–78.
the	best	of	all	worlds:
	Stephanie	Teasley	et	al.,	“How	Does	Radical	Collocation
Help	a	Team	Succeed?,”	paper	presented	at	the	Conference	on	Computer
Supported	Cooperative	Work,	December	2000.	See	also	Lisa	M.	Covi	et	al.,
“A	Room	of	Your	Own:	What	Do	We	Learn	About	Support	of	Teamwork
from	Assessing	Teams	in	Dedicated	Project	Rooms?,”	paper	presented	at	the
International	Workshop	on	Cooperative	Buildings,	February	1998.
“As	they	discussed	and	agreed”:
	Judith	S.	Olson	et	al.,	“The	(Currently)	Unique
Advantages	of	Collocated	Work,”	in	
Distributed	Work,
	ed.	Pamela	Hinds	and
Sara	B.	Kiesler	(Cambridge:	MIT	Press,	2002),	113–35.
gesture	at	large	artifacts:
	Mathilde	M.	Bekker,	Judith	S.	Olson,	and	Gary	M.
Olson,	“Analysis	of	Gestures	in	Face-to-Face	Design	Teams	Provides
Guidance	for	How	to	Use	Groupware	in	Design,”	
Proceedings	of	the	1st
Conference	on	Designing	Interactive	Systems:	Processes,	Practices,	Methods,
&	Techniques
	(August	1995):	157–66.
“were	often	put	up	in	the	order”:
	Olson	et	al.,	“The	(Currently)	Unique
Advantages	of	Collocated	Work,”	122–23.
“inherent	invisibility”:
	Covi	et	al.,	“A	Room	of	Your	Own.”
“transactive	memory”:
	Wegner,	Giuliano,	and	Hertel,	“Cognitive
Interdependence	in	Close	Relationships.”	See	also	Wegner,	“Transactive
Memory.”
“Toni	and	I	noticed”:
	Daniel	M.	Wegner,	“Don’t	Fear	the	Cybermind,”	
New
York	Times,
	August	4,	2012.
“to	understand	the	group	mind”:
	Wegner,	“Don’t	Fear	the	Cybermind.”
confirmed	Wegner’s	claim:
	Gün	R.	Semin,	Margarida	V.	Garrido,	and	Tomás	A.
Palma,	“Socially	Situated	Cognition:	Recasting	Social	Cognition	as	an
Emergent	Phenomenon,”	in	
The	SAGE	Handbook	of	Social	Cognition,
	ed.
Susan	Fiske	and	Neil	Macrae	(Thousand	Oaks,	CA:	Sage	Publications,	2012),
138–64.	See	also	Zhi-Xue	Zhang	et	al.,	“Transactive	Memory	System	Links
Work	Team	Characteristics	and	Performance,”	
Journal	of	Applied	Psychology
92	(2007):	1722–30.
--- Page 329 ---
transactive	memory	system:
	John	R.	Austin,	“Transactive	Memory	in
Organizational	
Groups:	The	Effects	of	Content,	Consensus,	Specialization,
and	Accuracy	on	Group	Performance,”	
Journal	of	Applied	Psychology
	88
(October	2003):	866–78.
much	of	their	potential:
	Kyle	J.	Emich,	“How	Expectancy	Motivation	Influences
Information	Exchange	in	Small	Groups,”	
Small	Group	Research
	43	(June
2012):	275–94.
thinking	different	thoughts:
	Babak	Hemmatian	and	Steven	A.	Sloman,	“Two
Systems	for	Thinking	with	a	Community:	Outsourcing	Versus	Collaboration,”
in	
Logic	and	Uncertainty	in	the	Human	Mind:	A	Tribute	to	David	E.	Over,
	ed.
Shira	Elqayam	et	al.	(New	York:	Routledge,	2020),	102–15.	See	also	Roy	F.
Baumeister,	Sarah	E.	Ainsworth,	and	Kathleen	D.	Vohs,	“Are	Groups	More	or
Less	Than	the	Sum	of	Their	Members?	The	Moderating	Role	of	Individual
Identification,”	
Behavioral	and	Brain	Sciences
	39	(January	2016).
sensitive	and	discriminating	filters:
	Eoin	Whelan	and	Robin	Teigland,
“Transactive	Memory	Systems	as	a	Collective	Filter	for	Mitigating
Information	Overload	in	Digitally	Enabled	Organizational	Groups,”
Information	and	Organization
	23	(July	2013):	177–97.
point	us	toward	the	people:
	Nathaniel	Rabb,	Philip	M.	Fernbach,	and	Steven	A.
Sloman,	“Individual	Representation	in	a	Community	of	Knowledge,”	
Trends
in	Cognitive	Sciences
	23	(October	2019):	891–902.	See	also	Garold	Stasser,
Dennis	D.	Stewart,	and	Gwen	M.	Wittenbaum,	“Expert	Roles	and	Information
Exchange	During	Discussion:	The	Importance	of	Knowing	Who	Knows
What,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Social	Psychology
	31	(May	1995):	244–65.
should	be	explicitly	informed:
	Jim	Steele,	“Structured	Reflection	on	Roles	and
Tasks	Improves	Team	Performance,	UAH	Study	Finds,”	article	posted	on	the
website	of	the	University	of	Alabama	in	Huntsville,	April	8,	2013.
a
	meta	
-knowledge	champion:
	Julija	N.	Mell,	Daan	van	Knippenberg,	and
Wendy	P.	van	Ginkel,	“The	Catalyst	Effect:	The	Impact	of	Transactive
Memory	System	Structure	on	Team	Performance,”	
Academy	of	Management
Journal
	57	(August	2014):	1154–73.	See	also	Alex	Fradera,	“Why	Your	Team
Should	Appoint	a	‘Meta-Knowledge’	Champion—One	Person	Who’s	Aware
of	Everyone	Else’s	Area	of	Expertise,”	
British	Psychological	Society
Research	Digest,
	September	8,	2014.
“shared	fate”:
	Haidt,	
The	Righteous	Mind,
	90.
public	schools	in	Austin,	Texas:
	My	discussion	of	Elliot	Aronson	and	his	“jigsaw
classroom”	technique	draws	on	the	following	sources:	Elliot	Aronson,	
Not	by
Chance	Alone:	My	Life	as	a	Social	Psychologist
	(New	York:	Basic	Books,
2010);	Elliot	Aronson,	
The	Social	Animal,
	9th	ed.	(New	York:	Worth
--- Page 330 ---
Publishers,	2004);	Elliot	Aronson,	
Nobody	Left	to	Hate:	Teaching
Compassion	After	Columbine
	(New	York:	Henry	Holt,	2000);	Elliot	Aronson,
“Reducing	Hostility	and	Building	Compassion:	Lessons	from	the	Jigsaw
Classroom,”	in	
The	Social	Psychology	of	Good	and	Evil,
	ed.	Arthur	G.	Miller
(New	York:	Guilford	Press,	2004),	469–88;	Elliot	Aronson	and	Diane
Bridgeman,	“Jigsaw	Groups	and	the	Desegregated	Classroom:	In	Pursuit	of
Common	Goals,”	in	
Readings	About	the	Social	Animal,
	ed.	Elliot	Aronson
(New	York:	Macmillan,	2003),	423–33;	Elliot	Aronson	and	Neal	Osherow,
“Cooperation,	Prosocial	Behavior,	and	Academic	Performance:	Experiments
in	the	Desegregated	Classroom,”	
Applied	Social	Psychology	Annual
	1	(1980):
163–96;	Susan	Gilbert,	“A	Conversation	with	Elliot	Aronson,”	
New	York
Times,
	March	27,	2001;	Ursula	Vils,	“
 
‘Jigsaw	Method’	Cuts	Desegregation
Strife,”	
Los	Angeles	Times,
	August	10,	1978.
“The	first	step”:
	Aronson,	
Not	by	Chance	Alone,
	201.
“The	teacher	stands”:
	Aronson,	
The	Social	Animal,
	281.
“students	learn	more”:
	Aronson	and	Osherow,	“Cooperation,	Prosocial
Behavior,	and	Academic	Performance.”
“a	situation	where	they	needed	to	cooperate”:
	Aronson,	
Not	by	Chance	Alone,
203.
“Each	student	has	possession”:
	Aronson,	“Reducing	Hostility	and	Building
Compassion.”
“In	this	situation”:
	Aronson	and	Osherow,	“Cooperation,	Prosocial	Behavior,
and	Academic	Performance.”
CONCLUSION
“I	was	totally	intimidated”:
	Author	interview	with	Joshua	Aronson.
“a	modern	classic”:
	Susan	T.	Fiske,	“The	Discomfort	Index:	How	to	Spot	a
Really	Good	Idea	Whose	Time	Has	Come,”	
Psychological	Inquiry
	14	(2003):
203–8.
described	for	the	first	time:
	Claude	M.	Steele	and	Joshua	Aronson,	“Stereotype
Threat	and	the	Intellectual	Test	Performance	of	African	Americans,”	
Journal
of	Personality	and	Social	Psychology
	69	(November	1995):	797–811.
“a	fixed	lump”:
	Joshua	Aronson,	quoted	in	Annie	Murphy	Paul,	“It’s	Not	Me,
It’s	You,”	
New	York	Times,
	October	6,	2012.
reinterpret	bodily	signals:
	Michael	Johns,	Michael	Inzlicht,	and	Toni	Schmader,
“Stereotype	Threat	and	Executive	Resource	Depletion:	Examining	the
Influence	of	Emotion	Regulation,”	
Journal	of	Experimental	Psychology:
General
	137	(November	2008):	691–705.
--- Page 331 ---
“cues	of	belonging”:
	Sapna	Cheryan	et	al.,	“Designing	Classrooms	to	Maximize
Student	Achievement,”	Policy	Insights	from	the	Behavioral	and	Brain
Sciences	1	(October	2014):	4–12.
expert	feedback:
	Geoffrey	L.	Cohen,	Claude	M.	Steele,	and	Lee	D.	Ross,	“The
Mentor’s	Dilemma:	Providing	Critical	Feedback	Across	the	Racial	Divide,”
Personality	and	Social	Psychology	Bulletin
	25	(October	1999):	1302–18.
“conditional	stupidity”:
	Joshua	Aronson,	quoted	in	Paul,	“It’s	Not	Me,	It’s
You.”
we	should
	offload	
information:
	Risko	and	Gilbert,	“Cognitive	Offloading.”
onto	the	world	itself:
	
Azadeh
	Jamalian,	Valeria	Giardino,	and	Barbara	Tversky,
“Gestures	for	Thinking,”	
Proceedings	of	the	Annual	Conference	of	the
Cognitive	Science	Society
	35	(2013):	645–50.
offloading	may	be	social:
	Sloman	and	Fernbach,	
The	Knowledge	Illusion.
“spatializing	the	curriculum”:
	Nora	S.	Newcombe,	“Thinking	Spatially	in	the
Science	Classroom,”	
Current	Opinion	in	Behavioral	Sciences
	10	(August
2016):	1–6.
they	don’t	design	machines:
	Andy	Clark,	“Extended	You,”	talk	given	at
TEDxLambeth,	December	16,	2019.
expands	to	encompass	it:
	Lucilla	Cardinali	et	al.,	“Tool-Use	Induces
Morphological	Updating	of	the	Body	Schema,”	
Current	Biology
	19	(June
2009):	R478–79.	See	also	Angelo	Maravita	and	Atsushi	Iriki,	“Tools	for	the
Body	(Schema),”	
Trends	in	Cognitive	Sciences
	8	(February	2004):	79–86.
“to	quantitatively	assess”:
	Bruno	R.	Bocanegra	et	al.,	“Intelligent	Problem-
Solvers	Externalize	Cognitive	Operations,”	
Nature	Human	Behaviour
	3
(February	2019):	136–42.
“Our	study	showed	very	clearly”:
	Author	interview	with	Bruno	Bocanegra.
“veil	of	ignorance”:
	John	Rawls,	
A	Theory	of	Justice
	(Cambridge:	Harvard
University	Press,	1971),	11.
--- Page 332 ---
Index
A
	|	
B
	|	
C
	|	
D
	|	
E
	|	
F
	|	
G
	|	
H
	|	
I
	|	
J
	|	
K
	|	
L
	|	
M
	|	
N
	|	
O
	|	
P
	|	
Q
	|	
R
	|	
S
	|	
T
	|	
U
	|	
V
	|	
W
	|	X
|	
Y
	|	
Z
	
A
Abrahamson,	Dor,	
61
,	
97
abstract	versus	spatial	thought,	
141
,	
143
,	
246
accountability	effect,	
203
acoustic	distraction,	
121–23
active	learning	approach,	
188–89
activity-based	workspaces,	
129
ADHD,	
48–49
,	
96
adolescents,	social	focus	of,	
194–95
affect	labeling,	
28–29
affiliation,	cues	of,	
130
affordances,	
153
Ainley,	Vivian,	
23
Alexander,	Christopher,	
116–17
Allen,	Thomas,	
120–21
“Allen	curve,”	
120–21
altering	our	own	state,	
244–45
ambient	belonging,	
134–35
amygdala,	
28
anchoring	effect,	
30
Anderson,	Douglas,	
66–67
Apple	Computer,	
xiii
,	
132
,	
169
,	
176–77
Appleton,	Jay,	
94
apprenticeships,	
163–64
arguing,	
200–204
argumentative	theory	of	reasoning,	
201–2
Aronson,	Elliot,	
237–39
Aronson,	Joshua,	
241–42
--- Page 333 ---
arousal,	shared,	
220–21
artifacts,	
234–35
,
Arya,	Diana,	
205–6
astronauts,	
111–13
asynchronous	communication,	
224
Atit,	Kinnari,	
78
attention,	
96–97
,	
221–23
attention	deficit	disorders,	
48–49
,	
96
attention	drainage	effect,	
123
auditory	cortex,	
80
automatization,	
181–82
,	
186
Autumn	Rhythm
	(Pollock),	
92
availability	heuristic,	
30
awe,	
110–11
	
B
Badía,	Enrique,	
171
Baer,	Markus,	
126
Balachandra,	Lakshmi,	
226–27
Ball,	Robert,	
148–50
Ban,	Masahide,	
131
Bar,	Moshe,	
124
Barker,	Roger,	
116
,	
137
Barnwell,	Paul,	
224
Bartik,	Jean,	
6
Basilica	of	Saint	Francis	of	Assisi,	
114–15
Bate,	Walter	Jackson,	
168
Baths	of	Caracalla,	
138
beat	gestures,	
70
,	
81
Becvar,	Amaya,	
77–78
behavioral	synchrony,	
215–21
,	
226–28
Beilock,	Sian,	
57–58
,	
60–61
,	
64
belonging,	cues	of,	
132–35
,	
242
,	
249
Berger,	Ron,	
179
Berman,	Marc,	
96
,	
98–99
Bernstein,	Ethan,	
125
--- Page 334 ---
Berry,	Meredith,	
108
biases,	
132–33
biologically	primary/secondary	abilities,	
12
biophilia	hypothesis,	
103
biophilic	design,	
103–4
Bird,	Brad,	
xii
,	
202–3
blackout	in	Seoul,	
10–11
Blackwell,	Lisa,	
7–8
Blake,	William,	
168–69
Block,	Ned,	
xiii
Bloom,	Paul,	
10
Bocanegra,	Bruno,	
251–52
body	scan,	
27–28
Bose,	Satyendra	Nath,	
229–30
Bose-Einstein	condensate,	
187
brain
computer	analogy	for,	
6–7
,	
9
,	
16
,	
157
,	
244–45
evolutionary	changes	in	size	of,	
45–46
limitations	of,	
2–3
muscle	analogy	for,	
8–9
thinking	outside,	
1–17
training	regimens	for,	
13
“brainbound”	perspective,	
xiii–xiv
,	xv,	
3–4
,	
13–14
,	
158
Bratman,	Gregory,	
95
breaks,	physical	activity	and,	
51–52
Broca,	Paul,	
190
Broca’s	area,	
190–91
Brooks,	Alison	Wood,	
38–39
Brown,	Graham,	
126
Brown,	John	Seely,	
164
Brown,	Lancelot	“Capability,”	
94
,	
101
Browne,	Janet,	
151
Browning,	Bill,	
104
Buffett,	Warren,	
170–71
built	spaces,	thinking	with,	
114–38
Burks,	Arthur,	
6
	
--- Page 335 ---
C
California	Energy	Commission,	
106–7
caricature	advantage,	
183–84
Caro,	Robert,	
xi
,	
144–45
,	
146
,	
243
cascading	mentorships	model,	
198–99
categorization,	
184–85
causal	relationships,	
206
Central	Park,	
93–94
Chalmers,	David,	
xiii
,	
14–15
Charcot,	Jean-Martin,	
165
checklists,	
175
,	
176
Cheryan,	Sapna,	
133–35
Chi,	Michelene,	
184
children
arguing	and,	
204
gestures	and,	
72–74
imitation	and,	
177–79
infantile	amnesia	and,	
141–42
language	acquisition	and,	
192
“Midwest	Study”	and,	
116
,	
137
shared	attention	and,	
221–22
teaching	instinct	and,	
195–96
Chinnici,	Joseph,	
63
Chiu,	Holly,	
199
chunking,	
182
Chux,	
171–72
Clark,	Andy,	
xiii–xiv
,	
3
,	
14–15
,	
47
,	
158–59
,	
233
,	
246
,	
247
,	
250
Clarke,	Jean,	
69–70
coaching,	
164
Coates,	John,	
21–23
,	
29
,	
32
,	
42
coffeehouses,	
120
,	
121
,	
137
cognitive	apprenticeships,	
164
,	
242
cognitive	fitness	exercises,	
8–9
cognitive	loops,	generating,	
247–48
cognitive	prioritization,	
221–22
cognitive	reappraisal,	
38–40
,	
242
Cognitive	Reflection	Test,	
200
--- Page 336 ---
cognitive	resilience,	
35–36
cognitive	revolution,	
6–7
cognitive	synchrony,	
217
,	
221
cognitively	congenial	situations,	
248
collaboration,	
119–21
,	
125
,	
127–29
collective	intelligence,	
xii
,	
231
Collins,	Allan,	
164
communication,	group	thinking	and,	
231–235
competitive	interactions,	
172–73
,	
191
computer,	as	part	of	mind,	
14–15
computer	analogy,	
6–7
,	
9
,	
16
,	
157
,	
244–45
concept	mapping,	
145–46
,	
151
,	
246
confirmation	bias,	
201
,	
202
conflict,	
203
congruent	movements,	
58–59
conservation	tasks,	
74–75
,	
84
constructive	controversy,	
203
contingent	communication,	
196
Cooke,	Michele,	
79
,	
84
cooperative	eye	hypothesis,	
222
Corbett,	Edward	P.	J.,	
180
Cornell,	Eric,	
187
Correa-Chávez,	Maricela,	
179
correspondence	problem,	
173–75
,	
176–77
Coyne,	Richard,	
137
Craig,	A.	D.,	
43
creativity,	
65–67
,	
109–10
,	
124–25
Crick,	Francis,	
156–57
Crowd,	The
	(Le	Bon),	
215
Csikszentmihalyi,	Mihaly,	
130
curved	shapes,	
136–37
	
D
Damasio,	Antonio,	
25–27
Darwin,	Charles,	
150–52
,	
243
daylight	autonomy,	
105–6
--- Page 337 ---
declarative	memory,	
54
Dennett,	Daniel,	
153
depersonalized	approach,	
206
depression,	nature	and,	
95
Descartes,	René,	
43
desegregation,	
237–39
designed	gestures,	
84–88
designer	environments,	
xiii
detachment	gain,	
154
,	
243
Dewline	Research,	
42
diapers,	
171–72
Dick,	Philip	K.,	
147
Dickson,	Kerry	Ann,	
85
Dining	Room,	The
	(Gurney),	
55
disciplinary	writing,	
180
distractions,	
121–23
distributed	cognition,	
xii
,	
15
DNA,	
156–57
doodling,	
49
doppel,	
42–43
drawing,	thinking	through,	
155
Dresler,	Martin,	
142
,	
143
Dror,	Itiel,	
183
Duckworth,	Angela,	
8
,	
223
Dweck,	Carol,	
7–8
	
E
Earth,	view	of	from	space,	
111–12
Eckert,	J.	Presper,	Jr.,	
5
Einstein,	Albert,	
61
,	
229–30
EL	Education,	
179
electroencephalography	(EEG),	
190
,	
192
Ellard,	Colin,	
118
embedding	extensions,	
248–49
Embeson,	Lauren,	
122
embodied	cognition,	
xii
,	
15
,	
53–54
,	
69
--- Page 338 ---
embodied	imagination,	
62
embodied	resources,	
148–49
,	
156
embodied	self-regulation,	
49
Emerson,	Ralph	Waldo,	
66
emotions,	
37–41
,	
226
Empathic	Technologies,	
42
empowerment,	
125
,	
127
,	
132
enactment	effect,	
54
Energy	Project,	
226
“Energy	Theater,”	
62
ENIAC	(Electronic	Numerical	Integrator	and	Computer),	
5–7
Enigma	of	Reason,	The
	(Mercier	and	Sperber),	
201
entitativity	(“groupiness”),	
224–29
environmental	cues,	
130–31
environmental	self-regulation,	
94–95
,	
131
Ericsson,	Anders,	
16
error	pruning,	
233–34
escape	rooms,	
225
essentialism,	
10
exercise	intensity,	cognitive	function	and,	
50–53
expertise,	nature	of,	
16
experts
automatization	and,	
181–82
,	
186
categorization	and,	
184–85
gaze	patterns	of,	
185
identification	of	relevant	material	by,	
183–84
thinking	with,	
163–86
“Extended	Mind,	The”	(Clark	and	Chalmers),	
14–15
extension	inequality,	
16–17
external	representations,	mental	versus,	
153–56
extra-neural	inputs/resources,	
xi
,	
xii
,	
2
eye	closure,	
123–24
eye	contact,	
196
eye	tracking,	
185
eyes,	whites	of,	
222
	
F
--- Page 339 ---
facilitated	comprehension,	
57
fading,	
164
fairness,	studies	based	on,	
29–30
Family	Playlists,	
199
Feld,	Robert,	
46
Fenton-O’Creevy,	Mark,	
30–31
,	
36
Ferdows,	Kasra,	
171
Feynman,	Richard,	
158–59
fidgeting,	
49–50
Fidler,	Jeff,	
44
,	
46
field	notes,	
150–53
,	
243
financial	traders,	bodily	signals	and,	
21–23
,	
30–31
,	
42
First	Book	in	Physiology	and	Hygiene
	(Kellogg),	
9
Fischer,	Susan,	
60–61
Fitz,	Nicholas,	
13
FitzRoy,	Robert,	
150–51
Flack,	Audrey,	
91
fMRI	(functional	magnetic	resonance	imaging)	scans,	
190
Foale,	Michael,	
112–13
Foer,	Joshua,	
139
fractals,	
100–101
Franklin,	Benjamin,	
120
,	
124
Freeman,	Walter,	
218
Frost,	Robert,	
124
functional	near-infrared	spectroscopy	(fNIRS),	
47–48
,	
190
,	
191
,	
196
future	discounting,	
108
	
G
Geary,	David,	
12
Gehry,	Frank,	
137
geology,	gestures	and,	
78–79
gestural	foreshadowing,	
71–72
gesture,	thinking	with,	
68–88
,	
243–44
gesture	gap,	
73
Giuliano,	Toni,	
235–36
Glenberg,	Arthur,	
58–59
--- Page 340 ---
Golder,	Peter,	
172
Goldin-Meadow,	Susan,	
75–76
,	
84
Goldschmidt,	Gabriela,	
155
Gopnik,	Alison,	
177
gossip,	
209
Gould,	Stephen	Jay,	
9–10
green	walls,	
104
Greene,	Erick,	
152–53
Grit
	(Duckworth),	
8–9
grit,	concept	of,	
8–9
,	
223
Gros,	Frédéric,	
x
,	xv
group	mind,	
xii
,	
215–16
,	
223–24
,	
232–37
Group	Mind,	The
	(McDougall),	
215
grouphate,	
229
“groupiness”	(entitativity),	
224–29
groups,	thinking	with,	
211–37
growth	mindset,	
8
Guggenheim	Museum	(Bilbao,	Spain),	
137
Gurney,	A.	R.,	Jr.,	
55
“gut	feelings,”	
21–22
	
H
Haidt,	Jonathan,	
218–19
“halfalogues,”	
122
haptic	signals,	
185
Hart,	Betty,	
73
Haslam,	Alexander,	
127
,	
132
health	care,	
102–3
,	
173–76
,	
207–8
,	
209
,	
225
heartbeat	detection	test,	
22–23
Heartrater,	
42–43
Heath,	Christian,	
71–72
Hercule,	Gabriel,	
68–70
Heron,	Cady,	
194
Hertel,	Paula,	
235
hippocampus,	
140
,	
141
Hirsch,	Joy,	
196
--- Page 341 ---
hive	mind,	
228
hive	switch,	
218–19
,	
221
Holum,	Ann,	
164
home	advantage,	
126–27
Homo	economicus
,	
30
honest	signals,	
172
Hoogerheide,	Vincent,	
197–98
Hôpital	Universitaire	Pitié-Salpetriere	(Paris),	
165–66
hospital	patients,	
102–3
,	
173–76
Hour	Between	Dog	and	Wolf,	The
	(Coates),	
22
Humanyze,	
125
hunter-gatherer	societies,	
45–46
Hutchins,	Edwin,	
212–14
	
I
Ian,	Janis,	
194
ideas,	thinking	with	the	space	of,	
139–59
identity,	cues	of,	
130–31
Imai,	Ryoko,	
131
imitation
children	and,	
177–79
correspondence	problem	and,	
173–75
disparaging	of,	
169
effectiveness	of,	
170–73
importance	of,	
169–70
learning	through,	
165–68
,	
177–81
mimicking,	
40–41
,	
165–68
teaching,	
175–76
improvisation,	gestures	and,	
82–83
impulse	control,	nature	and,	
108
income	levels,	language	acquisition	and,	
73–74
incremental	theory	of	intelligence,	
8
industrialization,	
168
infantile	amnesia,	
141–42
inspiratory	breathing	load	task,	
34–35
Institutio	Oratoria
	(Quintilian),	
167–68
--- Page 342 ---
insula,	
22
,	
24
,	
27
,	
29
,	
34
intarsia,	
118–19
interactive	brain	hypothesis,	
190–91
interactivity,	
157–58
intermittent	collaboration,	
127–29
interoception
affect	labeling	and,	
28–29
body	scan	and,	
27–28
description	of,	
xi
,	
22–23
differing	abilities	regarding,	
23–24
emotions	and,	
37–41
improving,	
31–32
non-conscious	information	acquisition	and,	
25–27
resilience	and,	
32–37
sharpening,	
xiv
social,	
41–42
technology	and,	
42–43
interoceptive	journals,	
32
interoceptive	learning,	
31–32
intrinsic	motivation,	
223–24
Invention	of	Air,	The
	(Johnson),	
120
IQ	scores/tests,	
12–13
,	
249–52
Irvine,	Richard,	
128–29
Isbister,	Katherine,	
49–50
,	
228–29
	
J
Jackson,	Joshua	Conrad,	
220
James,	William,	
37–38
,	
42
,	
96–97
Jeffreys,	Brendan,	
87–88
Jerusalem
	(Blake),	
169
jigsaw	classroom,	
238–39
Jobs,	Steve,	
132
,	
169
,	
176–77
Johnson,	David,	
203
Johnson,	Lyndon	B.,	
144
Johnson,	Philip,	
137
Johnson,	Steven,	
120
--- Page 343 ---
Jones,	Edward	Ellsworth,	
241
journals/note	taking,	
150–52
,	
243
journey	technique,	
140
Joye,	Yannick,	
100
,	
101
JUMP	Math,	
182–83
Jung,	Carl,	
216
	
K
Kabat-Zinn,	Jon,	
27–28
,	
36
Kahn,	Louis,	
114–16
,	
128
,	
136
,	
138
Kahneman,	Daniel,	
xi
,	
30
,	
50
,	
52
,	
201
Kellogg,	John	Harvey,	
9
Kelly,	Spencer,	
80
Keltner,	Dacher,	
110
Kennedy,	T.	R.,	Jr.,	
6
Kierkegaard,	Soren,	
66
Kirby,	David,	
147
Kirsh,	David,	
145
,	
155–56
Kizilcec,	René,	
135
Kniffin,	Kevin,	
227
Knight,	Craig,	
127
,	
132
knowledge	management	systems,	
209–10
Koedinger,	Kenneth,	
181
Konrad,	Boris	Nikolai,	
142
Krasner,	Lee,	
91
,	
102
Kreitz,	Christoph,	
163–64
Kuhl,	Patricia,	
192
Kuo,	Ming,	
96
	
L
Laland,	Kevin,	
169–70
landscape	design,	
93–94
Langhanns,	Christine,	
47–48
language/language	acquisition
--- Page 344 ---
accents	and,	
166
attunement	to,	
121–22
brain	function	and,	
190–91
gestures	and,	
72–74
,	
85–86
social	interactions	and,	
192
large	high-resolution	display,	
147–50
Laurence,	Gregory,	
131
Le	Bon,	Gustave,	
215–16
learning
active,	
188–89
apprenticeships	and,	
163–64
conflict	and,	
203
environmental	cues	and,	
133–35
gestures	and,	
75–79
,	
80–88
imitation/mimicking	and,	
165–68
,	
177–81
nature	and,	
105–6
storytelling	and,	
204–10
from	teaching,	
195–99
visual	explanations	and,	
154
legal	writing,	
180–81
Lewicki,	Pawel,	
24–25
Li,	Dongying,	
106
Lieberman,	Matthew,	
193–94
,	
195
Locke,	John,	
118
	
M
Macedonia,	Manuela,	
85–86
magpies,	power	outages	caused	by,	
10–11
Maguire,	Eleanor,	
140
Mallgrave,	Harry	Francis,	
113
market	pioneers,	failure	rates	of,	
171–72
Martin,	Gerald,	
170–71
Mauchly,	John,	
5
McClintock,	Barbara,	
xi
,	
61
McDougall,	William,	
215–16
McNeill,	William,	
219–20
,	
229
--- Page 345 ---
Meagher,	Benjamin,	
126
meals,	shared,	
227
Mean	Girls
,	
194
medical	outcomes,	nature	and,	
102–3
medication	errors,	
173–75
Meltzoff,	Andrew,	
178–79
“memory	palace”	strategy,	
140
memory/memorization
gestures	and,	
80
,	
84–86
method	of	loci	and,	
139–40
,	
142–43
movement	and,	
54–57
nature	and,	
95–96
place-based,	
139–43
spatial,	
148–49
,	
246
mental	maps,	
140–41
,	
145
,	
246
mental	versus	external	representations,	
153–56
Mercier,	Hugo,	
200
,	
201–2
,	
203
,	
204
metacognitive	stance,	
197
metaphorical	movements,	
58
,	
64–66
method	of	loci,	
139–40
,	
142–43
,	
148–49
microrestorative	experiences,	
107
Middle	Class	Gentleman,	The
	(Molière),	
3
Midwest	Psychological	Field	Station	(Oskaloosa,	Kansas),	
116
,	
137
Mighton,	John,	
182–83
Milivojevic,	Branka,	
141
mime-based	role-play	training	program,	
165–67
mimicking,	
40–41
,	
165–68
.	
See	also
	imitation
mindfulness	meditation,	
27
,	
36
Mindfulness-based	Mind	Fitness	Training	(MMFT),	
36–37
Mindset
	(Dweck),	
8
Minority	Report
,	
146–47
Mir	(space	station),	
112–13
Mishkin,	Frederic,	
70
Mitchell,	Edgar,	
112
models/modeling,	
164
,	
179–83
Molière,	
3
monasteries,	
128–29
Montaigne,	Michel	de,	
66
,	
119
Moonwalking	with	Einstein
	(Foer),	
139
--- Page 346 ---
Moore,	Henry,	
136–37
“Morning	Mile,”	
226
Moses,	Robert,	
144
motivation,	
223
motor	cortex,	
86
“Moved	by	Reading”	intervention,	
58
movement,	thinking	with,	
44–67
muddled	talk,	
76
Muir,	John,	
107
Müller,	Hermann,	
47–48
multiple	monitor	setups,	
149–50
Murakami,	Haruki,	
52–53
Murphy,	Mary,	
132–33
muscle,	analogy	of,	
7–8
muscular	bonding,	
219–20
music,	distraction	from,	
122–23
Musk,	Elon,	
177
Myers,	Christopher,	
207–8
,	
209–10
	
N
natural	light,	
104–6
,	
115
natural	spaces,	thinking	with,	
91–113
neural	synchrony,	
221
neuroarchitecture,	
115
,	
136–38
neurocentric	bias,	
4
neuroenhancement,	
13
neuromyths,	
9
Nietzsche,	Friedrich,	
ix–x
,	
xii
,	xv,	
66
Noice,	Tony	and	Helga,	
54–57
non-conscious	information	acquisition,	
24–27
non-places,	cognitive	deficiency	of,	
137–38
nootropic	drugs,	
13
note	taking/journals,	
150–52
,	
243
Novak,	Joseph,	
146
novel	movements,	
58
,	
59–61
novelty,	distraction	and,	
121–23
--- Page 347 ---
Number	
14
	(Pollock),	
102
Nyad,	Diana,	
34–35
	
O
occasion	creation,	
82–83
Ochs,	Elinor,	
61
“Of	Solitude”	(Montaigne),	
119
offloading,	
86–88
,	
145
,	
243–44
Olmsted,	Frederick	Law,	
93–94
Olson,	Gary	and	Judith,	
233–34
online	“spaces,”	cues	of	belonging	in,	
135
open	monitoring,	
97
open-plan	rooms/office	space,	
119–21
,	
125–26
Oppezzo,	Marily,	
65
optical	flow,	
149
Orbach,	Susie,	
xi
,	
41
organizational	setting,	
133
Orians,	Gordon,	
94
Origin	of	Species,	The
	(Darwin),	
151
originality,	
168–69
overimitation,	
178
“overview	effect,”	
111–12
ownership,	
126–27
,	
132
Oyserman,	Daphna,	
131
	
P
Palladio,	Andrea,	
136
Palau,	USS,	
211–14
Pampers,	
171–72
Pape,	Tess,	
173–75
Parfit,	Derek,	
43
Parmentier,	Fabrice,	
121–23
passive	attention,	
96–97
Pattern	Language,	A
	(Alexander),	
116
--- Page 348 ---
Paulus,	Martin,	
33–35
,	
36
peers,	thinking	with,	
187–210
peer-to-peer	assessment	technique,	
175–76
penetrative	thinking,	
78
Pentland,	Sandy,	
209
perceptual	fluency,	
100
peripheral	vision,	
148
personalization	of	workspace,	
130–32
Philips,	Emo,	
4
Philosophy	of	Walking,	A
	(Gros),	
x
physical	activity,	effects	of,	
x
,	
xiv
,	
48
,	
50–51
physical	embodied	resources,	
148–49
,	
156
physics	education,	
60–61
,	
62
,	
187–89
physiological	synchrony,	
220–21
,	
227–28
Piaget,	Jean,	
75
place-based	memory,	
139–42
plants,	
103–4
,	
112–13
Pollock,	Jackson,	
xii
,	
91–92
,	
101–2
Polman,	Evan,	
64–65
Power	Broker,	The
	(Caro),	
144
PowerMyLearning,	
199
prefrontal	cortex,	
29
,	
48
prejudiced	places,	theory	of,	
133
Pridmore,	Ben,	
139–40
,	
142
Principles	of	Psychology,	The
	(James),	
96–97
privacy,	
124–26
procedural	memory,	
54
productive	agency,	
198
productivity,	empowerment	and,	
127
,	
132
proprioception,	
85
,	
149
psychologically	inclusive	design,	
135
Puthenpurackal,	John,	
170
	
Q
Quintilian,	
167–68
	
--- Page 349 ---
R
Radio	Taiso
,	
216–17
radiologists,	movement	and,	
44–45
Raichlen,	David,	
45–46
rapport	detection,	
228
Raven	Advanced	Progressive	Matrices,	
250–51
Rawls,	John,	
252
reading	comprehension,	movement	and,	
58–59
reappraisal	of	emotions,	
38–40
reasoning,	
200–201
recess,	
51
recognition,	external	representations	and,	
154–55
re-embodying	information,	
245–46
re-enactive	empathy,	
182
Reiner,	Peter,	
13
Reisberg,	Daniel,	
154
relief	etching,	
168–69
Rendell,	Luke,	
170
Repton,	Humphry,	
94
,	
101
resilience,	
32–35
re-socializing	information,	
246–47
re-spatializing	information,	
246
restoration,	process	of,	
96
ReTUNE,	
98–99
Richards	Medical	Research	Laboratories,	
116
Risley,	Todd,	
73
rituals,	
226–28
Robinson,	Marin,	
180
Rodin,	Auguste,	
1
Rogelberg,	Steven,	
232
Rogoff,	Barbara,	
179
role-playing,	
165–67
Romantics,	
168–69
Roosevelt,	Theodore,	
107–8
Ross,	Jan-Michael,	
172–73
Roth,	Wolff-Michael,	
83
Rousseau,	Jean-Jacques,	
66
--- Page 350 ---
Rowe,	Meredith,	
74
Roze,	Emmanuel,	
165–67
rumination,	
95
	
S
Salk,	Jonas,	
xi
,	
61–62
,	
114–15
,	
128
,	
136
Salk	Institute,	
115–16
Sarnicola,	Lisa,	
106
scaffolding,	
164
Scherr,	Rachel,	
62
Schertz,	Kathryn,	
98
schools.	
See
	learning
Schulz,	Kathryn,	
53
Schwartz,	Daniel,	
65
Schwartz,	Tony,	
226
,	
229
Schweickart,	Rusty,	
111–12
Schweitzer,	Julie,	
48–49
scientific	management,	
132
Searle,	John,	
9
Second	Home,	
103–4
self-presentation,	
124
self-referential	movements,	
58
,	
61–64
self-serving	bias,	
30
self-silencing,	
232
sensations,	thinking	with,	
21–43
Sharapov,	Dmitry,	
172–73
shared	artifacts,	
234–35
shared	attention,	
221–23
Sheep	Piece
	(Moore),	
136–37
Shenkar,	Oded,	
175–76
Shepard,	Alan,	
111
Shimmering	Substance
	(Pollock),	
92
shuttling,	
36–37
,	
41–42
silo	effect,	
225
Silva,	Rohan,	
103
simulation	of	stories,	
207
--- Page 351 ---
situated	cognition,	
xii
,	
15
Sloman,	Steven,	
7
smart	meeting	rooms,	
228
smart	pills,	
13
smartphones,	
xiii
,	
97–98
Smith,	Carmen	Petrick,	
64
Smith,	Monte,	
180–81
,	
243
Smith,	Tracy,	
47
Snapp,	Matthew,	
237
social	eddies,	
218
social	encoding	advantage,	
189
social	engagement/interaction,	
122
,	
188–95
,	
197–99
social	interoception,	
41–42
socially	distributed	cognition,	
212
,	
214
soft	fascination,	
97
,	
109
soft	gazing,	
97
Solnit,	Rebecca,	
66
solo-authored	articles,	decline	in,	
230–31
somatic	rudder,	
25
,	
29
Space	Investor
	game,	
31
spatial	concepts,	gestures	and,	
78–79
,	
81–82
spatial	learning	strategies,	
140–41
,	
246
spatial	memory,	
148–49
,	
246
Spatial	Operating	Environment,	
147
spatial-thinking	problems,	
82
speech,	attunement	to,	
121–22
.	
See	also
	language/language	acquisition
Spengler,	John,	
106
Sperber,	Dan,	
201–2
,	
203
Spielberg,	Steven,	
147
standing	desks,	
47
,	
48
Stanley,	Elizabeth,	
35–37
,	
42
Steele,	Claude,	
241–42
Stein,	Nancy,	
204
stereotype	threat,	
241–42
sterile	cockpit	rule,	
174
,	
176
Stock,	Elizabeth,	
199
Stoller,	Fredricka,	
180
Stone,	A.	Douglas,	
229–30
storytelling,	
204–10
--- Page 352 ---
Strayer,	David,	
109–10
stress,	nature	and,	
95
studies	(rooms),	
118–19
studiolo
	example,	
118–19
,	
129–30
Stueber,	Karsten,	
182
subcentral	area,	
191
subgenual	prefrontal	cortex,	
95
Sullivan,	William,	
106
Sunstein,	Cass,	
232
Sutton,	Robert,	
202–3
,	
204
switchboard	metaphor,	
9
symbol	pushing,	
158
symbolic	gestures,	
70
,	
81
symmetry,	
136
synchrony,	
216–21
,	
226–28
	
T
tacit	knowledge,	
209
Taj	Mahal,	
136
Taylor,	Andrea	Faber,	
96
Taylor,	Frederick	Winslow,	
132
Taylor,	Richard,	
101–2
teaching	and	teaching	instinct,	
195–99
.	
See	also
	learning
technology
creativity	and,	
109–10
effects	of,	
15–16
extending	of	mind	through,	
xiii
group	cooperation	and,	
228–29
impact	of	screen	size	of,	
148–50
interoception	and,	
42–43
nature	and,	
97–99
Tellis,	Gerard,	
172
Than,	Ker,	
222
theory	of	mind,	
191
Thinker,	The
	(Rodin),	
1
Thinking,	Fast	and	Slow
	(Kahneman),	
201
--- Page 353 ---
Thinking	Skills	Assessment,	
200
Thoreau,	Henry	David,	
67
“three	day	effect,”	
109–10
thrombomodulin	study,	
77–78
time,	nature	and	perception	of,	
108–9
time	use	studies,	
92–93
To	Err	Is	Human
	(Institute	of	Medicine),	
173
tools,	body	schema	and,	
248
torque,	
60–61
transactive	memory,	
xii
,	
235–37
,	
238–39
,	
244
,	
249
transient	hypofrontality,	
53
Tsakiris,	Manos,	
42–43
Tversky,	Amos,	
xi
Tversky,	Barbara,	
76–77
,	
141
,	
145
	
U
Ulrich,	Roger,	
102
ultimatum	game,	
29–30
Underkoffler,	John,	
147
understanding,	movement	and,	
57–58
Uzzi,	Brian,	
231
	
V
Vallée-Tourangeau,	Frédéric,	
157–58
Valued	Youth	Partnership,	
198
van	der	Wal,	Arianne,	
108
video	deficit,	
196
Villa	Rotonda,	
136
virtual	navigation,	
149–50
vision,	movement	and,	
45
visual	artifacts/depictions,	
83
visual	distractions,	
123
visual	stimulation,	in	nature,	
99
Vives,	Juan	Luis,	
168
--- Page 354 ---
vocabulary	size,	gesture	and,	
73–74
,	
85–86
voluntary	attention,	
96–97
	
W
Waber,	Ben,	
125
wakefully	relaxed	state,	
101
Walker,	John,	
202
“Walking”	(Thoreau),	
67
walking	body,	
x
,	
65–67
walls,	
116–20
,	
124
,	
128
Wason,	Peter,	
193
,	
201
Wason	Selection	Task,	
192–93
,	
200
Watson,	James,	
xi
,	
156–57
Wegner,	Daniel,	
235–36
Weiner,	Charles,	
158
Wernicke,	Carl,	
190
Wernicke’s	area,	
190–91
Wesson,	Joshua,	
184–85
What	I	Talk	About	When	I	Talk	About	Running
	(Murakami),	
52
Wieman,	Carl,	
xii
,	
187–89
Wilson,	Charles,	
142–43
Wilson,	E.	O.,	
103
windows,	
104–7
working	memory,	
96
World	Memory	Championship,	
139
Wright,	Herbert,	
116
Write	Like	a	Chemist
	(Robinson	and	Stoller),	
180
	
Y
Yaden,	David,	
111
Yeats,	William	Butler,	
3
	
--- Page 355 ---
Z
Zara,	
171
Zhang,	Ting,	
182
Zink,	Maureen,	
47
--- Page 356 ---
About	the	Author
©	Stephanie	Anestis	Photography
ANNIE	MURPHY	PAUL
	is	an	acclaimed	science	writer	whose	work	has
appeared	in	the	
New	York	Times	Magazine,	Scientific	American,
	and	
The	Best
American	Science	Writing
,	among	many	other	publications.	She	is	the	author	of
Origins
,	selected	as	a	
New	York	Times
	Notable	Book,	and	
The	Cult	of
Personality
,	hailed	by	Malcolm	Gladwell	in	
The	New	Yorker
	as	a	“fascinating
new	book.”	Her	TED	Talk	has	been	viewed	more	than	2.6	million	times.	Paul	is
a	recipient	of	the	Rosalynn	Carter	Mental	Health	Journalism	Fellowship,	the
Spencer	Education	Journalism	Fellowship,	and	the	Bernard	L.	Schwartz
Fellowship	at	New	America.	A	graduate	of	Yale	University	and	the	Columbia
University	Graduate	School	of	Journalism,	she	is	currently	a	Learning	Sciences
Exchange	Fellow	at	New	America.